Title: Authorization for Self-Modifying AI Agent Populations: Conserving Authority across Replacement, Forking, and Rollback

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2610.00347v1

Published Time: Fri, 02 Oct 2026 00:13:04 GMT

Number of Pages: 41

Markdown Content:
# Authorization for Self-Modifying AI Agent Populations: Conserving Authority across Replacement, Forking, and Rollback 

GENLIANG ZHU, Accentrust, Canada and Georgia Institute of Technology, USA 

CHU WANG, Accentrust, Canada and University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, USA Self-modifying agents can replace, fork, and roll back identity-bearing software while descendants remain executable. Per-successor authorization does not constrain the population: siblings can duplicate quotas, combine complementary permissions, survive ancestor cuts, or overlap predecessors during promotion. We define authorization succession across software generations, which conserves authority across a single-parent generation forest’s active frontier. We present an external protocol that binds each generation to a manifest, root, unique parent, complete lin-eage, and fresh population sequence. Separate invariants jointly bound root-lifetime consumption and current population exposure. A staged reservation freezes the predecessor residual for replacement; a partitioning fork validates its full child family inline. Each commit atomically fences the predecessor and activates its suc-cessors. Ancestor cuts invalidate dependent descendants; rollback creates a fresh generation without restoring spent authority; a new root requires an independent grant. With complete mediation, authenticated records, sound effect abstraction, durable monotone state, and complete lineage accounting, we prove population-safe succession, fork conservation, revocation closure, atomic handoff, rollback non-reminting, and exclusion of self-certification. An executable evaluation matches 32 registered decisions through direct-call and mailbox mappings (64/64 replays; 28 allows, 36 denies). An independent checker accepts all 64 original traces and rejects 28/28 outer-resealed semantic mutants; 12/12 profile invariants, 16/16 crash cuts, and 32/32 contender schedules pass. Separate adapters reproduce all 32 decisions around one measured OurArk descendant and one Darwin Gödel Machine EditTool mutation, each with fresh-process restart, atomic succession, and predecessor rejection. These results establish authorization succession over registered protected effects, not arbitrary program equivalence or unmediated behavior. CCS Concepts: • Security and privacy → Access control ; Access control models ; • Mathematics of com-puting → Distributed computing models .Additional Key Words and Phrases: autonomous agents, self-modifying agents, access control, authorization succession, lineage, revocation, rollback, capability safety 

1 Introduction 

Self-modifying agents make authorization a population problem. A running agent can edit its code, change its model route or tool harness, create an isolated candidate, promote a successor, retain several successful branches, merge their changes, and later roll back to an earlier artifact. Each resulting process may present a valid-looking identity and may individually satisfy a transition policy. Yet authorization is exercised by the complete set of simultaneously live generations. Treating each accepted successor as a fresh copy of the predecessor’s grant silently multiplies budgets, concurrency slots, approval weight, and effect combinations. Existing controls establish important adjacent facts. Versioned agent bodies make descent and in-herited validation inspectable [38]. Self-improving systems demonstrate open-ended code mutation and selection across an archive of agents [34]. Mutation-aware authorization can decide whether one changed agent remains inside a grant-fixed transition envelope [37], while capability-bound   

> Authors’ Contact Information: Genliang Zhu, Accentrust, Vancouver, Canada and Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia, USA, research@accentrust.com ; Chu Wang, Accentrust, Vancouver, Canada and University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois, USA. arXiv:2610.00347v1 [cs.CR] 29 Sep 2026 2Zhu and Wang

certificates can invalidate a credential when its model/tool/permission manifest changes [40]. Dele-gation systems can attenuate capabilities and revoke workflow edges [17, 19], and recursive-tree controls can conserve probabilistic risk or deterministic resources [13, 27, 31, 33]. An external safety kernel can force protected effects through an immutable decision path [9]. None of these facts alone specifies how an authenticated software-generation lifetime is atomically replaced, how its population allocation is joined to a lineage cut and independent re-root, or whether a returned historical body has replayed that generation’s retired grant. The remaining object addressed here is this authorization-bearing generation frontier and its succession transaction. 

1.1 A strict population counterexample 

Suppose generation 𝑔 0 holds authority to submit payments satisfying a typed relation 𝐸 0, spend at most 100 units, and occupy one production executor slot. It produces two candidates, 𝑔 1 and 𝑔 2.Both make benign code changes and independently remain inside the same transition envelope. A per-successor rule therefore assigns each branch the grant of 𝑔 0. The pair can now spend 200 units and execute concurrently in two slots. If one branch retains a sensitive-data read projection and the other retains an external-destination projection, later coordination or code merging can also synthesize an effect tuple that no authority witness authorized. Every local transition was acceptable; the population transition was not. Revocation and rollback expose the same integration gap. Hierarchical credential and delegation systems already provide descendant or edge revocation [8, 17], and checkpoint controls address authority resurrection [36, 39]. Revoking 𝑔 0 while 𝑔 2 is offline does not necessarily revoke a cached grant later presented by a grandchild. Replacing 𝑔 0 with 𝑔 1 in two separately committed steps leaves a crash window in which both can submit. Checking out the byte-identical body of 𝑔 0 can resurrect its historical identifier unless the generation sequence and authorization lineage are distinct from body content. These executions are not failures of mutation classification. They are failures to conserve and retire authority across a changing generation graph. 

1.2 Authorization succession across generations 

This paper defines authorization succession across software generations. A generation is an authen-ticated principal whose identity binds its body, security-relevant runtime configuration, unique authorization parent, and monotonically fresh generation sequence. Each authorization root has a lifetime grant containing typed effect relations, consumable budgets, and concurrency shares; the population separately retains a persistent ceiling on current exposure. The registered succession profile also fixes evidence-independence requirements. Descendants receive ledger allocations within both bounds; a fork reallocates existing authority instead of copying it. We present an external protocol for maintaining these objects. Candidate generations remain quarantined while independent evidence is collected. The ledger reserves an exact residual authority slice and commits promotion at one linearization point. A replacement commit simultaneously fences one predecessor and activates one successor; a partitioning fork fences one predecessor while atomically activating two or more single-parent children whose allocations fit its residual. Every protected effect is checked against the exact current generation, current authorization root, allocation, population residual, and lineage cut set. Ancestor revocation creates a lineage cut. Every descendant whose authority witness still contains the revoked atom becomes ineligible, including delayed and nested descendants that start later. A descendant may continue only by an explicit independent re-root transaction supported by an authority root that does not derive from the revoked lineage. Rollback creates a new generation with a fresh population-issued sequence and new authorization record even when its body digest equals a historical digest. Body equality can justify code reuse; it cannot remint old authority. Authorization for Self-Modifying AI Agent Populations 3

1.3 Contributions 

This paper makes five contributions: (1) It defines authorization succession over an authenticated software- generation population and gives strict separating executions for sibling duplication, relational permission splicing, ancestor-revocation leakage, dual-active promotion, rollback replay, and self-certification. These executions remain possible under a per-generation transition ceiling. (2) It introduces an authorization model over an authenticated generation lineage forest. A root grant bounds lifetime authority, including irreversible debit, while a persistent population ceiling independently bounds current relational effect authority, additive budgets, and live-executor shares. Promotion separately requires evidence-root independence. (3) It presents a generation-aware protocol with quarantined candidates, independent evidence records, staged exact reservations, inline family authorization for forks, atomic commits, durable predecessor fences, complete ancestor cuts, explicit independent re-root, and rollback-as-new-generation semantics. (4) It proves conditional population-safe succession, fork conservation, cross-generation revocation closure, atomic generation handoff, rollback non-reminting, and exclusion of self-certification. The premises are stated as enforceable registry, ledger, evidence, and effect-mediation obliga-tions. (5) It supplies a registered executable evaluation over mutation and lineage cases, two separately implemented logical runtime mappings, durable crash cuts, deterministic interleavings, an independent trace checker, and consistently resealed semantic regressions. Two adapters to frozen public runtimes separately exercise source-native descent or mutation, fresh-process restart, succession, predecessor rejection, and the complete registered replay matrix. Each empirical statement is tied to the exact finite evidence denominator that produced it. 

1.4 Assurance scope 

The protected property is operation-time authorization at registered effect brokers. It covers generations, evidence and authorization records, lineage cuts, allocations, and effects whose security-relevant fields cross those brokers. It establishes authority conservation and revocation for the declared generation graph, root grants, and persistent population ceiling. Semantic equivalence of arbitrary programs, correctness of an evaluator’s substantive judgment, effects outside the registered mediation boundary, and reversal of already committed physical outcomes are distinct properties with distinct evidence requirements. The remainder of the paper separates population succession from adjacent controls (Section 2), states the system and assurance model (Section 3), formalizes the protocol and proves its properties (Section 4), presents the design and logical instantiations (Sections 5–6), evaluates the registered artifact and refinements over frozen public runtimes (Sections 7– 8), and closes with related work and the exact assurance boundary. 

2 Problem Setting and Separating Executions 

Authorization succession sits at the intersection of versioned identity, capability transfer, revocation, and distributed cutover. This section fixes the distinctions on which the protocol depends. 

2.1 Artifact identity is not generation authority 

A body digest can identify the files, prompts, policies, skills, and harness used by an agent. It does not uniquely identify one authorization lifetime. The same body can be installed twice, restored after 4 Zhu and Wang 

revocation, or launched under two different roots. Conversely, a body may undergo a semantics-preserving rebuild while remaining the intended successor. The proposed model therefore separates: 

• a body commitment , which binds security-relevant executable content and configuration; 

• a generation principal , which binds that commitment to one authorization parent (or no parent for an independently issued root), a lineage root, a fresh generation sequence, and its creation transaction; and 

• an authority allocation , which names the exact effect relation, budgets, shares, and evidence constraints currently assigned to that generation. Content equality may support a transition decision, but it never aliases two generation principals. This distinction is what makes replayed rollback and concurrent identical workers observable to the authorization layer. 

2.2 Lifecycle acceptance is not population conservation 

A mutation evaluator answers whether a candidate satisfies a transition contract. A promotion controller answers which candidate becomes live. A protected-effect broker answers whether a particular operation may cross its commitment point. Population safety connects all three decisions through a single durable allocation state. Branch-level conservation is already established for probabilistic risk, multidimensional resources, dynamic multi-agent topologies, and affine token budgets [13, 27, 31, 33]. The succession setting adds an authorization-bearing software generation, predecessor retirement, lineage cuts, and rollback. Checking candidates one at a time loses information. If two successors each pass the same ceiling check, a Boolean capability copied to both may increase parallel exercise, an additive budget may double, and two partial relational permissions may later be joined. The authorization algebra must therefore preserve multiplicity and tuple correlations. We model a protected effect as a complete typed tuple—for example, operation, resource, destination, purpose, provenance, amount class, and risk class—rather than as independently projected fields. Authenticated authorization objects allocate complete relations and explicit quantitative shares. 

2.3 Succession operations 

The generation graph supports four operations with different authorization semantics: 

Replacement. One active predecessor is fenced and one successor is activated in a single durable commit. No protected-effect check can observe both the old and new allocation as active. 

Partitioning fork. 

One active predecessor is fenced while two or more single-parent children are activated atomically. Their additive allocations are bounded by the predecessor’s unspent residual, and a registered single-holder effect atom may be assigned to at most one child. Forking creates principals, not authority. 

Branch coordination. 

Siblings may later coordinate or feed a common downstream action, but such coordination does not create an authorization parent edge or union their grants. The complete downstream effect must be admitted against one current authority witness or against a newly issued independent root. Multi-parent authority merge is outside the core transition system studied here. 

Rollback. A historical body commitment may seed a new successor, but the successor receives a fresh population-issued generation sequence and a new authorization decision. Authorization for Self-Modifying AI Agent Populations 5

Table 1. Strict executions separating population-aware succession from per-generation acceptance.         

> Execution Locally acceptable observation Population violation Required state Sibling duplication Both children remain below the parent’s individual ceiling The pair receives two copies of one budget or executor share Aggregate allocation and residual Relational splice Each branch exposes only an allowed field projection Branch coordination synthesizes a complete effect tuple never certified by one authority witness Complete effect relation and holder ownership Ancestor-revoke leak Offline descendant presents a previously valid child authorization record Its witness still depends on the revoked ancestor atom Lineage cut and complete frontier Dual-active promotion New generation activates; predecessor fence is retried after a crash Old and new generations both reach the protected sink Atomic replacement commit Rollback replay Historical body digest and old authorization record match Retired sequence, spent budget, or revoked grant is reused Fresh generation sequence and monotone identity/state guards Self-certification Distinct certifier identifiers approve a candidate All certifiers are declared under the candidate’s control root Evidence-root independence

Historical evidence and authorization records, reservations, receipts, and spent budget stay terminal. An independent re-root is not an additional graph-editing shorthand. It is an explicit authority transaction that supplies a fresh external root, proves that the new grant does not derive from the old lineage, allocates a new envelope, and removes the old lineage atom from the continuing generation’s authority witness. 

2.4 Six strict separating executions 

Table 1 states the minimum executions that a population-safe mechanism must distinguish. Each row contains locally valid artifacts; the violation appears only when lineage and population state are considered together. 

2.5 Design requirements 

The separating executions yield seven requirements. Generation identity must be exact and fresh. Every active descendant must be discoverable from a durable lineage frontier. Authority allocation must be aggregate and relation-preserving. Promotion must bind evidence that is independent of the candidate’s control root. Replacement and allocation changes must be atomic at one ledger linearization point. Ancestor revocation must reach delayed and offline descendants at their next mediated transition. Finally, every protected effect must validate current lineage and allocation state at the commit boundary; a cooperative process promise is insufficient. These requirements explain the paper’s boundary with adjacent systems. Mutation classification supplies evidence to succession, versioned bodies supply identity inputs, delegation supplies attenuation rules, and an external kernel supplies a trustworthy path. The population ledger adds the state that none of those components can reconstruct after authority has been copied into independent sessions. 6 Zhu and Wang 

3 System, Threat, and Assurance Model 3.1 Assurance statement 

We consider a self-modifying agent population derived from an authorization root 𝑟 . The protected statement is that every effect accepted at time 𝑡 is attributed to exactly one current active generation with a complete authority witness, that the aggregate authority allocated to all active dependent descendants remains below both 𝑟 ’s lifetime grant and the population’s persistent current-exposure ceiling, and that no descendant can exercise an ancestor atom after its durable revocation cut. Replacement promotion additionally establishes that predecessor fencing and successor activation share one linearization point. A body restored by rollback is a fresh generation and receives no authority from historical identity alone. The assertion is evaluated at the protected-effect commitment point. Planning, candidate gen-eration, evaluation, and code execution may be adversarial; they cannot turn an uncommitted proposal into a protected effect without a current ledger admission. The statement remains true during crashes and partitions by denying or retaining an indeterminate/quarantined state until authenticated current evidence is available. 

3.2 Components and trusted boundary 

The system has six logical components: (1) The generation registry stores content-addressed generation identities, each generation’s unique authorization parent, lineage roots, epochs, phases, and immutable creation records. (2) The population ledger owns root grants, persistent population ceilings, active-generation al-locations, reservations, residual budgets, revocation cuts, and replay tombstones. It is the linearization authority for every population change. (3) A candidate runtime creates and evaluates modifications in quarantine. Its own report may be evidence input but cannot activate itself. (4) Independent evidence roots attest registered predicates about body identity, effect-envelope com-patibility, validation results, and operator approval. Independence is evaluated by authenticated control root, not by display name or process identifier. (5) The succession coordinator proposes reservations and commits, but has no authority to by-pass ledger predicates. Only protected-effect requests promise exact-result retry under A10. Other repeated commands are accepted or rejected by their phase, uniqueness, version, and monotonicity guards; they do not inherit an exact-retry guarantee. (6) A protected-effect broker validates generation identity, complete lineage atoms and the current cut set, active phase, allocation, complete typed effect, budget, and revocation frontier in the same serialized operation that reserves or commits the effect. The registry, population ledger, admitted evidence/control-root bindings, and effect broker lie outside the mutable generation boundary. They can be implemented by separate processes or one isolated service; the logical trust separation and durable state obligations are invariant. An out-of-process only-path kernel is a compatible substrate for these components [9, 14, 18, 20]. 

3.3 Adversary and fault model 

The adversary controls every candidate and active generation, including its planner, model route, code, Skill closure, memory policy, policy compiler, and runtime configuration. It may fork repeat-edly, construct deep lineages, submit an unsupported multi-parent merge, retain old credentials, delay an offline descendant, alias certifier principals under one control root, present partial effect projections, reorder promotion messages, replay certificates and receipts, race predecessor and Authorization for Self-Modifying AI Agent Populations 7

successor effects, and crash the coordinator at every durable boundary. It may restore any historical body and may supply a byte-identical artifact under a new launch. The adversary cannot cause an authenticated root-authorization or certification predicate to accept without an admitted external control root, find a collision in the registered canonical digest, rewrite a committed ledger record, bypass every registered protected-effect broker, or violate the atomicity and serializable ordering of the trusted ledger. A compromised broker, omitted effect path, falsely admitted evidence root, incomplete lineage registration, or unsound effect normalizer violates an explicit premise; such evidence cannot be converted into a theorem conclusion. Authentication is an abstract premise. The reference prototype validates a frozen declared-principal-to- control-root mapping and digest-bound records; it does not authenticate the caller, prove key possession, or implement public-key signatures. Those authentication obligations remain part of A2 for a deployment satisfying the theorem. Networks and candidate runtimes may be unavailable for an unbounded interval. Safety requires no delivery deadline. Eventual activation additionally requires eventual delivery, stable current evidence, and available durable storage; it is outside the safety result stated here. 

3.4 Assurance assumptions 

Table 2 gives the premises used by the formal results. A1–A10 are safety assumptions. 

3.5 Registered profile and decision surface 

A profile fixes the generation-identity schema, effect normalizer, authority algebra, evidence-root independence classes, permitted succession operations, timeout semantics, and all brokers reachable by the root. A general deployment may bind these choices with a separate profile digest. The executable reference profile instead fixes its schema in the implementation and binds six manifest digests plus the external-control path and proposer identity; it implements single-parent succession, single-predecessor fork, rollback, cuts, and independent re-root, but no multi-parent merge. Unknown identity fields, incomplete lineage, missing evidence, unavailable current allocation state, and conflicting records yield Indeterminate or remain Quarantined ; they never become Allow through timeout. The broker’s decision surface is deliberately small. It receives a generation principal, a complete normalized effect, declared costs, and a retry-stable effect-request identity. Within its serialized ledger operation it loads the authoritative population and generation records, then checks the active state, lineage cut set, allocation, held reservations, and remaining budget. Current-root consistency follows from the ledger’s population-transition invariant rather than a caller-supplied version. It returns an accepted effect receipt, the same receipt for an exact effect retry, or a typed rejection. The agent cannot choose which identity fields, authorization parent, budgets, or effect dimensions participate in the decision. 

3.6 Assurance boundary 

The theorems quantify over the registered generation graph, root grants, population ceiling, nor-malizer, evidence profile, and mediated effects. They establish enforcement of the supplied policy relation and lineage state; they do not infer whether arbitrary code is semantically equivalent or whether an evaluator’s external factual judgment is correct. Evidence admission and profile governance supply those inputs. The design keeps this boundary explicit so a strong ledger result cannot be mistaken for a code-understanding or deployment-universality claim. 8 Zhu and Wang 

Table 2. Assurance assumptions for a registered succession profile. 

ID Assumption Enforced obligation A1 Complete effect mediation Every security-relevant commitment named by the profile crosses a broker that validates the current generation, complete lineage-atom closure, allocation, and complete effect tuple at its own linearization point. A2 Authentic canonical identity Generation identities, the unique authorization parent, body/configuration commitments, authorization and certification records, cuts, allocations, receipts, and evidence-root identities use unambiguous canonical encodings and authenticators whose acceptance cannot be produced from the candidate’s control root alone. A3 Durable monotone generations Generation and root epochs never decrease or reactivate; accepted evidence/authorization records, lineage cuts, fences, root-lifetime debit records, and effect-request replay records cannot be rewritten. A4 Complete lineage accounting Every non-root generation has exactly one registered authorization parent before activation. A fork may create several successors atomically, but each successor names the same single predecessor; the predecessor is fenced. The ledger retains every resulting parent edge and lineage atom across offline, delayed, and nested descendants until a terminal cut or independent re-root removes authority. A5 Sound population algebra Effect normalization preserves every policy-relevant correlation; the registered effect-membership predicate and authority join are monotone, multiplicity-aware where policy requires it, additive for consumable resources, and conservative for unknown fields. A6 Atomic population transactions Reservation, allocation replacement, activation, predecessor fencing, and budget consumption execute as serializable durable transitions with exact population-version and source-residual preconditions. A held reservation either blocks predecessor consumption or is made stale by it. A7 Evidence-root independence Each promotion profile names required predicates and independent control-root classes; aliases, descendants, cloned processes, and principals governed by the candidate’s control root cannot satisfy independent slots. A8 Transfer non-amplification An accepted authorization record binds one exact predecessor, one successor or atomic successor set, the predecessor’s reconstructed residual, successor grants, population state, manifest commitments, evidence records, and consumed identifiers. The ledger accepts only when the exact post-state remains below the predecessor residual, root-lifetime grant, and persistent population ceiling. A9 Complete revocation fencing An ancestor cut is checked on activation, succession, fork, re-root, rollback, and every protected effect. Cached child records cannot override a monotone lineage cut. A10 Effect-request idempotency For protected-effect requests only, an exact retry under the same request identity returns the previously committed effect receipt without another debit; the same identity with a different canonical effect request is rejected. No exact-retry guarantee is assumed for proposal, certification, reservation, succession, fork, cut, re-root, or administrative commands; their replay safety follows from A3 and A6 phase, uniqueness, and monotonicity guards. 

4 Formal Model 

This section defines authorization succession over a population of mutable agent generations. The model separates content identity, authorization lineage, and artifact provenance: reusing bytes does not reuse authority, and copying a predecessor does not copy its allocation. The six stated results are proved in Appendix A. Authorization for Self-Modifying AI Agent Populations 9

4.1 Assumptions, abstraction, and trusted boundary 

The authoritative premises are A1–A10 in Table 2: complete effect mediation, authentic canonical identity, durable monotone generations, complete lineage accounting, sound population algebra, atomic population transactions, evidence-root independence, transfer non-amplification, complete revocation fencing, and effect-request idempotency. The trusted-boundary definition in Section 3 additionally places the lineage authority, frozen control-root registry, authenticated-record valida-tors, and durable ledger outside every candidate generation’s mutable closure. A later delivery or physical consequence of a pre-cut commitment remains attributed to its unique pre-cut admission event. The theory is parameterized by a registered identity profile, authority algebra, and authenticated-record predicates. Those parameters support a general assurance statement; they are not claims that the executable artifact implements every possible profile. The reference realization fixes the manifest schema, uses effect-label sets and nonnegative integer budgets, and validates declared control-root separation and digest-bound authorization records. Caller authentication remains an A2 deployment premise; the artifact does not implement public-key signature verification, multi-parent generation identity, or a merge transition. The model likewise does not infer arbitrary program equivalence, discover unmanifested effect paths, or establish the truth of a certifier’s observations merely because an authenticated record was accepted. 

4.2 Generation identity and authorization lineage 

Let P be the set of governed populations, R the set of authorization roots, G the set of generations, and E the set of normalized protected effects. Each root 𝑟 ∈ R is bound to one population 𝑝 (𝑟 ), one monotone root epoch 𝜖 𝑟 , and an authenticated root-grant digest ℎ𝐺 𝑟 . Every non-root generation has one unique authorization parent par (𝑔 ) ∈ G ; a root generation has par (𝑔 ) = ⊥. Each generation 

𝑔 ∈ G is registered under exactly one authorization root, written root (𝑔 ) ∈ R . If par (𝑔 ) ≠ ⊥,then root (par (𝑔 )) = root (𝑔 ), so every ordinary parent edge remains within one root lifetime. Each population owns a monotone generation counter and records exactly one current authorization root curRoot 𝑆 (𝑝 ), with 𝑝 (curRoot 𝑆 (𝑝 )) = 𝑝 . A re-root may advance that pointer only through Definition 3; historical root records remain immutable. Let 𝑀 𝑔 denote the canonical registered manifest and 𝑚 𝑔 = 𝐻 (Enc (𝑑 𝑀 , 𝑀 𝑔 )) . The executable reference manifest consists exactly of the named fields 

𝑀 ref  

> 𝑔

= {codeDigest , controlPath , enforcementConfigDigest , memoryPolicyDigest ,

modelRouteDigest , policyCompilerDigest , proposerId , skillClosureDigest }.

All eight values are nonempty and unknown or missing fields are rejected. A general registered profile may define a larger manifest and bind its profile identifier within that manifest. Results for such a profile are conditional on A2 and its registered resolver; the reference-artifact evidence covers only the fixed schema above. Let 𝑎 𝑟 be the lineage atom authenticated by the root grant. For a generation under root 𝑟 , define its self atom, complete lineage-atom set, and generation identifier by 

𝑎 𝑔 = 𝐻 (Enc (𝑑 atom , 𝑝 (𝑟 ), 𝑟, 𝜖 𝑟 , ℎ 𝐺 𝑟 , 𝑛 𝑔 , par (𝑔 ), 𝑚 𝑔 )) ,𝐴 𝑔 =

(

{𝑎 𝑟 , 𝑎 𝑔 }, par (𝑔 ) = ⊥,𝐴 par (𝑔 ) ∪ { 𝑎 𝑔 }, otherwise ,

gid (𝑔 ) = 𝐻 (Enc (𝑑 gen , 𝑝 (𝑟 ), 𝑟, 𝜖 𝑟 , ℎ 𝐺 𝑟 , 𝑛 𝑔 , par (𝑔 ), sort (𝐴 𝑔 ), 𝑚 𝑔 )) .

(1) 10 Zhu and Wang 

Here 𝑛 𝑔 is a fresh population-issued sequence number. Thus equal content does not imply equal generation identity, and a fresh re-root cannot collide with an old authorization lifetime. A separately recorded source (𝑔 ) may name copied code, checkpoints, or artifacts; it is provenance only and never an authorization parent. A fork atomically creates siblings 𝑁 , each satisfying par (𝑔 ) = 𝑝 for the same unique predecessor 𝑝 . The core transition system admits no multi-parent child and no merge rule. Write 𝑝 →𝐿 𝑔 when 𝑝 = par (𝑔 ), and let Anc 𝐿 (𝑔 ) be the transitive closure of this relation. For each population 𝑝 , the ledger stores a monotone, population-wide set Cut 𝑆 (𝑝 ) of cut lineage atoms. The set is retained across an independent re-root, so changing the current root cannot erase a historical revocation. For 𝑟 = root (𝑔 ), define 

Current 𝑆 (𝑔 ) ⇐⇒ 𝑟 = curRoot 𝑆 (𝑝 (𝑟 )) ∧ state 𝑆 (𝑔 ) ∉ {FENCED , REVOKED } ∧ 

𝐴 𝑔 ∩ Cut 𝑆 (𝑝 (𝑟 )) = ∅. (2) An ancestor may be fenced by completed succession without invalidating an already-created descendant; inserting that ancestor’s atom into Cut 𝑆 (𝑝 (𝑟 )) invalidates every dependent descendant because its complete closure contains the atom. A richer deployment may additionally bind per-atom observations such as 𝑉 abs  

> 𝑔

= {( 𝑎, 𝐸 𝑆 (𝑎 )) :

𝑎 ∈ 𝐴 𝑔 } in a separately registered profile. That vector is an optional refinement of the cut-set rule, not a field stored or validated by the reference realization, and none of the results below depends on it. Definition 1 (Active descendants). The current active population below root 𝑟 is 

AD 𝑆 (𝑟 ) = {𝑔 : root (𝑔 ) = 𝑟, state 𝑆 (𝑔 ) = ACTIVE , Current 𝑆 (𝑔 )} .

A process whose record is fenced, revoked, or bound to a cut atom is not a member and cannot pass fresh effect admission under A1 and A9. 

4.3 Authority algebra, root grants, and population ceilings 

Let (Q , ⪯𝑄 , ∨, ⊥) be the registered finite-join semilattice of qualitative effect envelopes. The profile also supplies a monotone membership predicate Permits 𝑄 ⊆ Q × E : if 𝑞 ⪯𝑄 𝑞 ′ and Permits 𝑄 (𝑞, 𝑒 ),then Permits 𝑄 (𝑞 ′, 𝑒 ). Let 𝐷 be the finite set of quantitative resource dimensions and K ⊆ E 

the effect classes for which concurrent holders are counted. A generation’s immutable granted allocation is 

b𝛼 𝑔 = ⟨𝑞 𝑔 , b𝑏 𝑔 , 𝑢 𝑔 ⟩, 𝑞 𝑔 ∈ Q , b𝑏 𝑔 ∈ R𝐷 

> ≥0

, 𝑢 𝑔 ∈ NK . (3) If Permits 𝑄 (𝑞 𝑔 , 𝑒 ) for a counted class 𝑒 , profile validity requires 𝑢 𝑔 (𝑒 ) ≥ 1. This prevents an idempotent lattice join from hiding the fact that two siblings hold two concurrent copies of the same permission. Let 𝑅 𝑆 (𝑔 ) be the committed effect receipts attributed to 𝑔 in state 𝑆 , with every declared debit satisfying Δ𝑏 (𝜌 ) ∈ R𝐷 

> ≥0

. Its durable debit and remaining numeric authority are 

𝑑 𝑔 (𝑆 ) =∑︁   

> 𝜌 ∈𝑅 𝑆 (𝑔 )

Δ𝑏 (𝜌 ), 𝑏 𝑔 (𝑆 ) = b𝑏 𝑔 − 𝑑 𝑔 (𝑆 ),

with well-formedness requiring 0 ≤ 𝑑 𝑔 (𝑆 ) ≤ b𝑏 𝑔 . The authority currently transferable or exercisable by 𝑔 is 𝛼 𝑔 (𝑆 ) = ⟨𝑞 𝑔 , 𝑏 𝑔 (𝑆 ), 𝑢 𝑔 ⟩. For an authorization root 𝑟 , define its irreversible lifetime debit 

𝑐 𝑟 (𝑆 ) =∑︁ 

> 𝑔 :root (𝑔 )=𝑟

𝑑 𝑔 (𝑆 ).

Fencing a generation therefore removes its residual allocation from the active frontier but never removes its past debit from the root lifetime. Authorization for Self-Modifying AI Agent Populations 11 

Define attenuation componentwise and define population composition by 

𝛼 ⊑ 𝛼 ′ ⇐⇒ 𝑞 ⪯𝑄 𝑞 ′ ∧ 𝑏 ≤ 𝑏 ′ ∧ 𝑢 ≤ 𝑢 ′,𝛼 ⊕ 𝛼 ′ = ⟨𝑞 ∨ 𝑞 ′, 𝑏 + 𝑏 ′, 𝑢 + 𝑢 ′⟩. (4) Vector inequalities are pointwise. Let 𝑀 be a finite labeled allocation family whose entries have the form (𝑔, ⟨𝑞, 𝑏, 𝑢 ⟩) , with unique generation labels. Write lab (𝑀 ) for those labels and 𝑞 𝑀 (𝑔 ),

𝑏 𝑀 (𝑔 ), and 𝑢 𝑀 (𝑔 ) for the three components paired with label 𝑔 . Component aggregation uses those projections, while the full labeled family is passed to the relational predicate. Definition 2 (Root grant and population ceiling). Every authorization root 𝑟 has an au-thenticated grant envelope 

𝐺 𝑟 = ⟨𝑞 𝐺 𝑟 , 𝑏 𝐺 𝑟 , 𝑢 𝐺 𝑟 , ℎ 𝐺 𝑟 ⟩.

Independently, every population 𝑝 has a persistent ceiling 

𝐶 𝑝 = ⟨𝑞 𝑃 𝑝 , 𝑏 𝑃 𝑝 , 𝑢 𝑃 𝑝 , Φ𝑝 , ℎ 𝐶 𝑝 ⟩,

where Φ𝑝 (𝑀 ) is a registered downward-closed predicate over the full labeled allocation family and 

Φ𝑝 (∅) = true . A root grant is admitted only if its component envelope is attenuated from the corre-sponding population ceiling: 

⟨𝑞 𝐺 𝑟 , 𝑏 𝐺 𝑟 , 𝑢 𝐺 𝑟 ⟩ ⊑ ⟨ 𝑞 𝑃 𝑝 (𝑟 ) , 𝑏 𝑃 𝑝 (𝑟 ) , 𝑢 𝑃 𝑝 (𝑟 ) ⟩.

Define 

RootOK 𝑟 (𝑆, 𝑀 ) ⇐⇒ 

Ü 

> 𝑔 ∈lab (𝑀 )

𝑞 𝑀 (𝑔 ) ⪯ 𝑄 𝑞 𝐺 𝑟 ∧ 𝑐 𝑟 (𝑆 ) + ∑︁  

> 𝑔 ∈lab (𝑀 )

𝑏 𝑀 (𝑔 ) ≤ 𝑏 𝐺 𝑟 ∧∑︁  

> 𝑔 ∈lab (𝑀 )

𝑢 𝑀 (𝑔 ) ≤ 𝑢 𝐺 𝑟 , (5) 

and 

PopOK 𝑝 (𝑀 ) ⇐⇒ 

Ü 

> 𝑔 ∈lab (𝑀 )

𝑞 𝑀 (𝑔 ) ⪯ 𝑄 𝑞 𝑃 𝑝 ∧∑︁  

> 𝑔 ∈lab (𝑀 )

𝑏 𝑀 (𝑔 ) ≤ 𝑏 𝑃 𝑝 ∧∑︁  

> 𝑔 ∈lab (𝑀 )

𝑢 𝑀 (𝑔 ) ≤ 𝑢 𝑃 𝑝 ∧ Φ𝑝 (𝑀 ). (6) 

The combined exact-state guard is 

Safe 𝑟 (𝑆, 𝑀 ) ⇐⇒ RootOK 𝑟 (𝑆, 𝑀 ) ∧ PopOK 𝑝 (𝑟 ) (𝑀 ). (7) 

The root conjunct conserves authority over one root lifetime, including irreversible debit. The population conjunct limits current exposure even after a new independently granted root becomes current. Its predicate can express prohibited co-possession, separation of duties, branch-local target constraints, and correlations not representable by fieldwise bounds. 

The reference realization instantiates this abstraction with finite sets of registered effect labels, set membership for Permits 𝑄 , and maps of nonnegative safe-integer budgets. A bootstrap grant equals its population ceiling; a later independent re-root grant may be strictly smaller and must be componentwise bounded by that persistent ceiling. Root-lifetime validation checks spent budget plus active remaining budget against the applicable root grant. Separately, population validation prohibits the same effect label from belonging to two concurrently active generations and checks their aggregate remaining budgets against the population ceiling. Thus its effect-label exclusivity realizes one holder unit per label. General semilattices, arbitrary multiplicities, and arbitrary Φ𝑝 

predicates describe the registered abstraction and are not presented as executable-artifact results. 12 Zhu and Wang 

The ledger stores each generation’s grant immutably. A budget-consuming effect atomically appends one receipt/debit at commitment; remaining authority is reconstructed from that grant and the receipts. Qualitative effects consume no numeric budget unless their profile declares one, but the reference realization still prohibits copying a label across active siblings. 

4.4 Certification, transfer, and re-rooting 

An evidence record for 𝑔 has the canonical form 

𝜁 𝑔 = ⟨𝑐, 𝜅 𝑐 , 𝜅 prop , gid (𝑔 ), 𝑚 𝑔 , ℎ evidence , APPROVE ⟩.

Let Ctl 𝑆 (𝑥 ) be the frozen registry mapping from a principal to its admitted control root. The registered certification predicate is 

CertOK 𝑆 (𝑔, 𝜁 𝑔 ) ⇐⇒ AuthenticatedCert 𝑆 (𝜁 𝑔 ) ∧ 𝜅 𝑐 = Ctl 𝑆 (𝑐 ) ∧ 

𝜅 prop = Ctl 𝑆 (proposer (𝑀 𝑔 )) ∧ 𝑐 ≠ gid (𝑔 ) ∧ 

𝜅 𝑐 ≠ 𝜅 prop ∧ 𝜁 𝑔 .gid = gid (𝑔 ) ∧ 

𝜁 𝑔 .manifest = 𝑚 𝑔 ∧ 𝜁 𝑔 .decision = APPROVE .

(8) The first conjunct is the abstract external-authentication premise. The reference artifact executes the remaining frozen-control-root and digest binding checks; it does not execute caller authentication or public-key signature verification. For a single successor 𝑔 of active predecessor 𝑝 , transfer requires 

par (𝑔 ) = 𝑝 ∧ b𝛼 𝑔 ⊑ 𝛼 𝑝 (𝑆 ). (9) For an atomic fork with finite child set 𝑁 , |𝑁 | ≥ 2, transfer requires 

(∀ 𝑔 ∈ 𝑁 : par (𝑔 ) = 𝑝 ) ∧

Ê

> 𝑔 ∈𝑁

b𝛼 𝑔 ⊑ 𝛼 𝑝 (𝑆 ). (10) Every accepted family also satisfies the exact post-state root-grant and population-ceiling bounds. In the reference realization, (10) additionally means pairwise-disjoint child effect-label sets and a componentwise sum of child budgets no greater than the predecessor’s reconstructed residual. No retained-predecessor allocation and no fresh issuance participate in either core transition: 𝑝 is fenced at commit. A new authority source instead uses independent re-rooting. Let 𝜒 𝑝,𝑁 denote the authenticated authorization object for a family transition. It binds the root, exact predecessor identifier and active state, digest of 𝛼 𝑝 (𝑆 ), the child identifiers, manifests, allocations and evidence records, the root-grant and population-ceiling commitments, the transition mode, and every consumed identifier. For a staged singleton it also binds the compared population version. Abstractly, 

AuthOK 𝑆 (𝑝, 𝑁 , 𝜒 ) ⇐⇒ Authenticated 𝑆 (𝜒 ) ∧ BindsExact 𝑆 (𝜒, 𝑝, 𝑁 )∧ Fresh 𝑆 (𝜒 ) ∧ 

Û

> 𝑔 ∈𝑁

CertOK 𝑆 (𝑔, 𝜁 𝑔 ). (11) The executable singleton path realizes 𝜒 as a held reservation bound to the predecessor residual and population version. The executable fork path validates the complete family inline and records the atomic fork event; it does not consume a collection of staged child reservations. In both paths, the artifact executes the exact-binding and freshness guards in (11); acceptance by an authenticated external caller remains the A2 premise. No public-key authorization-record implementation is claimed. Authorization for Self-Modifying AI Agent Populations 13 

Definition 3 (Independent re-root). Let 𝑟 = curRoot 𝑆 (𝑝 0). An independent re-root of artifacts from 𝑔 into fresh root 𝑟 ′ ≠ 𝑟 , where 𝑝 (𝑟 ′) = 𝑝 0, is accepted only if 

{𝑥 : 𝑝 (root (𝑥 )) = 𝑝 0 ∧ state 𝑆 (𝑥 ) = ACTIVE } = ∅.

The transaction requires a fresh authenticated root grant whose issuer control root is independent of the proposer control root, a strictly fresh root epoch, independent accepted evidence, a fresh generation sequence, par (𝑔 ′) = ⊥, a new lineage closure containing no cut atom, and an allocation bounded by the new grant and population ceiling. It checks Safe 𝑟 ′ on the exact post-state and atomically sets 

curRoot 𝑆 ′ (𝑝 0) = 𝑟 ′ while creating 𝑔 ′ as the sole active member of that population. Other populations and all historical root, debit, cut, and generation records are unchanged. The source record may name 

𝑔 , but the new allocation and lineage derive only from 𝑟 ′. Deleting an old parent label or relabeling an old grant does not meet this definition. 

Definition 4 (Rollback generation). A rollback from current generation 𝑝 to an earlier manifest 

𝑀 𝑎 is the ordinary successor transition with 𝑀 𝑔 𝑟𝑏 = 𝑀 𝑎 , par (𝑔 𝑟𝑏 ) = 𝑝 , and a fresh population-issued sequence 𝑛 𝑔 𝑟𝑏 . It requires fresh evidence and authorization records; no record belonging to the earlier generation 𝑎 is reusable. Restoring the same manifest through independent re-root instead creates a root generation 𝑔 ′ under Definition 3; it is not the rollback generation 𝑔 𝑟𝑏 defined here. 

4.5 Atomic succession and protected-effect admission 

The staged singleton path records a proposed candidate, independent evidence, and a held reserva-tion before activation. Quarantine is an execution condition, not authority. The atomic fork path evaluates all children before the commit and creates their active generation records together. In either path, only ACTIVE authorizes a fresh protected effect. Definition 5 (Atomic single-parent family handoff). Let 

ℎ = CommitFamily (𝑝, 𝑁 , 𝜒 )

be one serializable ledger transaction, where 𝑝 is the unique active predecessor and 𝑁 ≠ ∅ is a finite set of distinct children. All children have root 𝑟 , satisfy par (𝑔 ) = 𝑝 , and are not active before the transaction. The guard re-resolves their identities, verifies that 𝑝 is current and active, evaluates (8) –(11) , rejects cut lineage atoms, and checks Safe 𝑟 on the exact post-state in which 𝑝 is absent and all members of 𝑁 

are active. For |𝑁 | = 1, 𝜒 must be the held, version-matched reservation. For |𝑁 | ≥ 2, 𝜒 is the complete inline fork authorization bundle. At its single commit position 𝜆 ℎ , the transaction atomically consumes the applicable authorization object, marks 𝑝 FENCED , marks every 𝑔 ∈ 𝑁 ACTIVE , advances the population version, and records the result. There is no durable state between predecessor fencing and child activation. 

An ancestor cut RevokeAncestor (𝑝, 𝑎 ) atomically inserts 𝑎 into the monotone set Cut 𝑆 (𝑝 ). The ledger projection moves every nonterminal affected generation and held reservation to REVOKED ;already terminal generations remain terminal. Safety does not require finding or stopping every descendant process: a fresh effect or population-changing request from any such process fails the current cut-set check. Let abs : O → E be the registered operation normalizer, and let 𝜆 𝑜 denote the admitted opera-tion’s position in the ledger serial order. For operation 𝑜 ∈ O proposed by 𝑔 , AdmitEffect (𝑔, 𝑜, 𝑖𝑑 ) is serialized with cuts and family handoffs. If 𝑖𝑑 already names the identical canonical effect request, the operation returns the original receipt without a new admission, effect, or debit; this remains a replay result even if 𝑔 has since been fenced. Reuse of 𝑖𝑑 with a different canonical request is rejected. Otherwise the request is fresh, and it is accepted only if 𝑔 ∈ AD 𝑆 (𝑟 ), the exact normalized effect 14 Zhu and Wang 

𝑒 = abs (𝑜 ) satisfies Permits 𝑄 (𝑞 𝑔 , 𝑒 ), and sufficient budget remains. A fresh acceptance atomically appends the declared debit, advances the population version, and emits the digest-bound receipt 

𝜌 𝑜 = 𝐻 (Enc (𝑑 receipt , 𝑖𝑑, 𝑟, gid (𝑔 ), 𝐻 (𝐴 𝑔 ),𝐻 (𝛼 𝑔 (𝑆 )) , 𝐻 (𝑜 ), 𝑒, Δ𝑏, 𝜆 𝑜 )) . (12) An attempt that fails any check may be logged, but it does not commit a protected effect. Exact-result replay is specified only for effect requests; other command classes rely on phase, uniqueness, version, and monotonicity guards and receive no A10 retry guarantee. 

4.6 Safety invariants and main results 

Definition 6 (Admissible initial state). An initial state satisfies InitOK (𝑆 0) when it is empty, or when it contains a finite set of disjoint populations provisioned exclusively by the bootstrap root-creation guard. For each provisioned population 𝑝 , the state contains exactly one root record 𝑟 , exactly one corresponding root-grant record 𝐺 𝑟 , and exactly one generation record 𝑔 ; there are no other root, generation, reservation, authorization-consumption, cut, or effect records for 𝑝 . The root is current and the generation is active: 𝑝 (𝑟 ) = 𝑝 , root (𝑔 ) = 𝑟 , and par (𝑔 ) = ⊥. The generation has a canonical fresh identity and complete fresh root closure, and its profile-valid authenticated bootstrap grant has an issuer control root distinct from its proposer control root. Its lifetime debit is zero, its allocation satisfies 

Safe 𝑟 (𝑆 0, {( 𝑔, 𝛼 𝑔 (𝑆 0))}) , and the population has no effect receipt, consumed authorization object, held reservation, or cut atom. Counters, root records, and current-root pointers are unique and mutually consistent across the provisioned populations. 

For a root 𝑟 , abbreviate the exact current active allocation family as 

M𝑟 (𝑆 ) = {( 𝑔, 𝛼 𝑔 (𝑆 )) : 𝑔 ∈ AD 𝑆 (𝑟 )} .

For every accepted-state prefix, define the following invariants: 

I1 (identity binding) every registered generation record binds the canonical identity in (1) to its resolved manifest and unique parent; 

I2 (authorized activation) every active generation satisfies its exclusive admission branch: a non-root generation has CertOK evidence and was activated by one accepted AuthOK 

family commit—the singleton path consumes its held reservation, whereas the fork path validates its complete inline bundle at the same commit that fences the predecessor; a bootstrap root generation has a profile-valid authenticated bootstrap grant whose issuer control root differs from the proposer control root; and an independent-re-root generation has a fresh authenticated root grant together with accepted independent evidence; 

I3 (lineage closure) every active generation record has its unique parent chain’s complete atom closure, and that closure contains no cut atom; 

I4 (allocation uniqueness) a reservation, authorization-object identifier, generation identifier, effect-request identity, or budget debit has at most one consuming transition; exact effect replay is non-consuming; 

I5 (root and population safety) for every root 𝑟 , Safe 𝑟 (𝑆, M𝑟 (𝑆 )) ;

I6 (attributable effects) every protected-effect receipt binds one exact generation that was active and current at admission, an authorized effect, and one valid budget debit; 

I7 (fence monotonicity) a fenced generation and a cut lineage atom never become current again; resumed content enters through a fresh generation or an independent re-root. Authorization for Self-Modifying AI Agent Populations 15 

Theorem 1 (Population-Safe Succession). Under A1–A10, I1–I7 hold after every prefix of every accepted trace that starts from InitOK (𝑆 0). In particular, for every root 𝑟 and reachable state 𝑆 ,

Ü  

> 𝑔 ∈AD 𝑆 (𝑟 )

𝑞 𝑔 ⪯𝑄 𝑞 𝐺 𝑟 , 𝑐 𝑟 (𝑆 ) + ∑︁   

> 𝑔 ∈AD 𝑆 (𝑟 )

𝑏 𝑔 (𝑆 ) ≤ 𝑏 𝐺 𝑟 ,∑︁   

> 𝑔 ∈AD 𝑆 (𝑟 )

𝑢 𝑔 ≤ 𝑢 𝐺 𝑟 ,

Ü  

> 𝑔 ∈AD 𝑆 (𝑟 )

𝑞 𝑔 ⪯𝑄 𝑞 𝑃 𝑝 (𝑟 ) ,∑︁   

> 𝑔 ∈AD 𝑆 (𝑟 )

𝑏 𝑔 (𝑆 ) ≤ 𝑏 𝑃 𝑝 (𝑟 ) ,∑︁   

> 𝑔 ∈AD 𝑆 (𝑟 )

𝑢 𝑔 ≤ 𝑢 𝑃 𝑝 (𝑟 ) ,

Φ𝑝 (𝑟 ) (M 𝑟 (𝑆 )) = true .

(13) 

Every committed protected effect is attributable to exactly one generation that was current and unrevoked at its admission position and lies within that generation’s allocation. 

Theorem 2 (Fork Conservation). Consider an accepted atomic fork from predecessor 𝑝 to children 

𝑁 . The composition of all child allocations is bounded by 𝑝 ’s reconstructed pre-fork residual as in 

(10) , 𝑝 is fenced at the same commit position, and the residual can be consumed by that fork at most once. Repeating this argument down a fork tree preserves the bound over current active leaf allocations descended from its originating allocation; equal qualitative permissions held by different descendants consume distinct holder units under the abstract profile and are prohibited outright by the reference effect-label profile. 

Theorem 3 (Cross-Generation Revocation Closure). 

Let 𝑐 = RevokeAncestor (𝑝 (𝑟 ), 𝑎 ) insert 𝑎 into Cut 𝑆 (𝑝 (𝑟 )) . No fresh protected-effect admission ordered after 𝑐 can be authorized by a generation whose complete lineage set contains 𝑎 . This includes every nested dependent descendant. A generation under an independent re-root is outside the conclusion because its authority contains no old atom. 

Theorem 4 (Atomic Generation Handoff). For an accepted family handoff at 𝜆 ℎ , a child in 𝑁 

has no production authority before 𝜆 ℎ , and predecessor 𝑝 has no production authority after 𝜆 ℎ . Every concurrent fresh protected-effect admission is ordered on exactly one side of 𝜆 ℎ . Hence no accepted prefix contains both 𝑝 ’s pre-transfer allocation and a child’s transferred allocation as simultaneously exercisable authority. 

Theorem 5 (Rollback Non-Reminting). If rollback generation 𝑔 𝑟𝑏 has the same manifest digest as historical generation 𝑎 , then gid (𝑔 𝑟𝑏 ) ≠ gid (𝑎 ). It cannot use 𝑎 ’s evidence record, authorization object, reservation, activation record, or cut lineage. Any authority obtained by 𝑔 𝑟𝑏 comes from its fresh accepted handoff and is counted by (13) .

Theorem 6 (No Self-Certification). No trace consisting only of records originating in or con-trolled by a non-bootstrap candidate generation 𝑔 can move 𝑔 to ACTIVE . Every accepted candidate activation contains an accepted evidence record from at least one profile-required control root indepen-dent of the candidate proposer, plus an authenticated authorization decision of the external lineage authority. 

Corollary 1 (Re-root non-laundering). An accepted independent re-root of 𝑔 ′ has no au-thorization path to the old root, imports no old-root allocation, and attributes every later admitted effect solely to its fresh root. Removing or renaming old lineage fields without the external root-grant transition cannot establish these facts. 

The theorems establish authorization safety for the registered identity and effect boundary. The abstract parameters above state the obligations for a conforming profile; the artifact evidence in 16 Zhu and Wang 

> mutable candidate runtime canonical generation identity independent evidence roots exact succession authorization external generation registry + population ledger atomic replacement/fork, lineage cuts, effect-request replay index durable active frontier protected-effect broker typed committed effect current-state check
> Fig. 1. Authorization-succession architecture. Candidate production and evidence feed an external ledger; only a committed population transition changes the active generation frontier. The effect broker revalidates current lineage and allocation state at the protected commitment point.

Section 8 applies only to the fixed manifest, authority, authentication, and transition realization described here. Neither level claims semantic equivalence for arbitrary code or models. 

5 Authorization Succession Protocol 

The protocol turns mutation acceptance into a durable population transition. The protocol does not ask a mutable agent to remember its own limits. It places generation registration, allocation, succession, revocation, and protected effect admission behind an external ledger and broker. 

5.1 Architecture 

Figure 1 separates candidate production from authority control. Mutable runtimes may produce any number of candidates. The identity builder commits every security-relevant field and the evidence layer evaluates registered predicates. Neither component can activate a candidate. Only the population ledger can accept the applicable authorization object and atomically change the active frontier. Every protected effect then revalidates the resulting generation and allocation state at the broker. 

5.2 Canonical generation identity 

The registry computes a generation identifier only from a complete canonical record. Table 3 separates the executable reference record from profile-level extensions. Omission or addition of a field in the fixed reference schema is a registration error rather than an implicit wildcard. The identifier is the domain-separated digest in (1), over the exact manifest digest, population, root grant, generation sequence, unique parent, and complete lineage-atom set. Domain separation prevents a manifest digest, authorization record, or effect receipt from being reinterpreted as a generation identity. The fresh generation sequence makes two otherwise identical manifests distinct. A rollback may intentionally reuse a manifest commitment while receiving a new sequence and therefore a new gid . Authenticated software provenance and rollback-resistant update metadata supply compatible lower-layer techniques [21, 29]; the generation record adds the live authorization lifetime. Claims backed by the executable artifact apply to the eight-field reference manifest, not automatically to the extension row. Authorization for Self-Modifying AI Agent Populations 17        

> Table 3. Generation identity inputs and their realization status.
> Layer Bound fact Security role Reference manifest code digest, control path, enforcement-configuration digest, memory-policy digest, model-route digest, policy-compiler digest, proposer identifier, Skill-closure digest fixes the exact eight-field executable schema Reference lineage population and root identifiers, root epoch and grant digest, one parent-generation identifier, complete lineage-atom set makes single-parent succession and fork ancestry explicit Reference lifetime fresh population-issued generation sequence separates launches and blocks historical identity replay Reference evidence proposer and certifier principals mapped through frozen control roots; subject-manifest and evidence digests checks digest binding and declared-root separation Registered extension any additional prompt, tool, harness, dependency, normalizer, or profile field named by a larger governed schema extends the abstract identity obligation only when a deployment resolves and binds it

5.3 Candidate and evidence phases 

The staged single-successor path records a PROPOSED generation, attaches an independent certifica-tion record, moves it to RESERVED , and atomically changes it to ACTIVE while fencing its predecessor. Quarantine describes where candidate code is evaluated; it is not an authority-bearing ledger phase. The fork path instead evaluates a complete child family and, after inline validation, creates all child 

ACTIVE records in the same transaction that fences the predecessor. Terminal FENCED and REVOKED 

states are monotone. A changed manifest creates a new candidate or fork-child description rather than editing an accepted record. At the registered-profile level, evidence slots may denote typed predicates such as body-manifest integrity, transition-envelope compliance, test-policy satisfaction, and human or organizational approval. Such a profile names its admitted principals and required independent control-root classes. The reference realization implements the narrower evidence-record boundary used by the experiments: one opaque evidence digest and APPROVE decision are bound to the exact generation and subject manifest, and the proposer and certifier identifiers are resolved through a frozen declared-control-root registry and required to differ at that root. It does not evaluate the opaque evidence, implement a multi-slot predicate policy, authenticate the caller, prove key possession, or verify a public-key signature. Those obligations and the substantive evidence judgment remain A2 and profile-level premises. A staged authorization is also bound to the predecessor’s residual and population version, so reuse against a later allocation state fails. 

5.4 Exact authority authorization 

For staged single-successor promotion, the ledger reserves the proposed allocation against one population version and one digest of the unique predecessor’s current residual. The reservation binds the complete effect-label set, additive budgets, certification record, predecessor, child, and single-use reservation identity. Creating it does not authorize effects. In the reference realization, a held reservation rejects new predecessor effects; any other accepted population transition advances 18 Zhu and Wang 

Algorithm 1 Atomic single-parent family commit 

Require: predecessor 𝑝 , nonempty child set 𝑁 , authorization object 𝜒  

> 1:

set 𝑟 ← root (𝑝 ); begin serializable transaction at population version 𝑣  

> 2:

require 𝑝 is current, active, and has no cut lineage atom  

> 3:

require every 𝑔 ∈ 𝑁 has unique parent 𝑝 and a fresh identity  

> 4:

require every child manifest and evidence record passes its exact checks  

> 5:

if |𝑁 | = 1 then  

> 6:

require 𝜒 is the held reservation bound to (𝑣, 𝑝, 𝑁 ) and the current residual  

> 7:

else  

> 8:

require 𝜒 is a complete inline fork bundle and |𝑁 | ≥ 2 

> 9:

end if  

> 10:

require (9) or (10), as applicable  

> 11:

compute the exact post-state labeled allocation family 𝑀 ′ excluding 𝑝 and including 𝑁  

> 12:

require Safe 𝑟 (𝑆 ′, 𝑀 ′) 

> 13:

atomically write 𝑝 ↦ → Fenced , 𝑁 ↦ → Active , consume 𝜒 where applicable, advance 𝑣 , and persist the result  

> 14:

commit the compared version. Either guard prevents concurrent consumption from spending the reserved residual. An atomic fork does not reuse that staged-reservation protocol. Its command supplies at least two complete child descriptions, and the ledger validates their manifests, independent evidence, allocations, common predecessor, disjoint effect labels, summed budgets, and exact post-state inline. It then fences the predecessor and creates all children in one commit. Both paths may leave residual authority unallocated; neither retains an attenuated active predecessor, returns spent budget, or mutates the predecessor’s immutable grant. The ledger derives transferable residual from the immutable grant minus committed receipts. Across an authorization root, cumulative lifetime debit plus every active generation’s residual remains at or below that root’s grant. Separately, the aggregate current active residual remains at or below the population’s persistent ceiling, including after an independent re-root. 

5.5 Atomic single-parent family handoff 

Algorithm 1 gives the common safety shape. The transaction starts from one current predecessor, reconstructs its residual and lineage, verifies the mode-specific authorization object, and writes the predecessor fence and child activations in one state change. The exact post-state, not an intended sequence of remote messages, defines the linearization point. The active frontier is the current, effect-admissible set in Definition 1; a cut atom or terminal state removes a generation from that set. The broker serializes its admission against all population transitions and reads the current ledger version and state. Agent transaction and provider-lifecycle systems already supply compatible staged effects and retry-safe lower boundaries [5, 28]; this trans-action changes which software generations hold the upstream authority. A fresh effect admission belongs either before the family commit and to the active predecessor allocation, or after it and to an active child allocation. It cannot observe a committed state in which both transferred allocations are active. A crash before commit leaves the predecessor unchanged and any staged candidate non-active; a crash after commit recovers the complete post-state. Authorization for Self-Modifying AI Agent Populations 19 

5.6 Fork and nested succession 

A fork atomically replaces one predecessor with at least two children. Every child independently names that same predecessor as its unique authorization parent; the predecessor never remains active after a successful fork. Additive budgets are partitioned so their componentwise sum does not exceed the predecessor’s reconstructed residual. The reference profile allocates effect labels disjointly across children, so no protected effect is silently copied. The abstract algebra in Section 4 permits a registered multiplicity-aware relation, but the reference artifact does not implement a more general shareability rule. Nested succession repeats the same single-parent rule against the current population state. An intermediate generation cannot launder authority by allocating to children and then disappearing: each fork consumes one current predecessor residual exactly once, fences that predecessor, preserves all past debits, and introduces only a bounded child composition. The core protocol has no multi-parent merge transition. Combining independently authorized branches requires a separately governed construction outside the core theorem rather than an implicit union of their authority. 

5.7 Ancestor cuts and independent re-root 

Revoking an ancestor inserts its atom into the population’s monotone cut set and marks nonterminal affected generations and held reservations revoked; already terminal generations remain terminal. Activation, succession, fork, rollback, and every fresh effect admission reject a witness containing the cut atom. Offline descendants need not receive a push message for safety; their next protected transition encounters the current cut. Frontier accounting is required before a positive statement that every dependent descendant has become terminal or re-rooted. An independent re-root transaction creates a fresh root and allocation from an authenticated external grant record. It binds the current manifest, new root epoch and lineage atom, effect labels, budgets, and independent certifier control root. The new generation has no authorization parent; the old generation is already non-active before re-root admission. Re-root therefore introduces a distinct external authority cause rather than deleting or relabeling the old atom. The formal model permits a separate, non-authorizing source record for provenance, and the external adapter evidence uses source-native identifiers for audit correlation; the reference re-root authorization record itself contains no provenance/source field. The population-wide cut set and persistent ceiling remain in force across the current-root switch. 

5.8 Rollback without reminting 

Rollback begins with ordinary candidate creation from the selected historical manifest. The ledger assigns a fresh generation sequence and binds the unique current predecessor. Optional mutation metadata can preserve a non-authorizing audit correlation, but the reference authorization decision does not depend on a provenance field. Fresh evidence and authorization records are required. Historical activation records, consumed reservations, cut atoms, and spent budgets cannot be reused. Thus a known-good body can be restored promptly without treating old authority as a property of its bytes. Checkpoint replay and safe-restore work already establish the general authority-resurrection threat [36, 39]; the rule here specializes it to a population transfer whose identity, allocation, and authorization record are fresh. 

5.9 Protected-effect admission 

For request 𝑥 , the broker atomically verifies: (1) the exact generation record authenticates and belongs to the governed population; 20 Zhu and Wang 

(2) the generation is active in the serialized ledger state, whose transition invariant maintains one current authorization root; (3) no ancestor atom in its authority witness is cut or stale; (4) the complete normalized effect belongs to its allocated relation; (5) declared additive budget remains available in both the generation allocation and root-lifetime accounting; and (6) the request identity has not committed a different canonical effect. For a fresh request identity, acceptance consumes required resources, advances the population version, and emits a typed receipt in the same transaction. An exact retry returns that receipt without a second debit; the same identity with a different canonical request is a conflict. A stale process cannot authorize from a cached allocation. Missing current facts remain non-authorizing. 

5.10 Evidence and independent verification 

Every accepted command emits a hash-linked, operation-specific event. Its envelope binds the previous digest and event type; its payload binds the population, generation, and transition fields used by that operation. Effect authorization events additionally bind the effect-request identity and canonical request digest. The case transcripts and final result-set commitment separately bind registered inputs, decisions, terminal state, and the complete denominator. The independent checker rebuilds identity digests, the single-parent generation forest, active frontiers, allocations, cuts, budget conservation, phase monotonicity, evidence-root independence, and effect decisions without importing the controller or adapter implementation. Semantic regression tests modify a security-relevant fact and then consistently reseal the enclos-ing event, transcript, state, case, and suite records. Each regression declares which content-addressed inner objects are also rebuilt. The checker must reject the resulting trace for the registered invariant or denominator violation, rather than only because an unrelated outer checksum is stale. The checker and executable cases validate the fixed eight-field manifest, frozen control-root registry, digest-bound records, single-parent succession, atomic fork, disjoint effect labels, and integer budgets described above. General profile digests, extra manifest fields, per-atom epoch vectors, public-key signatures, arbitrary relational authority predicates, and multi-parent merge are outside that executable evidence claim. 

6 Protocol Instantiations 

The executable artifact first uses two separately implemented logical runtime mappings to test whether the succession contract depends on one command layout. They are provider-free mappings, not measurements of named external systems. Section 8 reports a separate refinement through adapters to two frozen public runtimes. 

6.1 Direct-call mapping 

The logical-direct-call/v1 adapter receives a typed action and payload, maps the action through an explicit action-to-operation table, and invokes the ledger in the caller’s request path. Its transcript binds the complete input, mapped operation, ledger event sequence, decision, and preceding transcript digest. This shape makes the normalized command boundary directly visible. 

6.2 Message-mailbox mapping 

The logical-mailbox/v1 adapter first translates the same typed action into a versioned topic and delivery envelope. A topic-specific handler then constructs the ledger command. The delivery ordinal is transport metadata and cannot change the semantic request. Its separate topic and Authorization for Self-Modifying AI Agent Populations 21                

> Table 4. Logical runtime-to-succession mapping contract.
> Contract field Direct-call source Message-mailbox source Authorization parent typed predecessor identifier topic-handler predecessor identifier Body commitment canonical manifest fields canonical manifest fields Generation freshness ledger-owned sequence assigned during the command ledger-owned sequence assigned while handling the message Evidence direct certification command certification topic and handler Requested authority direct reservation command reservation topic and handler Lifecycle signal explicit succession operation versioned succession message Protected effect direct normalized request effect-attempt message

handler tables exercise a message-oriented dispatch shape without presenting an external provider as evaluated. 

6.3 Common mapping contract 

Table 4 lists the common contract facts established by the adapter-to-ledger path; generation freshness is assigned inside the ledger rather than supplied by either adapter. They share the typed input contract, transcript recorder, and semantic ledger, while their dispatch translations are separately coded. The experiment therefore tests translation-shape agreement; it does not treat the two paths as independent semantic implementations. The frozen executable profile instantiates one authorization parent per successor. It covers replacement, predecessor-fencing fork allocation, nested succession, rollback, and independent re-root. It has no multi-parent merge transition; branch coordination can authorize a complete effect only through one current witness or a separately issued root. For both mappings, native success is evidence rather than authority. An evaluation score, test pass, selected archive status, successful repository creation, or launched process cannot bypass the external activation receipt. The contract also carries source-native identifiers for audit correlation, but effect authorization receives the canonical generation identifier and loads the lineage, allocation, reservations, and population state inside the serialized ledger operation. The ledger transition invariant, not a supplied version, maintains current-root consistency. 

6.4 Mutation-surface normalization 

The registered corpus changes six security-relevant surfaces: code, model route, Skill/dependency closure, memory policy, policy compiler, and enforcement configuration. Each adapter maps its native representation into the same typed manifest. Four outcomes are then distinguished per surface: 

• a safe refactor preserves the complete effect relation and control path; 

• a safe narrowing produces a strict sub-allocation; 

• an effect expansion requests at least one tuple or quantitative share outside the available parent/population authority; and 

• a control-path weakening removes or bypasses a required identity, evidence, ledger, or broker check. The evaluation is not a general semantic-equivalence classifier. Corpus records provide the normalized ground-truth delta. The experiment asks whether both mappings preserve that delta and whether the ledger enforces its exact succession consequence. 22 Zhu and Wang 

6.5 Durability mapping 

The durable experiment stores the complete ledger image behind an intent record and temporary next-state image. A COMMIT_SUCCESSION execution first constructs and validates the complete post-state, persists the intent and next image, atomically renames that image, fsyncs the containing directory, and removes the intent. Restart verifies the event chain and accepts only the base or intended next-state digest. The 16 registered crash cuts are persistence-level boundaries around opening, writing, fsync-ing, closing, renaming, and cleaning those three files. They exercise the atomic predecessor-fence/successor-activation publication path; they are not presented as separate crash experiments for every protocol operation. At every cut, recovery must expose exactly one active generation and remove intent and temporary residue. 

6.6 External-runtime refinement contract 

A concrete external adapter is admitted only when it binds every field in Table 4 to a frozen public version and identifies the actual launch and protected-effect boundaries. The evidence record must include repository URL, license, immutable commit, acquisition date, executed command, native lineage fields, mapping code digest, and produced trace digest. At least one path must exercise a real body change, descendant or candidate creation, process restart, and a predecessor/successor overlap attempt. Public systems that implement versioned bodies, recursive descent, or self-modifying archives provide strong substrate candidates [34, 38]. Their native identity and evolution mechanisms are treated as inputs. The evaluated contribution remains the population authorization transition placed around those mechanisms. 

7 Evaluation 

The evaluation is organized as separately gated evidence layers. The first layer executes a fixed mutation-and-lineage corpus against the reference ledger. The second maps the same cases through direct-call and message-mailbox dispatch paths. The third interrupts durable replacement pub-lication and enumerates registered contender orders. The fourth asks an independent checker to reconstruct the invariants and reject consistently resealed semantic mutations. Two concrete refinements over frozen public runtimes have their own source, execution, and result seals; logical adapter results are never relabeled as external-runtime evidence. 

7.1 Research questions 

RQ1: Separation. 

Do individually acceptable sibling transitions, cached descendant credentials, non-atomic promotion, and historical rollback produce effects under adjacent per-session or per-generation controls while the population protocol rejects the same executions? 

RQ2: Precision. 

Does the protocol preserve every registered safe refactor, safe narrowing, legal single-successor promotion, and independent re-root while rejecting expansion and control-path weakening? 

RQ3: Conservation. 

Across the registered fork, nested-succession, ancestor-cut, effect-consumption, and rollback profiles, do complete effect relations remain within the persistent population ceiling, and does root-lifetime debit plus every active residual remain within the original root grant? Authorization for Self-Modifying AI Agent Populations 23 

Table 5. Registered 32-case logical corpus.                            

> Group Cases Expected Distinguishing obligation Mutation surfaces code, model route, Skill/dependency closure, memory policy, policy compiler, enforcement configuration ×safe refactor 6 Allow exact effect relation and control path preserved Mutation surfaces same six surfaces ×safe narrowing 6 Allow strict sub-allocation with no returned spent resource Mutation surfaces same six surfaces ×effect expansion 6 Deny requested tuple/share exceeds parent or population residual Mutation surfaces same six surfaces ×control-path weakening 6 Deny identity, evidence, ledger, or broker mediation removed Legal succession single replacement; independent re-root 2 Allow atomic old/new handoff; old-lineage dependence explicitly severed Population attacks sibling split; nested-successor laundering 2 Deny aggregate allocation cannot be copied or hidden by depth Lineage attacks ancestor-revoke leak; rollback replay 2 Deny cut atom and terminal authorization remain non-current Integrity attacks self-certification; old/new concurrent 2 Deny independent control roots and one atomic active frontier required

RQ4: Atomicity and recovery. 

Does durable replacement handoff recover to a complete pre-state or post-state at every registered persistence cut, and do the registered contender orders preserve one winner and reject the stale predecessor? 

RQ5: Independent verifiability. 

Can a separately implemented checker reconstruct all registered decisions and reject security-relevant traces after an adversary modifies semantics and consistently recom-putes hashes? 

7.2 Registered 32-case corpus 

The corpus is fixed before interpreting results. Twenty-four cases cross six mutation surfaces with four outcomes. The remaining eight exercise generation and population transitions. Table 5 gives the complete logical denominator. Every registered successor in this corpus has one authorization parent. The corpus therefore evaluates the paper’s single-parent authorization-lineage model; it contains no multi-parent merge transition. The expected total is 14 allows and 18 denies. Each case specifies the initial root grant and population ceiling, registered generations and parents, pre-state allocations, candidate manifest delta, evidence roots, operation sequence, complete effect attempts, and expected typed result. Unknown fields are explicit and cannot be filled from adapter defaults. 24 Zhu and Wang 

7.3 Two logical runtime mappings 

Both adapters execute all 32 cases, producing 64 paired mappings. The direct-call path uses an explicit action-to-operation table. The mailbox path uses versioned topics, delivery envelopes, and topic-specific command handlers. Both submit the same canonical succession contract to the same ledger and must produce the same case verdict and effect disposition. They share the input contract and transcript recorder; their independent variable is dispatch shape, not policy semantics. Agreement is necessary but not treated as independent ground truth. The corpus registration supplies expected outcomes, while the checker separately reconstructs whether each trace satisfies the formal invariants. A mapping- substitution regression changes one adapter transcript without altering the other; a cross-adapter regression changes one durable post-state. The checker must reject both disagreement forms. 

7.4 Logical baselines 

The baseline layer implements four deliberately minimal stated guarantees and labels each result as a logical abstraction rather than execution of an authors’ artifact: (1) session continuity accepts an effect while the presenting session remains live and its local grant has not expired; (2) exact-hash all-deny requires the candidate body and runtime manifest to equal the predecessor exactly; (3) per-generation fixed ceiling checks each accepted successor against the parent’s transition envelope and ceiling independently; (4) delegation-edge revocation rejects a credential on a revoked registered delegation path but has no generation replacement or rollback transaction. External only-path enforcement is held constant as a deployment premise: every protected effect reaches the configured broker. It is not counted as a fifth baseline because mediation alone supplies no population predicate to classify. The strict gate requires two complementary observations. A local continuity or per-generation ceiling must accept at least one registered population violation, demonstrating the need for joint state. Exact-hash all-deny must reject at least one registered safe successor, demonstrating that universal reauthorization is not the only safe policy. The reference mechanism must preserve all registered benign cases and reject all registered violations. 

7.5 Durable crash cuts and interleavings 

Crash injection targets 16 named persistence boundaries in one durable handoff: before and after opening, writing, fsyncing, and closing the intent and next-state files; before and after atomic rename; and around directory fsync and intent cleanup. Each worker terminates in a separate process. Recovery starts from disk, validates the hash-linked ledger, removes residue, and must expose either the active predecessor plus reserved successor or the fenced predecessor plus active successor—never a dual-active or zero-active replacement state. The schedule suite enumerates all 32 values of five Boolean order choices for two competing successors: proposal order, certification order, reservation order, whether the losing or winning commit is attempted first, and whether the active-successor or stale-predecessor effect probe runs first after handoff. Calls within one schedule are serialized. These registered order vectors are not a claim over every concurrent distributed execution or over cut/rollback interleavings; they exercise unique reservation, one successful handoff, losing-commit rejection, and stale-predecessor effect rejection. Authorization for Self-Modifying AI Agent Populations 25 

7.6 Independent checker and semantic mutants 

The runner serializes each event as a canonical hash-linked record and binds the complete result set. The checker imports no ledger, controller, adapter, or corpus expected-verdict function. It holds a separately encoded case oracle, recomputes domain-separated digests, reconstructs the generation graph and active frontier, and validates phase monotonicity, evidence-root independence, population joins, the bijection between effect events and durable consumptions, root-lifetime budget conservation, published population summaries, cuts, exact effect-request retries, and effect receipts. The adversarial regression harness changes a security-relevant fact and then recomputes the enclosing integrity layers. Registered regressions cover identity and lineage substitution, missing ancestry, active revoked lineage, population ceiling breaches, illegal phase transitions, certifi-cate/state mismatch, control-root aliasing, reservation reopening, verdict and oracle flips, accepted fenced effects, incomplete revocation, false re-root, rollback identity reuse, fabricated or detached consumptions, corrupted root-budget summaries, cross-adapter divergence, denominator omission or duplication, and mapping substitution. A regression is counted only when the checker rejects the resealed input for the intended semantic or denominator reason. 

7.7 Metrics and decision gate 

Primary safety metrics are unexpected allows, population-envelope violations, post-cut descendant effects, dual-active replacement effects, historical grant remints, self-certified activations, budget imbalance, replay acceptance, and mutant escape. Precision metrics are safe-successor retention and the number of benign cases forced to obtain an entirely new root. Evidence metrics are case, adapter, crash-cut, schedule, and mutant numerators over their fixed denominators. Runtime measurements, when reported, are descriptive diagnostics for the local artifact. The executable gate requires 32/32 logical outcomes, 64/64 adapter mappings, zero registered safety violations under the executed reference profile, all crash cuts and schedules in a complete pre/post state, checker agreement on every original trace, and rejection of every registered consis-tently resealed regression. Any failed or unexecuted case remains visible in its denominator. 

7.8 External refinement gate 

The external layer freezes two public self-modifying or self-evolving runtime versions. Each adapter must bind native identity, lineage, validation, launch, and effect observations to the succession contract and publish its repository, license, immutable revision, mapping fields, commands, and result seal. Across the layer, at least one execution must perform a real body edit or descent, restart the descendant in a fresh process, complete a broker-mediated handoff, and reject an old-instance effect after the fence. Each runtime then maps the registered 32-case corpus without treating those replays as independent evolution runs. Ground truth comes from immutable source history, native validation output, the succession ledger and broker, and the registered case oracle. The separately published harness-tampering taxonomy informs surface selection [32]; its annotated corpus is not part of the executed evidence reported here. 

8 Evidence Status and Results 

All observations in this section are exact finite-corpus results regenerated from the frozen inputs. We maintain three separately sealed evidence bundles: the provider-free core artifact, the OurArk adapter, and the Darwin Gödel Machine (DGM) adapter. Each bundle has its own aggregate seal and verifier. The core seal does not cover either public checkout or external result; conversely, an external seal does not enlarge the core denominator. This separation makes a missing or changed external checkout incapable of silently changing the short core gate. 26 Zhu and Wang            

> Table 6. Frozen core evidence. A pass count is over the complete registered denominator shown in the second column.
> Evidence family Frozen denominator Result and interpretation Logical corpus 32 cases; 14 Allow, 18 Deny 32/32 matched the registered verdict under the reference mechanism Command-surface mappings 32 direct-call + 32 mailbox replays 64/64 matched; 28 allows, 36 denies; zero cross-mapping disagreement Independent checking 64 complete traces 64/64 accepted after independent reconstruction Semantic regressions 28 outer-resealed mutants 28/28 rejected for the registered semantic or denominator violation Reference-profile invariants 12 targeted probes 12/12 passed: fork allocation, cut, rollback, lifetime debit, idempotency, reservation, and re-root Durable handoff cuts 16 process terminations 12 recovered the complete pre-commit state and 4 the complete post-commit state Contender schedules 32 deterministic command orders 32/32 preserved one winner and rejected the stale predecessor

8.1 Core conformance, faults, and adversarial checking 

Table 6 reports the complete core denominator. Each of the 32 logical cases was executed once through the direct-call mapping and once through the mailbox mapping. Both mappings therefore produced 14 allows and 18 denies, for 28 allows and 36 denies across 64 replays, with no verdict or effect-disposition disagreement. The independently implemented checker accepted all 64 original traces and rejected all 28 registered outer-resealed semantic mutants. “Outer-resealed” means that the harness recomputed the enclosing event, transcript, summary, state, and case commitments after changing a security-relevant fact; it does not claim an exhaustive mutation space. The 12 profile probes supply focused evidence for RQ3 beyond case-level classification. In the succession debit probe, 90 consumed tokens remain charged to the authorization root, the successor can consume only the final 10, and a further debit is rejected. The fork probe similarly records 25 spent tokens plus 75 units of active residual against a 100-token root grant. Rollback cannot restore a predecessor’s spent allocation; an exact effect retry returns the original effect identifier bound to its receipt without a second debit; a conflicting body under the same request identifier is rejected. While a handoff reservation is held, a new predecessor debit is rejected, while an exact retry of the already committed request remains idempotent. These observations exercise the root-lifetime accounting and predecessor-residual/version binding used by the formal invariants rather than merely checking terminal labels. The crash experiment terminates a worker at 16 named file-persistence cuts around one succes-sion commit. Every cut recovered to one of the two complete states; none exposed a committed dual-active or zero-active replacement. The schedule result covers all combinations of the five registered order bits, but remains a sequential deterministic command experiment rather than a claim about arbitrary thread, filesystem, or distributed executions. 

8.2 Controlled baseline separation 

Table 7 compares only the four stated logical abstractions from Section 7; these rows are not executions of third-party systems. Session continuity preserves every registered benign case but also accepts all 18 registered violations. Exact-hash all-deny gets the 18 deny cases right while Authorization for Self-Modifying AI Agent Populations 27 

Table 7. Logical classifications matching the registered oracle. 

Mechanism or stated abstraction Match Session continuity 14/32 Exact-hash all-deny 18/32 Per-generation fixed ceiling 29/32 Delegation-edge cascade 23/32 Complete authorization-succession profile 32/32 

Table 8. Reference realization boundary. 

Dimension Executed realization Boundary Authorization lineage Every non-root successor has one authorization parent. Fork atomically partitions one predecessor’s residual and fences that predecessor. No merge transition or multi-parent generation identity is implemented. Manifest commitment Exactly eight fields are bound: 

codeDigest , controlPath ,

enforcementConfigDigest ,

memoryPolicyDigest ,

modelRouteDigest ,

policyCompilerDigest , proposerId ,and skillClosureDigest .A deployment profile must add every further security-relevant surface; an omitted surface is outside this result. Authority algebra Additive nonnegative integer budgets and opaque, single-holder effect atoms. The executed budgets are actions and 

tokens .No general lattice evaluator, multi-holder effect relation, or arbitrary effect normalizer is implemented. Record binding Ledger-issued, digest-bound grants, certification records, reservations, events, and receipts are checked against a frozen declared-control-root registry. The prototype tests record binding and declared-root separation, not caller authentication or key possession; the abstract authenticated-record predicates remain deployment premises. Durability Intent, temporary state, file-image replacement, and directory synchronization around one handoff. Atomicity evidence is limited to this file-image replacement protocol; it does not cover distributed consensus or effect-delivery atomicity. 

rejecting every benign successor. The per-generation ceiling misses sibling copying and two inherited-lineage violations. Delegation-edge cascade misses nine cases involving control-path weakening, sibling partition, handoff overlap, or rollback. The reference mechanism is the only row that classifies all 32 cases as registered. 

8.3 What the reference realization implements 

The formal core retains single-parent authorization lineage while abstracting over the identity closure, authority algebra, and authenticated-record predicate. The executable evidence concerns the bounded realization in Table 8; it does not silently substitute one concrete commitment mechanism for every admissible deployment realization. 28 Zhu and Wang 

8.4 Public source-native refinements 

We next mapped two frozen public systems to the same succession contract while preserving their native lifecycle evidence. These are external source refinements, not additional logical adapters. In both paths, source identity, body closure, native validation, and restart observations are measured before a separate process hosts the prototype ledger and protected-effect broker. 

OurArk Genesis/Enoch. The run freezes Genesis v0.1.1 at commit e7bb896411db0d82710fab50 c1978b825297844f and Enoch v0.3.1 at 1021e1dacce85f4a2edebd865673671bb37a2142 , both under Apache-2.0, and exercises their public descent path [38]. The official gate creates an ephemeral descendant; a second, retained descendant binds the same parent-at-birth and is used for restart and handoff. Its manifest maps 176 inherited files: 162 changed content, 14 retained identical content, and no mapping miss. A fresh Python process reopened that descendant and discovered 753 inherited tests, with 5 skips and no failure or error. The broker then committed exactly one succession, allowed a successor effect, and rejected the same predecessor operation with E_GENERATION_INACTIVE .

Darwin Gödel Machine. The DGM run freezes public commit a565fd2d1dca504ef5104a7c c0f3bdc4ab9b4fd2 under Apache-2.0 and measures a 35-file source closure [34]. It invokes the upstream tools/edit.py EditTool for one deterministic, adapter-authored body mutation, then launches the copied descendant in a separate Python process. The upstream editor suite passes 10/10 on both parent and descendant. A broader editor/bash compatibility run is 21/22 on both bodies; the same interactive-shell startup diagnostic causes the single failure and is not a certification predicate. The prototype broker again activates the successor and rejects the predecessor with 

E_GENERATION_INACTIVE .The full open-ended DGM evolution loop was not executed: it requires external model-service credentials, container execution, network access, and downloaded benchmark assets excluded from this offline profile. The observed DGM event is therefore one real upstream EditTool mutation plus one independent restart, not an autonomous open-ended evolution. Each external adapter replays the 32 registered cases against its one measured retained descendant or descendant seal. Both obtain 32/32, with 14 allows and 18 denies each. The combined external count is thus 64 source-bound profile replays (28 allows and 36 denies), not 64 independent descents, mutations, or evolutions. Neither result instruments the upstream runtime. The broker is an out-of-process authorization-succession prototype, and the observations establish neither an upstream integration, a production deployment, nor endorsement by OurArk or the DGM authors. 

8.5 Independent seals and corpus boundary 

Table 9 records the three aggregate report digests. A dedicated verifier recomputes each bundle’s internal report chain and fixed denominators. The two external verifiers additionally reject local absolute paths in generated reports; the DGM verifier also rejects credential- and secret-like material. Finally, the external tampering source identified in the evaluation protocol provides a useful edit-role taxonomy [32], but no official, licensed machine-readable corpus was frozen for this evaluation. Accordingly, it contributes zero corpus records and no empirical denominator. The 28 semantic mutants above remain registered core regressions and are not relabeled as externally sourced tampering samples. Authorization for Self-Modifying AI Agent Populations 29   

> Table 9. Independent aggregate seals for the frozen evidence bundles.
> Evidence bundle Domain-separated aggregate report digest Provider-free core sha256: d92b3eefe1a7de48e936505c828ceff3bf83ed831a33e3bedef16cd4c3cb98ef
> OurArk Genesis/Enoch
> sha256: 02e26bac1a4e05855f9be4ed750a9e38de84236f6d18c19f9d0888730e4e64f8
> Darwin Gödel Machine
> sha256: 21b26c421d36d827b38bc89cfa0df301b477ee45da4f084468de25f002c73851

9 Related Work 9.1 Self-modification, versioned bodies, and guarded synthesis 

Darwin Gödel Machine demonstrates open-ended evolution in which coding agents modify their own code and successful variants remain in an archive [34]. OurArk treats code, prompts, tools, skills, policies, tests, and evolution mechanisms as an identity-bearing, versioned body; its Genesis and Enoch artifacts demonstrate governed changes and recursive descent [38]. SEVerA formu-lates self-evolving agent synthesis with formal output contracts and verified fallbacks, preserving specified behavioral constraints during optimization [2]. RegenHarness adds an evidence-gated recursive-improvement loop for a robot harness: candidate configuration changes pass fixed regres-sions and release authorization before versioned rollout or rollback, and the system is exercised on a real quadruped [30]. These systems supply concrete mutation, selection, identity, descent, and ver-ification substrates. Our protocol governs the distinct authorization transition among concurrently live generations produced by such substrates. Security analyses show why this boundary matters. The MLAS framework maps self-evolution threats across functional modules and lifecycle stages and documents lineage-persistent amplifica-tion [15]. Auditing Harness Tampering develops a taxonomy and annotated edit pairs for changes that compromise authorization, provenance, completeness, or evaluation integrity [32]. Bad Ge-nius instead challenges candidate harness improvements with valid counterfactual benchmark transformations and retains confirmed transformations in a finite archive, reducing dependence on task-specific shortcuts [41]. We use these works to define mutation surfaces and evidence obliga-tions. Detection of malicious code or proof of program semantics remains an input to, rather than a substitute for, population authorization. Neither candidate-validation method allocates authority across concurrently live generations or linearizes their succession. 

9.2 Mutation-aware authorization continuity 

Earned Authority directly addresses whether an evolving agent may retain a grant after a transition. It binds authority to a grant-fixed transition envelope and immutable effect ceiling, covering multiple classes of security- relevant change and proving conditional non-amplification [37]. That is the strongest direct predecessor for single-generation continuity. Its stated boundary leaves cross-generation revocation and population-level authority open. Our protocol begins after a candidate’s transition evidence is available and governs sibling allocation, generation handoff, lineage cuts, independent re-root, and rollback. A transition-envelope certificate can occupy one typed evidence slot in an authorization transfer. Self-Evolving Agents with Anytime-Valid Certificates controls update admission against a fixed statistical error budget [23]. Like formal transition verification, that certificate is a strong candidate-evidence input. The succession question begins when one or more admitted candidates would receive, share, replace, or lose protected-effect authority. 30 Zhu and Wang 

Exact-hash authorization lies at the conservative endpoint of this design space: any byte change forces fresh authorization. It prevents grant reuse but rejects a safe narrowing or semantics-preserving successor even after the old generation is durably fenced. Mutation-aware continuity preserves more useful successors, while our protocol adds the population transaction required when more than one generation can exist. Governing Dynamic Capabilities binds an agent certificate to a commitment over its model, tools, and permissions, invalidates access after a capability-set change, and records signed hash-linked interactions in a trust tree [40]. These are direct precedents for capability-bound identity and change invalidation. This work addresses the next population state: residual authority is allocated without copying, the predecessor is fenced at the successor linearization point, ancestor cuts govern dependent generations, and rollback cannot remint a retired generation grant. 

9.3 Recursive-agent risk budgets 

Progressive Risk Vesting (PRV) holds a trajectory-level risk budget in escrow and charges re-cursively spawned branches when they cross an irreversible activation boundary, proving an anytime probabilistic harm bound under history-conditional local certificates [31]. It establishes that branching authority must be controlled at the trajectory level rather than by independent local risk estimates. This work addresses a complementary deterministic authorization object: complete effect relations, consumable resources, concurrency shares, generation identity, durable predecessor fencing, ancestor cuts, independent re-root, and rollback non-reminting. PRV’s risk charge can be represented as one quantitative component of a population envelope; it does not replace the generation-lifetime and revocation state used here. Agent Contracts gives a formal multidimensional resource-contract framework with conservation across hierarchical, parallel, and recursive delegation; retrieval-conditioned topology selection proves a six-dimensional budget algebra for changing multi-agent topologies; and Token Budgets uses affine ownership to prevent clone, double-spend, and use-after-delegation failures [13, 27, 33]. These works occupy budget conservation as a standalone contribution. Our resource vectors reuse that principle inside a generation-succession state whose additional objects are complete effect relations, predecessor fencing, lineage cuts, independent re-root, and rollback lifetime. 

9.4 Delegation, ancestry, and hierarchical revocation 

Authorization propagation systems carry user and policy constraints through multi-agent work-flows [26]. Bounded-agent designs attenuate delegation and constrain composition [19]. VERA records federated delegation edges and supplies verifiable revocation across organizational workflow boundaries [17]. Attested delegation ancestry binds outputs to signed delegation paths, strength-ening provenance for downstream verification [16, 25]. ResidualAuth further characterizes why future-correct revocation requires authorization history beyond current reachability [6]. These mechanisms provide compatible authority and evidence inputs. Their principal object is a delegation or workflow edge rather than a self-modifying generation lifetime whose predecessor, siblings, rollback source, and body identity change under one population allocation. Heartbeat-Bound Hierarchical Credentials (HBHC) already establishes cascading revocation in an agent hierarchy by requiring periodic parent liveness proofs and bounding the resulting zombie window under its timing and key assumptions [8]. Accordingly, ancestor revocation by itself is not claimed as a novel concept here. The contribution is its integration with deterministic generation identity, aggregate population allocation, atomic replacement, independent re-root, and rollback replay protection. HBHC can serve as an efficient credential realization of a lineage cut when its heartbeat and clock premises match the succession profile. Authorization for Self-Modifying AI Agent Populations 31 

Authenticated Delegation and Authorized AI Agents separates agent and user identity in dele-gated action chains [24]. This supports the paper’s distinction among a generation principal, its operator, and the authority root from which its allocation derives. 

9.5 Effect transactions, cancellation, and rollback 

Stop Means Stop measures sibling leaks, cancellation orphans, timeout zombies, and replay, and sup-plies an external fence-on-cancel control [12]. Cordon provides task-scoped semantic transactions for staging and validating composed tool effects [5]; AID-Guard provides a stateful request-to-provider lifecycle with reservation and retry control [28]. Effect Closure characterizes when a prior authorization has lost its remaining provider-side path to an effect [22]. Root-scoped authorization quiescence additionally accounts for every manifested pre-cut carrier under a retired root epoch and composes provider-frontier certificates while preserving independently sufficient support [42]. These systems govern run cancellation, tool-effect transactions, or provider settlement. Our atomic transaction instead replaces the set of grant-holding software generations; the lower-level controls can serve as its effect and retirement leaves. In particular, root-scoped quiescence can retire the old authorization carriers around a cut, whereas the succession protocol decides how authority is allocated among predecessor, successor, sibling, rollback, and independently re-rooted generations. ACRFence directly studies action replay and authority resurrection after agent checkpoint restore, while Agent libOS combines capability-controlled processes, parent–child lineage, ceilings, budgets, checkpoint images, restore intersection, and prepare–dispatch–settle execution [36, 39]. Autogenesis likewise provides an auditable versioned evolution and rollback lifecycle [35]. These works occupy general checkpoint/rollback defense and several runtime primitives. The residual result here is a generation-population invariant: equal historical bytes acquire a fresh generation identity and cannot remint the retired allocation while sibling and ancestor state are atomically conserved. 

9.6 External enforcement and cross-substrate authority 

An unfireable safety kernel places protected effects behind an out-of-process path that mutable agents cannot remove [9]. Cross-substrate authority work likewise argues that authority state must survive movement among agent runtimes and orchestration surfaces [14]. Our protocol assumes such complete mediation and specifies the generation and population state that the external path checks. The kernel supplies placement and availability of the control point; it does not decide how a parent allocation is divided, how a replacement is linearized, or why a historical body lacks its historical grant. Work on epistemic Sybil resistance tracks evidence ancestry to prevent copied or correlated evidence from appearing independent [3]. Our evidence-root predicate adopts the same general lesson at an authorization boundary: principal counts are insufficient when declared principals share one control root. The result here is limited to authenticated declared control provenance and does not infer hidden organizational or economic coordination. 

9.7 Capability safety and revocation 

Capability systems established unforgeable authority tokens, delegation by possession, attenuation, and the importance of controlling the complete path to an object [1, 7, 20]. Contextual caveats support decentralized attenuation [4], and leases provide the classic time-bounded validity pattern [10]. Revocation research adds indirection, versioning, expiry, and online validation to invalidate delegated authority [11]. Our protocol uses these principles but makes the revocation and transfer subject a single-parent generation forest with a changing active population. Its distinctive state is the joint allocation and atomic succession record: a valid token from one generation is insufficient 32 Zhu and Wang 

Table 10. Boundary to the closest lines of work.             

> Line of work Principal object Established control State used by this work Earned Authority one evolving grant holder transition envelope and fixed effect ceiling active generation family and allocation transaction PRV recursive activation trajectory probabilistic risk escrow and anytime harm bound deterministic typed effects, resources, epochs, and lifetime HBHC / VERA hierarchical credentials / delegation edges cascading or verifiable revocation generation cut joined with handoff, re-root, and rollback OurArk / DGM versioned descent / mutation archive identity-bearing evolution and candidate selection protected-effect authority assigned to current generations SEVerA / RegenHarness / Bad Genius synthesized program / versioned harness candidate constrained outputs, evidence-gated rollout, and counterfactual validation external succession of executable generations Root-scoped quiescence retired authorization-root carriers pre-cut accounting and post-fence exclusion allocation and replacement of generation principals External safety kernel protected execution path non-removable mediation population and lineage predicates evaluated on that path

unless the generation, current authorization root, lineage cut set, population version, and effect allocation are current at commitment. 

9.8 Boundary summary 

Table 10 summarizes the nearest mechanisms. The rows are composable rather than mutually exclusive; the final column identifies the state added by this paper. 

10 Assurance Boundary and Artifact Scope 10.1 What the result establishes 

The formal result establishes a conditional safety refinement from the succession protocol to mediated protected effects. Under assumptions A1–A10, every accepted effect has a current active generation and authority witness; aggregate active descendant authority remains below its root grant and the persistent population ceiling; a cut ancestor cannot support a later accepted effect; replacement has no committed dual-active state; historical artifacts do not reactivate historical authority; and candidate-controlled evidence cannot fill required independent slots. The executable result has a finite, named denominator. It establishes that the reference ledger and two logical mappings realize the registered transitions and that a separately implemented checker detects the registered semantic violations after the enclosing integrity records are consistently resealed. These are mechanism and refinement results over the recorded corpus and fault space. They are reported as exact counts rather than population estimates. Both the core model and executable result use the frozen single-authorization- parent profile. A fork may activate several children, each with that same predecessor as its sole authorization parent, while atomically fencing the predecessor. Multi-parent authority merge is outside the formal, implemented, and executed result. Authorization for Self-Modifying AI Agent Populations 33       

> Table 11. Evidence classes and their admissible interpretation.
> Evidence class Object Supported statement Formal definitions, assumptions, lemmas, theorems, proofs conditional protocol safety for all executions satisfying the model premises Reference execution registered finite corpus, ledger, brokers, two logical adapters implementation conformance over the executed mutation and lineage cases Adversarial verification independent checker and consistently resealed semantic regressions checker separation and detection of the registered trace-level violations Fault execution durable crash cuts and deterministic schedules recovery and atomicity over the exact enumerated interruption/interleaving space External refinement frozen public runtime commits, native descent or edit, fresh restart, and broker traces field mapping and boundary behavior for the specifically executed versions

10.2 Inputs governed outside the theorem 

Several inputs have their own assurance process. The effect normalizer must retain every policy-relevant field and correlation. The generation manifest must cover every security-relevant body and runtime surface. Evidence roots must be admitted under accurate control provenance. The broker manifest must cover every protected commitment path. A substantive code verifier or human reviewer must correctly evaluate the predicates it evaluates and records. The protocol authenticates, composes, conserves, and revokes those decisions; it does not replace their domain semantics. Physical consequences already committed before a valid cut remain historical effects. Compensa-tion, legal settlement, task success, model alignment, and general semantic equivalence are separate properties. The protocol prevents new mediated authority from being derived from a retired lineage; it does not rewrite the past. 

10.3 Failure classification 

The protocol semantics distinguishes three outcomes rather than permitting an optimistic fallback: 

• Deny applies when current evidence proves a policy violation, stale lineage, insufficient alloca-tion, cut ancestor, stale lifecycle/transfer replay, effect-request conflict, or invalid transition; 

• Indeterminate applies when a required identity, lineage edge, current ledger fact, normalizer field, evidence root, or broker observation is unavailable or conflicting; and 

• Allow is available only after all registered predicates hold in the same serialized state used to reserve or commit the protected effect. These outcomes classify fresh authorization decisions. Under A10, an exact retry of an already committed effect request returns the prior success receipt without a new admission or debit; it is neither a fresh Allow nor a denied request. The bounded reference implementation represents every missing, conflicting, or unsupported fact as a typed rejection code; it does not expose a separate Indeterminate transport state or a reservation-expiry scheduler. A deployment that adds timeout or operator routing must preserve the same rule: absence of evidence cannot activate a candidate, and every fallback route needs its own explicit allocation. 

10.4 Evidence classes 

Table 11 keeps proof, execution, and external refinement distinct. 34 Zhu and Wang 

No evidence class is relabeled as another. In particular, logical adapter names describe runtime shapes and never imply execution of a named public project. External results enter the paper only with immutable source versions, commands, mapping commitments, and fresh traces. 

10.5 Artifact publication boundary 

The research abstraction contains generation identities, typed effects, allocations, root epochs, generation sequences, cuts, and receipts. It requires no customer data, tenant configuration, pro-duction topology, credentials, proprietary policy corpus, or company-internal deployment detail. Evaluation records use inert synthetic effect tuples and public-source metadata where applicable. The public preprint source archive is generated by a manuscript-only whitelist. It contains the reviewed L ATEX sources, bibliography, and only assets required to compile the paper. Executable artifacts, adapters, checker traces, temporary files, source caches, and non-manuscript research materials remain outside that archive. Public-source attribution identifies each upstream repository and immutable version without embedding local workspace paths. 

11 Conclusion 

Self-modification changes more than one agent’s code. Forking, promotion, coordination among retained branches, delayed descendants, and rollback change the set of principals that can exercise a shared authorization. Per-generation acceptance therefore cannot by itself preserve a population-wide bound. The proposed protocol makes that bound explicit. Canonical hash-derived generation principals separate body identity from authorization lifetime; an external population ledger allocates rather than copies effect relations and resource shares; atomic transactions replace or rebalance the active frontier; lineage cuts reach every dependent descendant; independent re-root preserves genuinely new authority; and rollback creates a fresh generation instead of reviving a historical grant. Protected effects revalidate this state at their commitment point. The formal results connect these mechanisms to population-safe succession, fork conservation, revocation closure, atomic handoff, rollback non-reminting, and evidence-root independence. The registered executable evaluation makes the separating executions concrete across two logical runtime mappings, durable fault cuts, interleavings, and independently checked semantic mutations. Separate OurArk and Darwin Gödel Machine adapters further exercise frozen public source-native descent or edit, fresh-process restart, atomic handoff, predecessor rejection, and all 32 registered decisions without treating replay count as evolution count. Together, the protocol and evidence establish authorization succession as a first-class control plane for evolving agent populations. 

A Proofs of the Succession Results 

We reason over finite prefixes of the accepted transition relation in Section 4. A rejected command may append a diagnostic event, but it changes no generation state, cut set, allocation, reservation, authorization-object consumption record, or protected-effect commitment. The cryptographic and systems facts used below are exactly A1–A10. 

A.1 Trace notation and elementary facts 

For the remainder of the appendix, every trace starts in a state satisfying InitOK (𝑆 0) from Defini-tion 6. Write 

𝑆 0

> 𝑜 1

−→ 𝑆 1

> 𝑜 2

−→ · · · 𝑜 𝑛 

−−→ 𝑆 𝑛 

for an accepted trace. By A6, every security-changing transition has one position in the external lineage ledger’s serial order, written <𝐿 . An effect admitted at such a position may settle later; its Authorization for Self-Modifying AI Agent Populations 35 

authorization remains attributable to that admission. A10 applies only to a protected-effect request: an exact retry returns its existing receipt and creates no second admission, effect, or debit. No proof below assumes exact-result retry for another command class. The operation ⊕ of (4) is associative and commutative: qualitative components use the finite join, while budget and exposure components use vector addition. It is monotone in each argument under 

⊑. For every registered population profile, A5 requires Φ𝑝 to be downward closed under removal of a labeled allocation and attenuation of an allocation. Removing an active residual leaves 𝑐 𝑟 (𝑆 )

unchanged and can only decrease the aggregated components of both (5) and (6). A fresh debit 𝛿 

increases 𝑐 𝑟 (𝑆 ) and decreases the admitting generation’s 𝑏 𝑔 (𝑆 ) by the same 𝛿 , so the root-lifetime sum is invariant while current population exposure decreases. These facts preserve Safe 𝑟 .Lemma 1 (Canonical generation separation). Within a population, two accepted generation registrations never have the same population-issued sequence number. If their population, authorization root, root epoch, root-grant digest, unique parent, complete lineage-atom set, manifest digest, or sequence differs, their generation identifiers differ except with a digest collision. In particular, a rollback and an independent re-root have identifiers distinct from the corresponding historical generation. 

Proof. A3 makes allocation of 𝑛 𝑔 monotone and durable, and the ledger’s registration guard rejects reuse. Equation (1) canonically encodes the domain separator, population, authorization root, root epoch, root-grant digest, sequence, unique authorization parent, complete lineage-atom set, and manifest digest as distinct typed fields. Distinct inputs have distinct encodings; equality of their digests would be a collision excluded by A2. Definition 4 requires a fresh sequence and current parent, so the rollback and historical inputs differ even when their manifests are equal. Definition 3 additionally gives a fresh authorization root, root epoch, grant digest, sequence, and root lineage atom. □

Lemma 2 (Pre-activation inertness). Candidate construction, quarantine execution, evidence recording, and a held singleton reservation do not add a member to AD 𝑆 (𝑟 ) and cannot commit a protected effect. An atomic fork child acquires authority only at its family commit position. 

Proof. The staged path leaves a candidate PROPOSED or RESERVED ; an evidence record does not itself change that state. The fork path has no active child record before its atomic commit. Definition 1 requires ACTIVE , and A1 independently requires the broker to read an exact current active record before a fresh admission. A reservation or inline fork description is an authorization input, not an executable handle, and cannot satisfy that check. □

Lemma 3 (Handoff preservation). Suppose I1–I7 hold in 𝑆 . If CommitFamily (𝑝, 𝑁 , 𝜒 ) is accepted, they hold in its post-state 𝑆 ′.

Proof. The guard re-resolves each child manifest, assigns exactly one parent 𝑝 , and recomputes (1), establishing I1. It checks each independent evidence record with (8) and the family authorization object with (11). For a singleton, the held reservation binds the current predecessor residual and population version and is consumed at commit; for a fork, the complete family bundle is validated inline at the same atomic commit that fences the predecessor. Thus each child is activated by one accepted AuthOK family commit, establishing I2 without asserting a persisted, consumed fork bundle. For every 𝑔 ∈ 𝑁 , the guard constructs 𝐴 𝑔 = 𝐴 𝑝 ∪ { 𝑎 𝑔 } from authoritative records and checks 

𝐴 𝑔 ∩ Cut 𝑆 (𝑝 (𝑟 )) = ∅. There is no second parent from which an atom could be omitted. This establishes I3. The transaction rejects reused generation identifiers and authorization objects; for the staged path it also requires an unspent reservation. A6 makes their consumption and all state writes atomic. No appeal to A10 is needed, so I4 holds. 36 Zhu and Wang 

Before committing, the guard constructs the exact post-state population: unrelated active mem-bers plus 𝑁 , with 𝑝 removed. Acceptance requires Safe 𝑟 (𝑆 ′, 𝑀 ′) on that labeled allocation family and (9) or (10) against 𝑝 ’s reconstructed residual. The handoff creates no effect receipt, so 𝑐 𝑟 (𝑆 ′) = 𝑐 𝑟 (𝑆 ).Other roots are unchanged; hence I5 holds for every root. Existing instances of I6 remain true. At one commit position, the transaction marks 𝑝 FENCED and all members of 𝑁 ACTIVE . It neither mutates 𝑝 ’s immutable grant nor restores a terminal record, establishing I7. □

Lemma 4 (Cuts and effect reqests preserve the invariants). If I1–I7 hold before an accepted ancestor cut, fresh protected-effect admission, or exact effect-request replay, they hold afterward. 

Proof. An ancestor cut adds one atom 𝑎 to Cut 𝑆 (𝑝 (𝑟 )) under A3 and A9. It creates no identity, evidence record, allocation, or effect receipt, so I1, I2, I4, and I6 are unchanged. Every nonterminal registered generation whose closure contains 𝑎 is marked REVOKED ; already terminal generations remain terminal, and any unobserved descendant still fails (2) because A4 requires the complete unique-parent closure. Thus I3 and I7 hold. The current active population can only lose members while every historical debit remains in 𝑐 𝑟 , so downward closure preserves I5. For a fresh effect request, A1 checks one exact current active generation, its complete atom closure and current cut set, remaining allocation, normalized effect, and budget at the admission position. A fresh acceptance writes one receipt and one debit in the same transaction under A6 and records the request identity under A10. This establishes I6 and preserves I4. For debit 𝛿 , 𝑐 𝑟 

increases by 𝛿 while the active 𝑏 𝑔 (𝑆 ) decreases by 𝛿 . The budget conjunct of (5) is unchanged, the budget conjunct of (6) decreases, and every other conjunct is preserved. No identity, parent edge, state, or cut set is widened. For an exact retry, A10 returns the previously bound receipt. It appends no protected-effect commitment and no debit, even when the named generation is no longer active. Hence all seven invariants are unchanged. Reusing the identity with a different canonical effect request is rejected and is outside the accepted relation. □

Lemma 5 (Independent re-root preservation). If I1–I7 hold in 𝑆 and an independent re-root is accepted, they hold in its post-state 𝑆 ′.

Proof. Definition 3 first requires an empty raw active frontier for the affected population. The transition therefore transfers no old-root residual and cannot overlap an old active allocation. It authenticates a fresh external root grant under A2, assigns a strictly fresh root epoch and generation sequence under A3, resolves the exact manifest, and creates 𝑔 ′ with no authorization parent. These checks establish I1. Accepted independent evidence and the new root-grant authorization establish I2. The constructed closure contains only the fresh root and generation atoms and is checked against the cut set, establishing I3. The root, grant, generation, and lineage identifiers are fresh, and the new certification record binds accepted evidence to the fresh generation even when the opaque evidence digest has appeared before. The transaction creates each new identifier once at one serial position; this establishes I4 without using A10. Before changing the current-root pointer, the guard checks the new grant and 

Safe 𝑟 ′ on the exact post-state containing 𝑔 ′ as the population’s sole active generation. The new root has zero prior lifetime debit, old roots expose no active descendants, and other populations are unchanged, so I5 holds. The transition creates no protected-effect receipt, leaving I6 unchanged. Finally it atomically advances curRoot 𝑆 (𝑝 0), retains every historical root and terminal record, and never reactivates an old generation or cut atom. Monotonic root epochs and records under A3 establish I7. □Authorization for Self-Modifying AI Agent Populations 37 

Lemma 6 (All remaining accepted transitions preserve the invariants). Assuming I1–I7, every accepted transition other than family handoff, ancestor cut, fresh effect admission, exact effect replay, or independent re-root preserves them. 

Proof. By Lemma 2, proposal, quarantine execution, evidence recording, and reservation add no current active member and no effect receipt. Their guards bind identities and evidence prospectively, and phase, version, uniqueness, and monotonicity checks reject stale or duplicate commands. This argument uses A3 and A6, not a general retry property. Voluntary termination or an administrative fence removes a member from the current active population and does not release a consumed authorization object. Population safety follows by downward closure, while fence monotonicity follows from A3 and A6. A trusted bootstrap root is admitted only with a canonical identity, a profile-valid authenticated bootstrap grant whose issuer control root differs from the proposer control root, fresh allocation, zero initial lifetime debit, and a post-state satisfying Safe 𝑟 (𝑆 ′, 𝑀 ′). Its root is installed as the population’s unique current root. These facts establish the bootstrap branch of I2 without postulating a separate certification record. No other registered transition changes protected authority. □

Lemma 7 (Invariant preservation). Under A1–A10, I1–I7 hold after every prefix of every accepted trace that starts from InitOK (𝑆 0).

Proof. By Definition 6, an empty initial state satisfies I1–I7 vacuously. In every provisioned ini-tial population, the canonical unique root record establishes I1 and I3; its profile-valid authenticated bootstrap grant with issuer/proposer control-root separation establishes the bootstrap branch of I2; unique counters and empty consumption state establish I4; the explicit Safe 𝑟 guard establishes I5; I6 is vacuous because no effect receipt exists; and fresh records and an empty cut set establish I7. Disjoint populations compose these facts. Induct on trace length. Lemma 3 handles a family handoff, Lemma 4 handles a cut, effect admission, or effect replay, Lemma 5 handles independent re-root, and Lemma 6 handles every remaining accepted step. □

A.2 Proofs of the six main results 

Proof of Theorem 1. Lemma 7 gives I5 in every reachable state. Expanding Safe 𝑟 by Defini-tion 2 yields both classes of conjuncts in (13). The RootOK conjuncts bound qualitative authority, root-lifetime debit plus active remaining budget, and holder exposure by 𝐺 𝑟 . The PopOK conjuncts independently bound the current active allocation family and its relational predicate by persistent 

𝐶 𝑝 (𝑟 ) . In particular, fencing a spender cannot remove its debit from 𝑐 𝑟 , so a successor cannot recover consumed root budget; an independent re-root cannot raise current population exposure above its persistent ceiling. For the attribution statement, I6 gives a digest-bound receipt for one exact gid (𝑔 ), atom-set digest, source-allocation digest, canonical operation, normalized effect, budget debit, and ledger position. A1 validates that 𝑔 is active and current at that position and that the effect and debit lie within its allocation. The request index and A10 prevent a second fresh commitment under the same effect-request identity; an exact retry only returns the existing receipt. A2 prevents substitution of a different canonical object under a recorded digest. Thus each protected commitment has exactly one current generation witness at admission. □

Proof of Theorem 2. Fix an accepted fork from 𝑝 to 𝑁 . Equation (10) directly gives 

Ê

> 𝑔 ∈𝑁

b𝛼 𝑔 ⊑ 𝛼 𝑝 (𝑆 ). (14) 38 Zhu and Wang 

The family commit fences 𝑝 at the same position that activates 𝑁 , and A3 prevents 𝑝 ’s residual from becoming active again. A6 admits that predecessor state to only one serialized consuming family transition. The fork therefore replaces, rather than supplements, the predecessor allocation. For a fork tree, induct on accepted fork positions among the current active leaves. Equation (14) replaces one current allocation by a bounded child composition at each step; associativity, mono-tonicity, and transitivity preserve the originating bound. If two descendants both receive a counted qualitative effect, the abstract profile assigns each a positive holder unit, so vector addition accounts for both. In the reference profile, the stronger pairwise-disjoint effect-label check rejects that duplicate ownership directly. Numeric child budgets are summed componentwise in both cases. Thus neither a direct nor nested fork amplifies the originating residual. □

Proof of Theorem 3. Let cut 𝑐 insert atom 𝑎 into Cut 𝑆 (𝑝 (𝑟 )) . By A3 and A9 the insertion is durable and monotone. Consider a fresh effect admission 𝑘 with 𝑐 <𝐿 𝑘 and a presenting generation 

𝑔 for which 𝑎 ∈ 𝐴 𝑔 . At 𝑘 , A1 and A9 require Current 𝑆 (𝑔 ). Equation (2) requires 𝐴 𝑔 ∩Cut 𝑆 (𝑝 (𝑟 )) = ∅,yet the intersection contains 𝑎 , a contradiction. By A4 and (1), every ordinary descendant contains the transitive unique-parent closure; inserting an intermediate generation cannot remove an ancestor atom. Hence the contradiction applies at arbitrary descendant depth. Definition 3 explains the stated exception: an independent re-root has a new external authority cause and no old authorization-parent atom. An exact retry after 𝑐 may return the receipt of an effect admitted before 𝑐 , but A10 creates no new admission, effect, or debit and therefore does not contradict the result. □

Proof of Theorem 4. Before 𝜆 ℎ , every staged child is non-active and every inline fork child lacks an active record; Lemma 2 and A1 exclude their production effects. At 𝜆 ℎ , Definition 5 fences 

𝑝 and activates all members of 𝑁 in one durable transaction. There is no observable accepted state between these writes. After 𝜆 ℎ , I7 prevents 𝑝 ’s reactivation, and A1 rejects its fresh effect admission. A6 serializes every fresh protected-effect admission with the family handoff. An admission therefore lies either before or after 𝜆 ℎ , never both and never between its component writes. The earlier side can contain exercisable predecessor authority but no child authority; the later side can contain child authority but no predecessor authority. A pre-handoff commitment that settles later remains attributed to its earlier admission. An exact retry may return that old receipt after the handoff, but it is non-consuming and is not a second post-handoff admission under A10. □

Proof of Theorem 5. Lemma 1 gives gid (𝑔 𝑟𝑏 ) ≠ gid (𝑎 ) even when 𝑚 𝑔 𝑟𝑏 = 𝑚 𝑎 . Equation (8) binds an evidence record to the exact generation identifier and manifest digest. Equation (11) binds the family authorization object to the current predecessor, child identifier, evidence, allocation, and residual state. An old evidence record, reservation, or authorization object therefore fails the rollback’s exact binding even when the manifest bytes match. I4 prevents reuse of a consumed reservation or authorization identifier, while A3 prevents restoring the external ledger to an earlier state. If an ancestor atom has been cut, Theorem 3 blocks the ordinary rollback lineage. The only admission path for 𝑔 𝑟𝑏 is consequently a fresh ordinary handoff whose unique-parent closure is current. Lemma 3 checks its post-state Safe condition, including irreversible lifetime debit and the persistent population ceiling, so restored bytes never remint historical authority. If the same historical manifest is instead restored under an independent re-root, the resulting root generation is 𝑔 ′, not 𝑔 𝑟𝑏 , and Lemma 5 together with Corollary 1 supplies the corresponding non-laundering result. □

Proof of Theorem 6. There are two activation paths for a non-bootstrap candidate. Under an existing root, CommitFamily requires CertOK 𝑆 (𝑔, 𝜁 𝑔 ) for each child and AuthOK 𝑆 (𝑝, 𝑁 , 𝜒 ) for the transition. By (8) and A7, at least one required certifier control root differs from the proposer control Authorization for Self-Modifying AI Agent Populations 39 

root, and the candidate cannot modify the frozen registry or remove that slot. By (11) and the trusted-boundary premise, the lineage authorization decision also originates outside the candidate boundary. For independent re-root, Definition 3 instead requires both a fresh authenticated external root grant and accepted independent evidence, with the registered issuer and evidence control roots outside the proposer control root. The candidate cannot mint the fresh grant, satisfy the independent evidence predicate, or change the frozen control-root registry. A2 excludes producing an accepted external authenticator or substituting a candidate-controlled principal under any of these registered roots. Consequently, records originating only in or controlled by 𝑔 cannot satisfy either activation guard. The result establishes provenance independence of authorization evidence; the factual soundness of the external observation remains a separate domain-semantic obligation stated in Section 10, not a consequence of A7. □

Proof of Corollary 1. Definition 3 gives par (𝑔 ′) = ⊥ under the new root and records reused artifacts only as provenance. A4 prevents an omitted authorization parent, while the fresh root grant, root epoch, sequence, allocation, evidence record, and lineage set contain no old authority atom. A7 validates the independent evidence root, A8 binds the fresh allocation, and A9 rejects cut atoms. Lemma 5 establishes the unique current-root switch and exact new-root post-state. The Population-Safe Succession result then attributes an effect of 𝑔 ′ to that exact fresh root and allocation. A field deletion or label edit supplies neither the authenticated external root grant nor the new canonical bindings, so A2 rejects it rather than accepting it as a re-root. □

A.3 Evidence status 

The arguments above are conditional mathematical proofs over the registered transition system. The executable evidence instantiates them only for the fixed eight-field manifest, trusted control-root registry and digest records, single-parent succession, atomic single-predecessor fork, cut set, disjoint effect labels, and integer budgets. Per-atom epoch vectors, general profile digests, public-key signatures, arbitrary authority relations, and multi-parent merge are not inferred from those runs. Executable cases, independent trace checking, consistently resealed semantic regressions, logical-adapter replay, crash cuts, contender orders, and public-source runtime mapping remain distinct evidence obligations reported from frozen result records. 

References                             

> [1] Martín Abadi, Michael Burrows, Butler Lampson, and Gordon Plotkin. 1993. A Calculus for Access Control in Distributed Systems. ACM Transactions on Programming Languages and Systems 15, 4 (1993), 706–734. doi: 10.1145/ 155183.155225
> [2] Debangshu Banerjee, Changming Xu, Eugene Ie, Ming Zhang, Daiyi Peng, Chu-Cheng Lin, and Gagandeep Singh. 2026. SEVerA: Verified Synthesis of Self-Evolving Agents. arXiv:2603.25111 [cs.LG] https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.25111
> Version 2, revised 24 April 2026. [3] Marc Bara. 2026. Epistemic Sybil Resistance: Multiplying AI Agents Without Multiplying Evidence. arXiv:2609.01873 [cs.AI] https://arxiv.org/abs/2609.01873 Version 1, submitted 1 September 2026. [4] Arnar Birgisson, Joe Gibbs Politz, Úlfar Erlingsson, Ankur Taly, Michael Vrable, and Mark Lentczner. 2014. Macaroons: Cookies with Contextual Caveats for Decentralized Authorization in the Cloud. In Proceedings of the Network and Distributed System Security Symposium . Internet Society, San Diego, CA, USA, 16 pages. doi: 10.14722/ndss.2014. 23212
> [5] Zheng Chen, Hanqing Liu, Duling Xu, Dong Dong, Jialin Li, Bangzheng Pu, and Jidong Zhai. 2026. Cordon: Semantic Transactions for Tool-Using LLM Agents. arXiv:2606.17573 [cs.OS] https://arxiv.org/abs/2606.17573 Version 1, submitted 16 June 2026. [6] Moonwon Choi, Seokho Jeong, and Seunggeun Lee. 2026. ResidualAuth: What Authorization State Must Language Agents Preserve under Revocable Delegation? arXiv:2609.08062 [cs.AI] https://arxiv.org/abs/2609.08062
> Version 1, submitted 8 September 2026.

40 Zhu and Wang 

[7] Jack B. Dennis and Earl C. Van Horn. 1966. Programming Semantics for Multiprogrammed Computations. Commun. ACM 9, 3 (1966), 143–155. doi: 10.1145/365230.365252 

[8] Saurabh Deochake. 2026. Heartbeat-Bound Hierarchical Credentials: Cryptographic Revocation for AI Agent Swarms. arXiv:2605.20704 [cs.CR] https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.20704 Version 1, submitted 20 May 2026. [9] Seth Dobrin and Łukasz Chmiel. 2026. The Unfireable Safety Kernel: Execution-Time AI Alignment for AI Agents and Other Escapable AI Systems. arXiv:2606.26057 [cs.AI] https://arxiv.org/abs/2606.26057 Version 1, submitted 24 June 2026. [10] Cary G. Gray and David R. Cheriton. 1989. Leases: An Efficient Fault-Tolerant Mechanism for Distributed File Cache Consistency. In Proceedings of the Twelfth ACM Symposium on Operating Systems Principles . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 202–210. doi: 10.1145/74850.74870 

[11] Åsa Hagström, Sushil Jajodia, Francesco Parisi-Presicce, and Duminda Wijesekera. 2001. Revocations—A Classification. In Proceedings of the 14th IEEE Computer Security Foundations Workshop . IEEE Computer Society, Washington, DC, USA, 44–58. doi: 10.1109/CSFW.2001.930135 

[12] Sajjad Khan. 2026. Stop Means Stop: Measuring and Repairing the Enforcement Gap in Agent-Framework Control Primitives. arXiv:2607.14166 [cs.SE] https://arxiv.org/abs/2607.14166 Version 3, revised 8 August 2026. [13] Sajjad Khan. 2026. Token Budgets: An Empirical Catalog of 63 LLM-Agent Budget-Overrun Incidents, with an Affine-Typed Rust Mitigation as a Case Study. arXiv:2606.04056 [cs.SE] https://arxiv.org/abs/2606.04056 Version 1, submitted 2 June 2026. [14] Yang Li, Sergey Volkov, Hai Liu, Zongsi Xu, Xiyu Chen, Tuo Zhou, Dian Shao, Hao Sun, and Ye Lu. 2026. Beyond Agent Harnesses: Cross-Substrate Authority for Multi-Agent Systems. arXiv:2609.08472 [cs.MA] https://arxiv. org/abs/2609.08472 Version 1, submitted 8 September 2026. [15] Ruixiao Lin, Xinhao Deng, Qingming Li, Jianan Ma, Yunhao Feng, Yuqi Qing, Zhenyuan Li, Yechao Zhang, Shiwen Cui, Changhua Meng, Tianwei Zhang, Xingjun Ma, Qi Li, Ke Xu, and Shouling Ji. 2026. Safety in Self-Evolving LLM Agent Systems: Threats, Amplification, and Case Studies. arXiv:2606.23075 [cs.CR] https://arxiv.org/abs/2606.23075 

Version 1, submitted 22 June 2026. [16] Lifei Liu and Haoran Yu. 2026. Attesting Outputs and Delegation Ancestry in Multi-Agent AI Systems. arXiv:2608.30387 [cs.CR] https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.30387 Version 1, submitted 31 August 2026. [17] Lifei Liu, Haoran Yu, and Xiaochong Jiang. 2026. VERA: Authority-Preserving Edge Revocation for Federated AI-Agent Workflows. arXiv:2608.30091 [cs.AI] https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.30091 Version 1, submitted 30 August 2026. [18] Adam Mazzocchetti. 2026. Runtime Governance for Agentic AI: Action-Boundary Control with Trusted Provenance and Fail-Closed Execution. arXiv:2608.16891 [cs.AI] https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.16891 Version 1, submitted 17 May 2026. [19] Xabier Muruaga. 2026. Bounded Agents: Delegation Security for Multi-Agent AI Systems. arXiv:2608.15888 [cs.AI] 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.15888 Version 1, submitted 16 August 2026. [20] Jerome H. Saltzer and Michael D. Schroeder. 1975. The Protection of Information in Computer Systems. Proc. IEEE 63, 9 (1975), 1278–1308. doi: 10.1109/PROC.1975.9939 

[21] Justin Samuel, Nick Mathewson, Justin Cappos, and Roger Dingledine. 2010. Survivable Key Compromise in Software Update Systems. In Proceedings of the 17th ACM Conference on Computer and Communications Security . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 61–72. doi: 10.1145/1866307.1866315 

[22] Igor Santos-Grueiro. 2026. When Does Authorization End? Effect Closure at Provider Boundaries. arXiv:2609.02866 [cs.CR] https://arxiv.org/abs/2609.02866 Version 1, submitted 2 September 2026. [23] Biswa Sengupta. 2026. Self-Evolving Agents with Anytime-Valid Certificates. arXiv:2607.00871 [cs.AI] https: //arxiv.org/abs/2607.00871 Version 1, submitted 1 July 2026. [24] Tobin South, Samuele Marro, Thomas Hardjono, Robert Mahari, Cedric Deslandes Whitney, Dazza Greenwood, Alan Chan, and Alex Pentland. 2025. Authenticated Delegation and Authorized AI Agents. arXiv:2501.09674 [cs.CY] 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.09674 Version 1, submitted 16 January 2025. [25] Stefania S , tefănescu and Iulian Aciobănit , ei. 2026. Lineage: A UMA 2.0 Protocol Extension for Multi-Hop LLM Agent Delegation. IEEE Access 14 (2026), 104574–104591. doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2026.3708618 

[26] Krti Tallam. 2026. Authorization Propagation in Multi-Agent AI Systems: Identity Governance as Infrastructure. arXiv:2605.05440 [cs.AI] https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.05440 Version 1, submitted 6 May 2026. [27] Abhijit Talluri, Pujith Anne, Bhagavan Choudary Pendiyala, and Raghavendra Chilukuri. 2026. Retrieval-Conditioned Topology Selection with Provable Budget Conservation for Multi-Agent Code Generation. arXiv:2605.05657 [cs.AI] 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.05657 Version 1, submitted 7 May 2026. [28] Yingzhe Tong, Leyu Dai, and Songhui Guo. 2026. AID-Guard: Stateful Authorization for Delegated Agent Effects. arXiv:2608.21159 [cs.CR] https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.21159 Version 1, submitted 21 August 2026. [29] Santiago Torres-Arias, Hammad Afzali, Trishank Karthik Kuppusamy, Reza Curtmola, and Justin Cappos. 2019. in-toto: Providing Farm-to-Table Guarantees for Bits and Bytes. In 28th USENIX Security Symposium . USENIX Association, Santa Authorization for Self-Modifying AI Agent Populations 41 

Clara, CA, 1393–1410. https://www.usenix.org/conference/usenixsecurity19/presentation/torres-arias 

[30] Kailin Wang, Haoxiang Jie, Yaoyuan Yan, Zhiyou Heng, and Zhaosong Li. 2026. RegenHarness: A Robot Agent Harness with Evidence-Gated Recursive Self-Improvement. arXiv:2609.27612 [cs.RO] doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2609.27612 

Version 1, submitted 23 September 2026. [31] Molly Wang. 2026. Spawn Freely, Act Sparingly: Progressive Risk Vesting for Recursive LLM-Agent Trees. arXiv:2609.01035 [cs.AI] https://arxiv.org/abs/2609.01035 Version 1, submitted 1 September 2026. [32] Xing Wang, Xiaoyi Zhang, and Jie Shao. 2026. Auditing Harness Tampering in Self-Improving Agents. arXiv:2609.00069 [cs.CL] https://arxiv.org/abs/2609.00069 Version 1, submitted 30 August 2026. [33] Qing Ye and Jing Tan. 2026. Agent Contracts: A Formal Framework for Resource-Bounded Autonomous AI Systems. arXiv:2601.08815 [cs.MA] https://arxiv.org/abs/2601.08815 Version 3, revised 25 March 2026. [34] Jenny Zhang, Shengran Hu, Cong Lu, Robert Lange, and Jeff Clune. 2025. Darwin Gödel Machine: Open-Ended Evolution of Self-Improving Agents. arXiv:2505.22954 [cs.AI] https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.22954 Version 3, revised 12 March 2026. [35] Wentao Zhang, Zhe Zhao, Haibin Wen, Yingcheng Wu, Cankun Guo, Ming Yin, and Bo An. 2026. Autogenesis: A Self-Evolving Agent Protocol. arXiv:2604.15034 [cs.AI] https://arxiv.org/abs/2604.15034 Version 5, revised 20 June 2026. [36] Yingqi Zhang. 2026. Agent libOS: A Runtime Substrate for Capability-Controlled Self-Evolving LLM Agents. arXiv:2606.03895 [cs.OS] https://arxiv.org/abs/2606.03895 Version 3, revised 18 August 2026. [37] Zhaoxi Zhang and Xiaomei Zhang. 2026. Are You Still the Agent I Authorized? Earned Authority under a Fixed Ceiling for Evolving Agents. arXiv:2607.23586 [cs.AI] https://arxiv.org/abs/2607.23586 Version 1, submitted 26 July 2026. [38] Roy Zhao and Zhenyu Zhao. 2026. Code Is the Body: Agent-Owned Software Bodies for Recursive Evolution and Descent. arXiv:2607.28691 [cs.SE] https://arxiv.org/abs/2607.28691 Version 1, submitted 30 July 2026. [39] Yusheng Zheng, Yiwei Yang, Wei Zhang, and Andi Quinn. 2026. ACRFence: Preventing Semantic Rollback Attacks in Agent Checkpoint-Restore. arXiv:2603.20625 [cs.CR] https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.20625 Version 1; CoDAIM Workshop 2026. [40] Ziling Zhou. 2026. Governing Dynamic Capabilities: Cryptographic Binding and Reproducibility Verification for AI Agent Tool Use. arXiv:2603.14332 [cs.CR] https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.14332 Version 2, revised 19 March 2026. [41] Guojun Zhu, Xunheng Huang, Peng Yin, Jiahui Xie, Sanguo Zhang, and Doudou Zhou. 2026. Bad Genius: Counterfactual-Guided Harness Evolution Beyond Task-Specific Shortcuts. arXiv:2609.18366 [cs.AI] doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2609.18366 

Version 3, revised 24 September 2026. [42] Genliang Zhu and Chu Wang. 2026. Authorization Revocation for Long-Running AI Agents: Root-Scoped Quiescence under Delegation and Asynchronous Execution. arXiv:2609.21284 [cs.PL] doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2609.21284 Version 1, submitted 18 September 2026.