Title: Hybrid deep learning-based phase diversity method for wavefront reconstruction

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.25855v1

Published Time: Thu, 25 Jun 2026 01:12:57 GMT

Number of Pages: 13

Markdown Content:
Hybrid deep learning-based phase diversity method for wavefront reconstruction 

# Hybrid deep learning-based phase diversity method for wavefront reconstruction 

Y. Rodimkov, 1 A. Kotov, 2 K. Burdonov, 2 S. Perevalov, 2 V. Volokitin, 1 I. Meyerov, 1 and A. Soloviev 2

> 1)

Lobachevskii State University of Nizhni Novgorod, pr. Gagarina 23, Nizhni Novgorod, 603022 Russia 

> 2)

Institute of Applied Physics, Russian Academy of Sciences, Nizhny Novgorod 603951, Russia 

(*Electronic mail: rodimkov@itmm.unn.ru) (Dated: 25 June 2026) 

The efficiency of high-power laser systems is limited by wavefront distortions in the beam, particularly non-common path aberrations, which reduce the peak intensity at the focal plane. Compensating for these aberrations requires the calibration of the adaptive optics system. Conventional calibration methods rely on a time-consuming iterative optimization that is highly sensitive to initial conditions. While deep learning-based models offer high speed, they often demonstrate insufficient accuracy. In this work, we present a hybrid wavefront reconstruction method that combines a convolutional neural network to generate an initial estimate of the wavefront distortions, with the L-BFGS (Limited-memory Broyden–Fletcher–Goldfarb–Shanno) algorithm for its subsequent refinement. In numerical simulations, the method achieved an efficiency of ∼ 0.99 in 80% of the cases for a root-mean-square (RMS) of wavefront distortions ranging from 0 to 1 .3λ . In a physical experiment, for initial wavefront distortions with RMS values from 0.15 to 0 .6λ ,the method achieved an efficiency of ∼ 0.75. As a result, focusing with a Strehl ratio of 0 .96 ± 0.02 was attained within 2 to 4 iterations of the algorithm, confirming the applicability of the method for the fast and accurate calibration of adaptive optics systems under real experimental conditions. 

I. INTRODUCTION 

The primary factors limiting the performance of optical sys-tems are static and dynamic aberrations, which degrade the image quality and reduce the peak intensity at the focal plane. The application of adaptive optics systems (AOS) to compen-sate for these distortions and achieve diffraction-limited per-formance is critical for a wide range of applications, including astronomical telescopes 1,2 , microscopy 3,4 , ophthalmology 5,optical communication systems 6–8 , and laser systems 9–11 .A typical AOS configuration includes a wavefront sensor (WFS), a phase-correcting element, such as a deformable mir-ror (DM), and a control system. In high-power laser facili-ties, wavefront correction is typically implemented using an AOS, the schematic diagram of which is shown in Fig. 1. The system operates as follows. The laser beam is reflected from the deformable mirror and directed to a partially trans-parent mirror with a reflectivity of approximately 99%. The main part of the beam reflected from the partially transparent mirror enters the focusing channel and is focused at the main focal point of the system. The part of the beam that passes through the partially transparent mirror enters the diagnostic channel, where it is used to measure the wavefront. However, this approach suffers from a significant drawback due to non-common path aberrations (NCPA) 12 , which are non-identical wavefront distortions acquired by the beam in the diagnos-tic and focusing channels. Under these conditions, even if a perfectly flat wavefront is achieved at the WFS plane, the re-sulting intensity distribution at the focal plane will not reach the diffraction limit. The presence of NCPA necessitates an AOS calibration pro-cedure to determine the reference wavefront for the WFS that corresponds to optimal focusing at the target. Essentially, this reference wavefront is the conjugate of the non-common path 

FIG. 1: Schematic of the physical experiment and the operation of the adaptive optics system. wavefront distortions. In practice, any changes in the focus-ing or diagnostic channels require recalibration, so it is usually performed before each experimental session, as well as during experiments. Existing methods for determining the reference wavefront can be divided into three main categories, each with inherent limitations. (i) Phase retrieval methods, based on the intensity distributions in the near and far fields 13,14 , rely on the iterative propagation of the optical field between the near- and far-field planes via the Fourier transform, replacing the computed dis-tribution of the electric field amplitude with the one derived from the measured distribution at each step. Their drawbacks include high computational complexity, sensitivity to noise, instability under complex wavefront distortions, and suscepti-bility to artifacts. (ii) Iterative methods 15,16 for optimizing the intensity distribution at the focal plane within the parameter 

> arXiv:2606.25855v1 [physics.optics] 24 Jun 2026

Hybrid deep learning-based phase diversity method for wavefront reconstruction 2space of the wavefront distortions require a large number of it-erations, often converge to local extrema, and yield results that are highly dependent on initial conditions and optimization parameters. (iii) Recently, neural network-based models 17–19 

have gained widespread adoption due to their rapid inference speeds. However, their application is limited by insufficient accuracy in reconstructing higher-order wavefront distortions and problems with the generalization ability of models. To overcome these limitations, we developed hybrid method for reconstruction of wavefront distortions that combines the advantages of iterative optimization and deep learning. The method employs a phase diver-sity technique, wherein a convolutional neural network generates an initial estimate of the wavefront distor-tions based on the intensity distributions at the focus and defocused planes 19 . This initial prediction is sub-sequently refined using the L-BFGS (Limited-memory Broyden–Fletcher–Goldfarb–Shanno) 20 optimization algo-rithm. This paper presents both numerical and experimen-tal evaluations of the performance of the method. In numer-ical simulations, a correction efficiency approaching unity is demonstrated using up to 100 Zernike modes 21 for an RMS of wavefront distortions ranging from 0 to 1 .3λ . Experimen-tally, we demonstrate the ability to achieve a Strehl ratio of approximately 0.96 within 2 to 4 iterations of the algorithm for initial wavefront distortions with RMS values up to 0 .6λ ,which corresponds to a Strehl ratio below 0.1. The paper is organized as follows. Section II presents an overview of existing methods for the reconstruction of wave-front distortions and the calibration of adaptive systems. Sec-tion III describes the training data generation procedure and the hybrid method. Section IV discusses the performance of the method on numerical and experimental data. Section V summarizes the main findings of the study.   

> II. RELATED WORK A. Mirror control

Traditional AOS calibration methods belong to the class of sensorless techniques, which operate without a WFS and are based on iterative algorithms for optimizing the inten-sity distribution at the focal plane. For the direct control of the DM surface, various optimization algorithms are applied, including hill climbing 22,23 , genetic algorithms 22–24 , stochas-tic gradient descent 15,25 , and simulated annealing 26,27 . In re-cent years, reinforcement learning methods 28,29 have gained widespread adoption, enabling a reduction in the number of iterations required and accelerating the overall calibration pro-cess. Rather than directly controlling the mirror surface, some approaches employ a mapping between the mirror actuators and a set of basis functions describing the wavefront dis-tortions. Within this formulation, both classical optimiza-tion algorithms 16,30–32 and modern reinforcement learning techniques 33,34 have been explored. A key advantage of this approach is a significant reduction in the dimensionality of the search space compared to a direct actuator-level optimization.  

> B. Wavefront distortion reconstruction

An alternative approach to AOS calibration relies on wave-front reconstruction using the phase diversity method pro-posed by Gonsalves 14 . This method enables the unambigu-ous determination of wavefront distortions from the near-field intensity distribution combined with two intensity measure-ments taken at the focal and defocused planes. Subsequent studies have compared various optimization algorithms for re-constructing both the Zernike coefficients and the pixel-wise wavefront distortions 35 , adapting these algorithms to account for Gaussian and Poisson noise 36 . Additionally, approaches combining global and local optimization algorithms have been proposed to improve the reconstruction accuracy 37,38 .However, classical phase retrieval and sensorless mirror control methods exhibit several limitations. Specifically, they are computationally expensive, are prone to stagnation in lo-cal extrema, and yield results that are highly sensitive to hy-perparameter tuning. Moreover, in the presence of dynamic aberrations, these distortions can severely interfere with the iterative wavefront correction process 30 .Various convolutional neural network architectures have been investigated and adapted for estimating the Zernike mode coefficients, including AlexNet 39 , ResNet 18,40–42 ,EfficientNet 40 , and Inception 17,41,42 . For direct phase retrieval tasks, image-to-image architectures such as De-VGG 43 , U-Net 18 , and UNet++ 42 have been successfully applied. These methods demonstrate comparable accuracy 18 , though in some cases, architectures like U-Net and UNet++ outperform net-works designed solely for Zernike coefficient regression 42 .Hybrid methods 44–47 aim to surpass both the convergence speed of classical local optimization algorithms and the accu-racy of neural networks. In these approaches, a deep learning model provides a rapid initial estimate of the wavefront distor-tions, which is subsequently refined using local optimization algorithms. Nevertheless, existing studies typically focus on a limited number of Zernike modes or lack comprehensive ex-perimental validation, including in the context of the problem addressed in this study.  

> III. METHODS AND ALGORITHMS

In this work, the problem of the reconstruction of wave-front distortions is addressed using the hybrid method (Sec-tion III D) that combines deep learning with a classical itera-tive optimization algorithm. A neural network, whose archi-tecture is detailed in Section III B, is trained on numerical data generated according to the procedure outlined in Section III A. The trained neural network is then used to predict the wave-front distortions. Subsequently, the predicted distortions are decomposed into Zernike modes to serve as an initial guess for the L-BFGS optimization algorithm, which is described in Section III C. Hybrid deep learning-based phase diversity method for wavefront reconstruction 3Although two beam cross-sections in the near-focal planes are theoretically sufficient to resolve the ambiguity of wave-front distortions, three measurement planes were applied in this study. Preliminary experiments have shown that correc-tion of weak distortions using only two images leads to sys-tematic errors, since this method tends to interpret noise, blur artifacts, and scaling inaccuracies as optical aberrations. To regularize the optimization, a third measurement with a de-focus of the opposite sign was incorporated into the L-BFGS algorithm, significantly enhancing the robustness when pro-cessing experimental data. In all experiments, the neural net-work is trained on and processes only two images, whereas the L-BFGS algorithm performs the optimization based on all three images.  

> A. Data generation

The hybrid method takes as input the distributions of the electric field amplitude at the focal plane and at two sym-metrically defocused planes, which are obtained by taking the square root of the intensity measured by the camera. The following procedure was used to generate the synthetic dataset. First, the near-field amplitude was defined by a uni-form circular aperture. Next, the Zernike coefficients, denoted by a, were randomly sampled from a uniform distribution 

U (−1, 1) and subsequently scaled by the inverse of their cor-responding radial orders. The wavefront W (a, x, y) was con-structed as a linear combination of these modes: 

W (a, x, y) = 

> N

# ∑

> j=1

a jZ j(x, y),

where Z j(x, y) represents the j-th Zernike mode 21 , a j is the corresponding Zernike coefficient, x and y are Cartesian coor-dinates, and N is the total number of modes. The coefficients for the piston and tip/tilt terms were set to zero. The sampling bounds and a representative set of generated coefficients are illustrated in Fig. 2. 

FIG. 2: Maximum and minimum bounds for the Zernike mode amplitudes, along with an example of a generated co-efficient set. To calculate the intensity distribution in the focal plane, the 2D Fast Fourier Transform was used to relate the complex field, including the amplitude distribution in the near field and the wavefront, to the intensity distribution in the focal plane. To simulate defocused intensity distributions, an additional phase term corresponding to the defocus Zernike mode was added to the wavefront with an amplitude of ±0.5λ . To en-hance the sensitivity of the neural network to low-intensity features at the periphery of the focal spot, a square-root trans-formation was applied to the intensity distributions. Thus, for notational convenience, we define the inputs to the method as FF j:FF j(a) = F A(x, y) exp [i2π (W (a, x, y) + α jZ3(x, y))] ,

where F is the 2D Fourier transform operator, A(x, y) is the aperture function, W (a, x, y) is the wavefront expressed in units of wavelength, Z3(x, y) is the Zernike mode for defocus, and α j is the corresponding defocus coefficient ( α1 = −0.5λ ,

α2 = 0, α3 = 0.5λ ). Following generation, the focal and defocused images were center-cropped to a spatial resolution of 128 × 128 pixels. The effective pixel size was defined as dpix = 0.25 λ F/D, where F

is the focal length and D is the beam diameter. The total field of view for each image corresponded to 32 λ F/D × 32 λ F/D.Examples of the synthetic data generated for various aber-ration strengths using 100 Zernike modes are presented in Fig. 3. The final dataset consisted of training set of 100,000 samples, validation set of 5,000 samples and test set of 1,000 samples. 

FIG. 3: Examples of synthetic data. Columns (left to right): distributions of the electric field amplitude at the defocused plane ( α1 = −0.5λ ), at the focal plane ( α2 = 0λ ), and at the defocused plane ( α3 = 0.5λ ); corresponding wavefront dis-tortions. Hybrid deep learning-based phase diversity method for wavefront reconstruction 4 

> B. Deep learning model architecture

A neural network ˆW = NN (FF 1, FF 2) is applied to re-construct the wavefront distortions ˆ W from two distributions of the electric field amplitude, one at the defocused plane FF 1 and one at the focal plane FF 2. A modified U-Net architecture 48 , illustrated in Fig. 4, was used for this task. The original U-Net was designed for semantic segmentation, where the input and output domains share spatial correspon-dence, unlike our problem. Consequently, the early-stage skip connections were removed. 

FIG. 4: Architecture of the modified U-Net applied for the reconstruction of wavefront distortions. The distributions of the electric field amplitude at the focal and defocused planes were concatenated along the channel di-mension to form a two-channel input tensor. The network’s output was subsequently multiplied by a circular mask. The model was trained to predict the pixel-wise wavefront distor-tions directly. The network architecture comprises five se-quential encoder blocks, a bottleneck layer, and five decoder blocks. The encoder and decoder pathways are bridged by skip connections, which are retained only for the last three en-coder blocks, passing their feature maps to the corresponding decoder stages. Each encoder block consists of two 3 × 3 convolutional lay-ers with a padding of 1, each followed by a non-linear activa-tion function, and terminates with a 2 × 2 max pooling layer for spatial downsampling. The first three decoder blocks use transposed convolutions for spatial upsampling, followed by concatenation with the feature maps routed from the corresponding encoder. The combined feature maps are then processed by a sequence of two 3 ×3 convolutions and activations, mirroring the structure of the encoder blocks. The final two decoder blocks, lacking skip connections, rely solely on the output of the preceding decoder stage. These final blocks use bilinear upsampling fol-lowed by a convolutional block identical to those in the en-coder. The model was optimized using a mean squared error loss function. Training was performed for 600 epochs with a batch size of 500 using the Adam optimizer 49 at a learning rate of 5 × 10 −4. No regularization was applied. The ReLU activa-tion function was used across all hidden layers, while the final output layer used a linear activation. The model was trained on the synthetic dataset generated using 100 Zernike modes.  

> 1. Data preprocessing and augmentation

Each distribution of the electric field amplitude FF i was independently normalized by its maximum value. The tar-get wavefront distortions were normalized by a factor of 3 λ ,yielding a value range of approximately [−3, 3], which is con-ducive to stable training of the neural network. During infer-ence, the inverse scaling was applied to the predicted wave-front distortions. Data augmentation was employed to prevent overfitting to the idealized synthetic data. Four types of transformations were used to simulate measurement errors: spatial translation, Gaussian blurring, quantization, and additive uniform noise. Each transformation was applied independently with a proba-bility of 50%. For each training batch, a random scaling co-efficient r ∼ U (0, 1) was generated to modulate the perturba-tion amplitude. This exposed the model to data with varying error magnitudes, ranging from low levels, which accelerate convergence in the early training stages, to levels approaching real experimental conditions. The distributions were randomly shifted by a value sam-pled from U (−7r, 7r) pixels, where the effective pixel size is 

dpix = 0.25 λ F/D. This addition allows the model to adapt to beam displacements relative to the image. Blurring was per-formed using a 5 × 5 Gaussian kernel with a standard devia-tion sampled from U (0.01 r, 0.5r). To emulate the limited dy-namic range and analog-to-digital discretizations of the cam-era, the electric field amplitude quantization was modeled by converting the data from 32-bit floating point to 8-bit floating point and back. Finally, additive uniform noise sampled from 

U (0, 0.07 r) was superimposed on the electric field amplitude.  

> 2. Circular buffer

The synthetic dataset used for model training was not static. The dataset was dynamically updated during the optimization process. The data were stored in a fixed-size circular buffer, where older examples were continuously replaced with newly generated ones 50 . The training procedure followed a standard pipeline. Mini-batches were sampled from the buffer to com-pute the forward and backward passes for the weight updates. In parallel with model training, new synthetic data were continuously generated via numerical simulations and ap-pended to the circular buffer. The generated data were written to the buffer in chunks of 100 samples. Insertion and extrac-tion operations on the buffer were strictly synchronized to en-sure that only one operation was executed at a given time. The buffer capacity was set to 100,000 samples and was completely pre-filled before the start of model training. The data generation pipeline was parallelized across 10 processes. On average, approximately 15,000 samples in the buffer were updated per training epoch. Hybrid deep learning-based phase diversity method for wavefront reconstruction 5 

> C. L-BFGS Algorithm

The L-BFGS algorithm 20 is a quasi-Newton method for un-constrained optimization, designed to find a local optimum of a multivariate function. As a local optimization algorithm, its outcome depends on the initial guess, and it does not guaran-tee convergence to a global optimum. Unlike the exact New-ton method, the L-BFGS does not require explicit storage or inversion of the Hessian. In the standard Newton method, an iterative procedure de-termines the search direction using the exact inverse Hes-sian, Hk = ( ∇2 f (θk)) −1, yielding the update rule θk+1 =

θk − αkHkgk, where gk = ∇ f (θk) is the gradient. The defining feature of the L-BFGS is that it approximates the inverse Hes-sian Hk using only the m most recent pairs of parameter dif-ferences si = θi+1 − θi and gradient differences di = gi+1 − gi.The search direction pk = −Hkgk is computed using the Two-loop Recursion algorithm (Algorithm 1) 51 .

Algorithm 1 L-BFGS Two-loop Recursion                                                                             

> 1: Input: Current gradient gk, history of mpairs {si,di}k−1
> i=k−m
> 2: Output: Descent direction pk
> 3: q←gk
> 4: for i=k−1down to k−mdo
> 5: ρi←1
> dTisi
> 6: αi←ρisTiq
> 7: q←q−αidi
> 8: end for
> 9: H0
> k←sTk−1dk−1
> dTk−1dk−1I
> 10: z←γkq
> 11: for i=k−mto k−1do
> 12: β←ρidTiz
> 13: z←z+si(αi−β)
> 14: end for
> 15: return pk← − z▷pkapproximates −Hkgk

The parameters are then updated as θk+1 = θk + αk pk. In this work, we use the L-BFGS implementation from the Py-Torch framework. The stopping criteria are set to a gradient norm tolerance of 10 −7 and a relative change in the objective function of 10 −9. The step size αk is determined adaptively via a line search satisfying the Wolfe conditions. This algorithm is used to optimize the amplitudes of the Zernike modes, the number of which varies depending on the experiment. The optimization objective is the similarity between the ground-truth image and the image numerically simulated from the predicted Zernike coefficients. To eval-uate this, the maximum of the normalized cross-correlation (NCC max ) is used: 

NCC max (FF pred , FF truth ) = 1

n max 



Re 

h

F −1 

F ( ˜FF pred ) · F ( ˜FF truth )∗i 

where ˜FF pred = FF pred −μpred  

> σpred

and ˜FF truth = FF truth −μtruth  

> σtruth

are the normalized images; FF pred is the simulated image generated from the predicted amplitudes; FF truth is the ground-truth im-age; μpred , μtruth , σpred , and σtruth denote the respective means and standard deviations of FF pred and FF truth ; F and F −1

represent the 2D forward and inverse Fourier transforms, re-spectively; ∗ denotes complex conjugation; Re [·] extracts the real part of a complex number; and n is the total number of pixels in the image. This metric is translation-invariant, which is crucial in experimental where precise centering of the data is unfeasible. To optimize the Zernike mode amplitudes a, the negative sum of the normalized cross-correlations across three images is minimized: 

f (a) = −

> 3

# ∑

> j=1

NCC max (FF pred  

> j

(a), FF truth  

> j

). 

> D. Hybrid Method

The hybrid method is used to predict the Zernike mode co-efficients, as illustrated in Fig. 5.In the first stage, the trained convolutional neural network reconstructs per-pixel wavefront distortions based on intensity distributions obtained in the fo-cal and defocused planes, denoted as ˆ W = NN (FF 1, FF 2). The reconstructed wavefront distortions ˆW are then decomposed into a selected number of Zernike coefficients ainit . These ini-tial estimates ainit serve as the starting point for the L-BFGS algorithm, which minimizes the objective function f (a), de-fined as the negative sum of the normalized cross-correlations between the numerically simulated distributions of the electric field amplitude and the corresponding experimentally mea-sured intensity distributions. A key advantage of this hybrid method is that the neural net-work and the L-BFGS algorithm do not require identical input data. This decoupling means the neural network can be trained once using a standard two-plane phase diversity scheme to provide a robust initial guess. The subsequent optimization can then incorporate an arbitrary set of measurement planes to stabilize the solution and achieve the desired reconstruc-tion accuracy. Consequently, this method offers significant flexibility. It naturally accommodates additional observation planes or alternative phase diversity configurations specific to a given experimental setup, entirely circumventing the com-putationally expensive process of retraining the neural net-work.   

> IV. RESULTS A. Numerical results

First, we compared the accuracy and computational time of four approaches for the reconstruction of wavefront dis-tortions using numerical data. The first approach employs a trained convolutional neural network (NN) to predict the wavefront distortions. The second approach uses the L-BFGS Hybrid deep learning-based phase diversity method for wavefront reconstruction 6

FIG. 5: Schematic of the workflow of the hybrid method. algorithm to optimize the Zernike coefficients with zero ini-tialization (L-BFGS (zero init)). This initial guess is physi-cally justified, as a wavefront without aberrations corresponds to a vector of zero coefficients. The third approach relies on the L-BFGS algorithm executed with 10 random initializa-tions (L-BFGS (10 × random)). The procedure for generating these starting points is identical to the data generation proce-dure used in the data generation. The fourth approach is a hy-brid method, which employs a convolutional neural network for the initial reconstruction of wavefront distortions. The re-sulting distortions are then projected onto the Zernike basis to provide an initial guess for the L-BFGS algorithm (Hybrid method). To ensure consistency, all methods reconstructed the amplitudes of Zernike modes, i.e., the wavefront distortions were decomposed into Zernike modes when necessary. This step is essential because the primary objective of this work is the calibration of the AOS, where additional wavefront cor-rections are applied via Zernike modes. Experiments were conducted across three configurations. Test data were generated using 25, 50, and 100 Zernike modes, and all approaches reconstructed the corresponding number of coefficients in each trial. The RMS of the resid-ual wavefront distortions was used to evaluate the reconstruc-tion accuracy. To calculate this, the predicted Zernike coeffi-cients were converted into wavefront distortions, and the RMS of the residual difference between the predicted and ground-truth wavefront distortions was computed. The error met-rics and computation times for all approaches are summarized in Table I. Notably, the hybrid method achieves the highest accuracy, particularly as the number of Zernike modes in-creases. The neural network also demonstrates acceptable per-formance, although its RMS error is approximately five times higher than that of the hybrid method.The L-BFGS algorithm with zero or random initialization shows significantly worse performance. Their RMS errors are an order of magnitude higher than those of the hybrid method. This substantial per-formance gap underscores the critical importance of an initial guess. Computation time measurements performed on a CPU (In-tel Core i5-10400) indicate that the neural network achieves the fastest inference. A single run of the L-BFGS algorithm takes an average of 3-6 seconds, depending on the number of Zernike coefficients being optimized. As the dimension-ality of the optimization parameter space increases, the prob-lem complexity grows, leading to an increased number of it-erations. The hybrid method reduces the overall computation time by 2-3 times, since the neural network provides an initial guess close to the local optimum. Consequently, the number of iterations required for the convergence of the L-BFGS algo-rithm decreases. Utilizing GPU acceleration can significantly reduce the computation time for all approaches, yielding a re-markable speedup of over 4 times faster. Figure 6 illustrates the dependence of the reconstruction ef-ficiency on the magnitude of the wavefront distortions for dif-ferent numbers of Zernike modes used in the data generation. The efficiency is defined as: efficiency = 1 − RMS ( ˆWpred −Wtruth )

RMS (Wtruth ) ,

where ˆWpred denotes the predicted wavefront distortions and 

Wtruth represents the ground-truth wavefront distortions. Hybrid deep learning-based phase diversity method for wavefront reconstruction 7TABLE I: Accuracy and computation time of approaches for different numbers of Zernike coefficients.                                                             

> 25 Zernike mods 50 Zernike mods 100 Zernike mods Method RMS ( λ)Time (s) RMS ( λ)Time (s) RMS ( λ)Time (s) Net 6.05 ·10 −20.05 6.68 ·10 −20.05 1.09 ·10 −10.05 L-BFGS (zero init) 2.45 ·10 −13.08 3.59 ·10 −13.68 4.91 ·10 −16.61 L-BFGS (10 ×random) 7 .82 ·10 −238.43 3.10 ·10 −165.25 5.35 ·10 −1105.16 Hybrid method 1.33 ·10 −21.17 9.56 ·10 −31.36 3.16 ·10 −22.70
> (a)
> (b)
> (c)

FIG. 6: Dependence of algorithm efficiency on distortion level for different numbers of Zernike modes used for data generation. (a) 25 modes, (b) 50 modes, (c) 100 modes. The colored line corresponds to a moving average with a window size of 50 points. The neural network demonstrates high robustness, main-taining high efficiency over a wide range of RMS wavefront distortion values, except for cases with exceedingly small ini-tial wavefront distortions. This behavior occurs because the relative metric becomes highly sensitive to small absolute er-rors at low RMS levels. Furthermore, the reconstruction ac-curacy improves as the number of modes decreases, which is attributed to the reduced spatial complexity of the target wavefront distortions. The L-BFGS algorithm exhibits high, near-ideal efficiency in the area of small wavefront distortions for both zero and random initializations. However, as the am-plitude of the wavefront distortions or the number of modes increases, the frequency of cases yielding low or negative ef-ficiency grows. In certain instances, the efficiency takes large negative values. This effect is observed, for example, in the L-BFGS algorithm with random initialization in the regime of small wavefront distortions (Fig. 6(b)). The average effi-ciency of the L-BFGS algorithm for both initialization strate-gies begins to degrade substantially at an RMS of wavefront distortions exceeding 0 .35 λ . The hybrid method consistently delivers high accuracy across almost all evaluated scenarios, regardless of the number of modes or the RMS of the initial wavefront distortions. The efficiency of the hybrid method ex-ceeds 0 .99 in 80% of the cases. Moreover, fewer than 2% of the samples exhibit an efficiency below 0 .9 for wavefront dis-tortions with an RMS below 0 .6λ , which constitutes the target operational range for the physical experiment. The hybrid method demonstrated the best accuracy and sta-bility while maintaining sufficiently fast processing times. In the next part of the study, the method was subsequently tested for AOS calibration under real-world experimental conditions.   

> B. Experiment
> 1. Experimental facility

The experiments were performed using the AOS 52–54 con-sisting a of Shack-Hartmann WFS and a bimorph DM. The DM design and electrode geometry are illustrated in Fig. 7. The DM is a three-layer composite structure consisting of a polished substrate with a reflective coating and two piezoce-ramic disks. All mirror components are rigidly bonded. The operation of the DM relies on the inverse piezoelectric effect: applying a control voltage to the piezoceramic disks induces longitudinal compression or expansion of the piezo-ceramic material. This, in turn, deforms the DM surface, en-abling high-precision shape control. The inner piezoelectric Hybrid deep learning-based phase diversity method for wavefront reconstruction 8

FIG. 7: Schematic of the deformable mirror and the electrode layout on the outer piezoceramic plate. disk with a solid electrode is used to form the overall cur-vature of the DM surface. The outer surface of the second piezoceramic disk is patterned with galvanically isolated seg-mented electrodes to generate localized surface deformations. In this study, a 48-electrode DM with a 120 mm diameter was used, designed for a 100 mm aperture. The DM substrate was coated with a multilayer dielectric coating, ensuring a reflec-tivity of at least 99 .9% in the 910 ± 40 nm spectral range. The Shack-Hartmann WFS consisted of a CMOS camera coupled with a microlens array. The camera sensor had a clear aperture of approximately 1.1 cm and a pixel size of 5.5 μm. The microlens array had a focal length of 3.2 mm and a lenslet size of 136 μm. The WFS provided a residual wavefront mea-surement error with an RMS below 0 .025 λ . The operating principle of the Shack-Hartmann WFS involves spatially sam-pling the incident beam into subapertures using the microlens array. Each lenslet focuses the light onto the camera sensor, forming a two-dimensional array of focal spots known as a Hartmannogram. The displacements of the focal spot cen-troids relative to their reference positions allow for the com-putation of local wavefront slopes, from which the wavefront distortions are reconstructed. The measured wavefront dis-tortions represent the difference between the incident wave-front and a calibrated reference wavefront. When measuring wavefront distortions in beams with an aperture larger than the WFS sensor, an telescopic system is used. In such config-urations, a proper closed-loop AOS operation requires precise optical conjugation between the DM and the WFS planes. The standard wavefront correction procedure in adaptive optics is implemented via phase conjugation in a closed-loop control system. This process operates as an iterative cycle: 1. The WFS measures the wavefront distortions, defined as the wavefront difference between the incident beam and the reference wavefront. 2. The control system calculates the corresponding com-mand voltages based on the WFS measurements and applies them to the DM. 3. The DM updates its surface profile in response to the applied control signals. 4. This cycle repeats continuously to ensure a dynamic wavefront stabilization. Through this feedback loop, the AOS minimizes the resid-ual wavefront distortions between the incident and reference wavefronts. The experiment was performed at the PEARL laser facility 9. The optical scheme is depicted in Fig. 8. The output from a laser diode was expanded by a beam expander to a clear aperture of approximately 10 cm. The beam was then reflected by the DM and focused by an off-axis parabolic (OAP) mirror with a focal length of F = 760 mm. The converging beam was collected by a microscope objective (MO) and subsequently collimated and demagnified to a 5 mm diameter using a relay lens system (L1-L2). A beam splitter (BS) divided the beam: the transmitted portion was directed into the WFS, while the reflected portion was focused by lens L3 onto a CCD camera for focal spot monitoring. Phase diversity was implemented directly via the DM. This approach offers several significant advantages: 1. Utilizing the deformable mirror allows for a highly flex-ible phase diversity scheme. For instance, diverse types and amplitudes of wavefront distortions can be applied, enabling the acquisition of intensity distributions at an arbitrary number of focal and defocused planes. The reconstruction accuracy is then primarily limited by the spatial fidelity of the mirror’s surface shaping capabili-ties. 2. No supplementary optical components are required in the measurement scheme, avoiding parasitic wavefront distortions and simplifying the optical alignment. Con-ventional methods, such as introducing an auxiliary focusing channel or a beam splitter, inherently in-duce inter-channel wavefront distortions. Alternatively, translating the camera along the optical axis demands high-precision motorized stages and degrades the tem-poral resolution of the system. 3. This approach seamlessly integrates into the existing AOS architecture, as it can be executed purely as a soft-ware procedure within the closed-loop control system. In each experiment, we introduced controlled wavefront distortions into the beam by adding combinations of Zernike modes to the wavefront. Zernike mode coefficients were gen-erated similar to the synthetic data. Consequently, the target reference wavefront was shifted to a range with an RMS of wavefront distortions up to 0 .6λ , which corresponds to the limits of the DM. Following the introduction of these distor-tions, the AOS engaged in a closed-loop correction to mini-mize the residual wavefront distortions between the measured and the modified reference wavefronts. Once the control loop Hybrid deep learning-based phase diversity method for wavefront reconstruction 9

FIG. 8: Schematic of the experimental setup. DM: deformable mirror; OAP: off-axis parabolic mirror; MO: microscope objective; BS: beam splitters; L1-L3: lenses; WFS: wavefront sensor; CCD: CCD camera. converged, the intensity distributions at the focal and defo-cused planes were recorded. The experimentally acquired intensity distributions were subjected to a preprocessing pipeline. To suppress back-ground noise, the median pixel value of a peripheral back-ground region was subtracted from each distribution, and any resulting negative values were clipped to zero. Each distribu-tion was then spatially centered based on its center of mass and normalized by its maximum value. Following this, an element-wise square root operation was applied. These pre-processed distributions of the electric field amplitude were subsequently fed into the hybrid method to reconstruct the corresponding wavefront distortions. The number of Zernike modes used was limited by the AOS software and set to 25.  

> 2. Experimental results

The performance of the hybrid method was evaluated in nine experimental series, each with different initial wavefront distortions. Each series comprised nine correction iterations based on the predictions of the hybrid method. In applica-tions aimed at maximizing the peak intensity, the most stan-dard metric for assessing the compensation quality of wave-front distortions is the Strehl ratio. It is the ratio of the on-axis energy density measured at the focal waist to the max-imum value achievable for the given near-field distribution, assuming a perfectly flat wavefront and ideal focusing optics. Thus, the deviation of the Strehl ratio from unity quantifies the degradation in the peak intensity at the focal plane caused by residual wavefront distortions. In addition to the Strehl ra-tio, the experiment also analyzed the residual wavefront dis-tortions, calculated relative to the wavefront corresponding to the best focusing with a Strehl ratio of 0.98 (4th series, 5th iteration). The results of iterative wavefront correction based on the predictions of the hybrid method are shown in Fig. 9. The left vertical axis of the plots denotes the Strehl ratio, while the right axis indicates the RMS of the wavefront distortions mea-sured by the WFS and predicted by the hybrid method. For the final correction series, focal plane images are also displayed for each iteration and for the calculated diffraction-limited fo-cusing case. These distributions are normalized to their re-spective peak values and plotted in a palette from 0 to 0.05. The hybrid method achieves a Strehl ratio of approximately 0.96, which corresponds to a reduction of the residual RMS of the wavefront distortions to below 0 .032 λ . The convergence of the correction loop is reached within 2 to 4 iterations. In the numerical simulations, the RMS prediction error of the wave-front distortions was on the order of 0 .01 λ to 0 .03 λ . Conse-quently, for synthetic data, a single correction iteration is suf-ficient to achieve a comparable or superior performance. The discrepancy between the numerical and experimental results is attributed to several factors: WFS measurement uncertainty, noise during the acquisition of the intensity distributions at the focal and defocused planes, and the limited spatial fitting capability of the deformable mirror. The lack of further improvement is explained not only by WFS limitations and registration noise but also by residual wavefront distortions residing in higher-order Zernike modes. The deformable mirror used in this study has a limited capac-ity for correcting high-spatial-frequency wavefront distortions due to the specific number and geometry of its electrodes, which enforces a 25-mode correction limit. Therefore, mit-igating higher spatial frequencies would require a DM with a higher actuator density. With the reference wavefront corresponding to the realiza-tion with a Strehl ratio of 0.98 (series 4, iteration 5), the next stage of the experiment was to measure the efficiency depen-dence, similar to the one obtained from the numerical data (see Figure 6). To evaluate the quality of the correction of wavefront dis-tortions, an efficiency metric is defined as: efficiency = 1 − RMS ( ˆWpred −Wmeas )

RMS (Wmeas ) ,

where Wmeas represents the wavefront distortions measured by the WFS. This metric characterizes the residual wavefront distortions relative to the initial state. The measurement un-certainty, corresponding to the WFS measurement error, is Hybrid deep learning-based phase diversity method for wavefront reconstruction 10 

FIG. 9: Experimental results of the iterative wavefront correction based on the predictions of the hybrid method. The left axis indicates the Strehl ratio; the right axis shows the RMS of the wavefront distortions measured by the WFS and predicted by the hybrid method. For the final correction series, the normalized intensity distributions at the focal plane for each iteration and for the ideal focusing case are displayed, rendered with a colormap scaled from 0 to 0.05. Hybrid deep learning-based phase diversity method for wavefront reconstruction 11 

σmeas = 0.025 λ . When the measured wavefront distortions are comparable to this uncertainty (RMS (Wmeas ) ∼ σmeas ), the error contribution becomes indistinguishable from the sig-nal, which reduces the reliability of the efficiency estima-tion. Consequently, at low RMS values of the measured wave-front distortions, the metric becomes statistically unstable as noise dominates. Based on this, an applicability threshold of 2 σmeas = 0.05 λ was established, ensuring the error con-tribution does not exceed 50%. Data points falling below this threshold were excluded from the analysis. The dependence of efficiency on the initial wavefront dis-tortions for the experimental data is shown in Fig. 10. For an RMS of wavefront distortions exceeding 0 .15 λ , the efficiency is approximately 75%. Below 0 .15 λ , the efficiency begins to decline. This decrease occurs because the metric is relative. At small initial wavefront distortions, even minor absolute de-viations significantly affect the result. Furthermore, in this range, the influence of WFS measurement and registration er-rors is amplified. Nevertheless, the average efficiency remains above 50%, facilitating convergence within several iterations of the hybrid method, as demonstrated in Fig. 9. 

FIG. 10: Efficiency of the hybrid method on experimental data as a function of the RMS of wavefront distortions.  

> V. CONCLUSION

In this work, the hybrid method for the reconstruction of wavefront distortions and adaptive optics system calibration was developed, combining deep learning with the local opti-mization algorithm. A trained convolutional neural network predicts an initial estimate of the wavefront distortions, which is subsequently improved by the L-BFGS algorithm. When optimizing the amplitudes of the Zernike modes with the L-BFGS algorithm, three cross-sections of the intensity distri-bution were used: at the focal plane, and at two defocused planes with positive and negative defocus. Numerical experiments demonstrate that the hybrid method achieves high accuracy in the reconstruction of wavefront dis-tortions. The mean RMS reconstruction error is on the or-der of 10 −2λ across an RMS of wavefront distortions rang-ing from 0 to 1 .3λ , regardless of the number of modes in the data. The correction efficiency exceeds 0 .99 in 80% of the cases and drops below 0 .75 in fewer than 0.5% of the instances. The computational time is on the order of a few seconds on a CPU, demonstrating practical applicability. By contrast, relying solely on the neural network, while stable, yields an average RMS error five times higher than that of the hybrid method and fails to achieve an efficiency above 0.95 for any combination of the magnitude of the wavefront distortions and the number of Zernike modes. Applying the L-BFGS algorithm with zero or random initialization yields efficiencies approaching unity only for small wavefront dis-tortions. However, as the magnitude of the wavefront distor-tions or the number of Zernike modes increases, the efficiency decreases. Consequently, the overall accuracy is significantly lower than that achieved by the hybrid method. Experimental validation demonstrates the practical applica-bility of the developed method. The hybrid method converges within 2 to 4 iterations, achieving a Strehl ratio of 0 .96 ± 0.02 and reducing the residual RMS of the wavefront distortions to 0 .032 λ . Discrepancies in the convergence rates between the experimental and numerical results are attributed to mea-surement noise, spatial scale calibration uncertainties, and in-herent errors in both the sensing and correction of the wave-front distortions. Incorporating the third intensity distribution as a regularizing constraint during the optimization using the L-BFGS algorithm ensures the robustness of the method and maintains a stable correction performance post-convergence, thereby preventing error accumulation. 

> ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors acknowledge the support of the Ministry of Science and Higher Education of the Russian Federation, project FSWR-2026-0007 (Y.R., V.V., and I.M., development of the hybrid method, computational experiments), project FFUF–2024–0038 (A.K., K.B., S.P., A.S., physical experi-ments, preprocessing of experimental data). The hardware platform for the experiment was provided with the support of the Russian Science Foundation project No. 25-62-00019. The authors acknowledge the use of computational resources provided by Lobachevsky University. 

> DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT

The data that support the findings of this study are openly available in https://cloud.unn.ru/s/6Z5eeTsxi9is6RA.    

> 1B. H. Dean, D. L. Aronstein, J. S. Smith, R. Shiri, and D. S. Acton, “Phase retrieval algorithm for jwst flight and testbed telescope,” in Space telescopes and instrumentation I: optical, infrared, and millimeter , Vol. 6265 (SPIE, 2006) pp. 314–330.
> 2J. R. Fienup, J. C. Marron, T. J. Schulz, and J. H. Seldin, “Hubble space telescope characterized by using phase-retrieval algorithms,” Applied op-tics 32 , 1747–1767 (1993).

Hybrid deep learning-based phase diversity method for wavefront reconstruction 12 

> 3

Y. Jin, J. Chen, C. Wu, Z. Chen, X. Zhang, H.-l. Shen, W. Gong, and K. Si, “Wavefront reconstruction based on deep transfer learning for microscopy,” Optics Express 28 , 20738–20747 (2020). 

> 4

M. J. Booth, “Adaptive optical microscopy: the ongoing quest for a perfect image,” Light: Science & Applications 3, e165–e165 (2014). 

> 5

Y. N. Sulai and A. Dubra, “Non-common path aberration correction in an adaptive optics scanning ophthalmoscope,” Biomedical optics express 5,3059–3073 (2014). 

> 6

F. Bennet, O. Thearle, L. Roberts, J. Smith, J. Spollard, D. Shaddock, and P. Lam, “Free-space quantum communication link with adaptive optics,” in 

In Proc. of 2018 Advanced Maui Optical and Space Surveillance Technolo-gies Conference (AMOS), Hawaii (2018). 

> 7

R. K. Tyson, “Adaptive optics and ground-to-space laser communications,” Applied optics 35 , 3640–3646 (1996). 

> 8

Z. Li and X. Zhao, “Bp artificial neural network based wave front correction for sensor-less free space optics communication,” Optics Communications 

385 , 219–228 (2017). 

> 9

A. A. Soloviev, K. F. Burdonov, V. N. Ginzburg, M. Y. Glyavin, R. S. Zem-skov, A. V. Kotov, A. A. Kochetkov, A. A. Kuzmin, A. A. Murzanev, I. B. Mukhin, et al. , “Research in plasma physics and particle acceleration using the pearl petawatt laser,” Uspekhi Fizicheskikh Nauk 194 , 313–335 (2024). 

> 10

J. W. Yoon, C. Jeon, J. Shin, S. K. Lee, H. W. Lee, I. W. Choi, H. T. Kim, J. H. Sung, and C. H. Nam, “Achieving the laser intensity of 5.5 ×

1022 w/cm2 with a wavefront-corrected multi-pw laser,” Optics express 27 ,20412–20420 (2019). 

> 11

A. S. Pirozhkov, Y. Fukuda, M. Nishiuchi, H. Kiriyama, A. Sagisaka, K. Ogura, M. Mori, M. Kishimoto, H. Sakaki, N. P. Dover, et al. , “Ap-proaching the diffraction-limited, bandwidth-limited petawatt,” Optics ex-press 25 , 20486–20501 (2017). 

> 12

J.-F. Sauvage, T. Fusco, G. Rousset, and C. Petit, “Calibration and prec-ompensation of noncommon path aberrations for extreme adaptive optics,” Journal of the Optical Society of America A 24 , 2334–2346 (2007). 

> 13

R. W. Gerchberg, “A practical algorithm for the determination of the phase from image and diffraction plane pictures,” Optik 35 , 237–246 (1972). 

> 14

R. A. Gonsalves, “Phase retrieval and diversity in adaptive optics,” Optical Engineering 21 , 829–832 (1982). 

> 15

P. Piatrou and M. Roggemann, “Beaconless stochastic parallel gradient de-scent laser beam control: numerical experiments,” Applied optics 46 , 6831– 6842 (2007). 

> 16

P. Yang, M. Ao, Y. Liu, B. Xu, and W. Jiang, “Intracavity transverse modes controlled by a genetic algorithm based on zernike mode coefficients,” Op-tics express 15 , 17051–17062 (2007). 

> 17

S. W. Paine and J. R. Fienup, “Machine learning for improved image-based wavefront sensing,” Optics letters 43 , 1235–1238 (2018). 

> 18

G. Orban De Xivry, M. Quesnel, P. Vanberg, O. Absil, and G. Louppe, “Focal plane wavefront sensing using machine learning: performance of convolutional neural networks compared to fundamental limits,” Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 505 , 5702–5713 (2021). 

> 19

A. Kotov, Y. A. Rodimkov, I. Meyerov, V. Volokitin, S. Perevalov, K. Bur-donov, R. Zemskov, and A. Soloviev, “Retrieval of the wavefront of a laser beam via the analysis of the in-focus and out-of-focus intensity distributions with a convolutional neural network,” Radiophysics and Quantum Electron-ics , 1–6 (2025). 

> 20

D. C. Liu and J. Nocedal, “On the limited memory bfgs method for large scale optimization,” Mathematical programming 45 , 503–528 (1989). 

> 21

J. C. Wyant and K. Creath, “Basic wavefront aberration theory for optical metrology,” Applied optics and optical engineering 11 , 28–39 (1992). 

> 22

J. V. Sheldakova, A. L. Rukosuev, and A. V. Kudryashov, “Genetic and hill-climbing algorithms for laser beam correction,” in Laser Resonators and Beam Control VII , Vol. 5333 (SPIE, 2004) pp. 106–111. 

> 23

P. Yang, W. Yang, Y. Liu, S. Hu, M. Ao, B. Xu, and W. Jiang, “19-element sensorless adaptive optical system based on modified hill-climbing and ge-netic algorithms,” in 3rd International Symposium on Advanced Optical Manufacturing and Testing Technologies: Optical Test and Measurement Technology and Equipment , Vol. 6723 (SPIE, 2007) pp. 36–42. 

> 24

S. P. Poland, A. J. Wright, and J. M. Girkin, “Evaluation of fitness pa-rameters used in an iterative approach to aberration correction in optical sectioning microscopy,” Applied optics 47 , 731–736 (2008). 

> 25

J. Cao, X. Zhao, Z. Li, W. Liu, and Y. Song, “Stochastic parallel gradient descent laser beam control algorithm for atmospheric compensation in free space optical communication,” Optik 125 , 6142–6147 (2014). 

> 26

R. El-Agmy, H. Bulte, A. Greenaway, and D. Reid, “Adaptive beam profile control using a simulated annealing algorithm,” Optics Express 13 , 6085– 6091 (2005). 

> 27

S. Zommer, E. Ribak, S. Lipson, and J. Adler, “Simulated annealing in ocular adaptive optics,” Optics letters 31 , 939–941 (2006). 

> 28

H. Ke, B. Xu, Z. Xu, L. Wen, P. Yang, S. Wang, and L. Dong, “Self-learning control for wavefront sensorless adaptive optics system through deep reinforcement learning,” Optik 178 , 785–793 (2019). 

> 29

R. Landman, S. Y. Haffert, V. M. Radhakrishnan, and C. U. Keller, “Self-optimizing adaptive optics control with reinforcement learning for high-contrast imaging,” Journal of Astronomical Telescopes, Instruments, and Systems 7, 039002–039002 (2021). 

> 30

A. V. Kotov, S. E. Perevalov, M. V. Starodubtsev, R. S. Zemskov, A. G. Alexandrov, I. V. Galaktionov, A. V. Kudryashov, V. V. Samarkin, and A. A. Soloviev, “Adaptive system for correcting optical aberrations of high-power lasers with dynamic determination of the reference wavefront,” Quantum Electronics 51 , 593–596 (2021). 

> 31

H. Ma, Q. Zhou, X. Xu, S. Du, and Z. Liu, “Full-field unsymmetrical beam shaping for decreasing and homogenizing the thermal deformation of optical element in a beam control system,” Optics Express 19 , A1037– A1050 (2011). 

> 32

Y. Liu, J. Ma, B. Li, and J. Chu, “Hill-climbing algorithm based on zernike modes for wavefront sensorless adaptive optics,” Optical Engineering 52 ,016601–016601 (2013). 

> 33

E. Durech, W. Newberry, J. Franke, and M. V. Sarunic, “Wavefront sensor-less adaptive optics using deep reinforcement learning,” Biomedical optics express 12 , 5423–5438 (2021). 

> 34

Y. Gutierrez, J. Mazoyer, L. M. Mugnier, O. Herscovici-Schiller, and B. Abeloos, “Image-based wavefront correction using model-free rein-forcement learning,” Optics Express 32 , 31247–31269 (2024). 

> 35

J. R. Fienup, “Phase-retrieval algorithms for a complicated optical system,” Applied optics 32 , 1737–1746 (1993). 

> 36

R. G. Paxman, T. J. Schulz, and J. R. Fienup, “Joint estimation of object and aberrations by using phase diversity,” Journal of the Optical Society of America A 9, 1072–1085 (1992). 

> 37

P. Zhang, C. Yang, Z. Xu, Z. Cao, Q. Mu, and L. Xuan, “Hybrid particle swarm global optimization algorithm for phase diversity phase retrieval,” Optics Express 24 , 25704–25717 (2016). 

> 38

Z. Zhou, Y. Nie, Q. Fu, Q. Liu, and J. Zhang, “Robust statistical phase-diversity method for high-accuracy wavefront sensing,” Optics and Lasers in Engineering 137 , 106335 (2021). 

> 39

Y. Jin, Y. Zhang, L. Hu, H. Huang, Q. Xu, X. Zhu, L. Huang, Y. Zheng, H.-L. Shen, W. Gong, et al. , “Machine learning guided rapid focusing with sensor-less aberration corrections,” Optics express 26 , 30162–30171 (2018). 

> 40

Y. Li, D. Yue, and Y. He, “Prediction of wavefront distortion for wave-front sensorless adaptive optics based on deep learning,” Applied Optics 

61 , 4168–4176 (2022). 

> 41

T. Andersen, M. Owner-Petersen, and A. Enmark, “Image-based wave-front sensing for astronomy using neural networks,” Journal of Astronomi-cal Telescopes, Instruments, and Systems 6, 034002–034002 (2020). 

> 42

P.-O. Vanberg et al. , “Machine learning for image-based wavefront sens-ing,” (2019). 

> 43

H. Guo, Y. Xu, Q. Li, S. Du, D. He, Q. Wang, and Y. Huang, “Improved ma-chine learning approach for wavefront sensing,” Sensors 19 , 3533 (2019). 

> 44

S. W. Paine and J. R. Fienup, “Smart starting guesses from machine learning for phase retrieval,” in Space Telescopes and Instrumentation 2018: Opti-cal, Infrared, and Millimeter Wave , Vol. 10698 (SPIE, 2018) pp. 1681– 1687. 

> 45

H. Gu, M. Liu, H. Liu, X. Yang, and W. Liu, “An algorithm combining convolutional neural networks with spgd for slao in fsoc,” Optics Commu-nications 475 , 126243 (2020). 

> 46

Z. Zhou, Q. Fu, J. Zhang, and Y. Nie, “Generalization of learned fourier-based phase-diversity wavefront sensing,” Optics Express 31 , 11729–11744 (2023). 

> 47

Y. Wang, M. Wen, and H. Ma, “Improved phase diversity wavefront sens-ing with a deep learning-driven hybrid optimization approach,” Photonics ,

12 , 235 (2025). Hybrid deep learning-based phase diversity method for wavefront reconstruction 13 

> 48

O. Ronneberger, P. Fischer, and T. Brox, “U-net: Convolutional networks for biomedical image segmentation,” in International Conference on Med-ical image computing and computer-assisted intervention (Springer, 2015) pp. 234–241. 

> 49

D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980 (2014). 

> 50

Y. A. Rodimkov, “Using circular buffer to improve accuracy of wavefront distortion reconstruction using deep learning methods for deformable mir-ror control problems,” Transactions of NNSTU n.a. R.E. Alekseev , 32–42 (2026). 

> 51

J. Nocedal and S. J. Wright, Numerical optimization (Springer, 2006). 

> 52

A. L. Rukosuev, A. Alexandrov, V. Y. Zavalova, V. V. Samarkin, and A. V. Kudryashov, “Adaptive optical system based on bimorph mirror and shack-hartmann wavefront sensor,” in High-Resolution Wavefront Control: Meth-ods, Devices, and Applications III , Vol. 4493 (SPIE, 2002) pp. 261–268. 

> 53

A. A. Soloviev, A. V. Kotov, S. E. Perevalov, M. V. Esyunin, M. V. Star-odubtsev, A. G. Alexandrov, I. V. Galaktionov, V. V. Samarkin, A. V. Kudryashov, V. N. Ginzburg, et al. , “Adaptive system for wavefront cor-rection of the pearl laser facility,” Kvantovaya Elektronika 50 , 1115–1122 (2020). 

> 54

AKA Optics, Accessed: 2026-04-30.