Title: Dynamic Edge Coloring of Forests

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.09711v1

Published Time: Tue, 12 May 2026 02:17:15 GMT

Number of Pages: 50

Markdown Content:
# Dynamic Edge Coloring of Forests 

Haim Kaplan ∗ David Naori ∗ Yaniv Sadeh ∗

Abstract 

In the dynamic edge coloring problem, one has to maintain a graph of maximum degree ∆ with at most ∆ + c colors, given updates to the edges of the graph. An important objective is to minimize the recourse , which is the number of edges being recolored. We study this problem on forests, which is a natural yet nontrivial restriction of the prob-lem. We consider the problem in both incremental (edges are only inserted) and fully dynamic 

(edges may be deleted) models. In the deterministic setting, we show that the natural greedy algorithm achieves O( 1 

> c+√∆

) amortized recourse in the incremental model, and this is tight up to tie-breaking. In contrast, in a fully dynamic forest, greedy can be forced to have Ω(log ∆ n)amortized recourse. To partially alleviate this limitation of greedy, we show an optimal non-greedy algorithm with O(1) amortized recourse for rooted fully dynamic forests and c = ∆ − 2. In the randomized setting, we give a natural distribution-maintaining algorithm that achieves Θ( 1∆ ) expected amortized recourse in the incremental model and Θ(min { ∆ 

> c

, log ∆ n}) expected recourse in the dynamic model. These randomized results are optimal for c = 0. 

> ∗

The Blavatnik School of Computer Science and AI, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel. Emails: {haimk, dnaori, yanivsadeh }@tau.ac.il . This research was supported by ISF grant number 1156/23 and the Blavatnik research Foundation. 

1

> arXiv:2605.09711v1 [cs.DS] 10 May 2026

# Contents 

1 Introduction 3

1.1 Preliminaries and Main Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41.2 Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5

2 Technical Overview 7

2.1 Deterministic Algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72.1.1 Incremental Forests (Insertions Only) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72.1.2 Fully Dynamic Forests (Insertions and Deletions) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 82.2 Randomized Algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11 2.2.1 A Randomized Distribution-Maintaining Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12 2.2.2 Recourse Analysis (Incremental and Fully Dynamic Forests) . . . . . . . . . . 12 

3 Deterministic Algorithms: A Formal Account 15 

3.1 Incremental Forests (Insertions Only) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16 3.2 Fully Dynamic Forests (Insertions and Deletions) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18 3.2.1 Greedy Logarithmic Amortized Recourse . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21 3.2.2 O(1) Recourse with 2∆ − 2 Colors on Rooted Forests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24 3.3 Greedy Algorithms: Additional Variants and Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26 3.3.1 Greedy Optimality for ∆ = 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27 3.3.2 The Greedy Algorithms Are Efficient on Trees . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28 3.3.3 What Changes for the new Greedy Variants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29 

4 Randomized Algorithms: A Formal Account 31 

4.1 A Randomized Distribution-Maintaining Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31 4.1.1 Rooted Forests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31 4.1.2 General (unrooted) Forests via Rerooting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36 4.2 Recourse Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37 4.2.1 Incremental Forests (Insertions Only) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38 4.2.2 Fully Dynamic Forests (Insertions and Deletions) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42 

5 Concluding Remarks 44 A Additional Technical Analyses 45 

A.1 Basic Summation Calculus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45 A.2 Sublinear Worst-Case Recourse for ∆ Edge Coloring . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45 A.3 Detailed Analysis of the Relation between n to ∆ and c . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48 21 Introduction 

In the classical edge coloring problem, the goal is to color the edges of a graph so that no two incident edges share the same color, while using as few colors as possible. Any graph of maximum degree ∆ requires at least ∆ colors, since all edges incident to a maximum-degree vertex must receive distinct colors. Vizing’s theorem [Viz64] shows that ∆ + 1 colors always suffice, while K¨ onig’s theorem [K¨ on16] shows that ∆ colors are enough for bipartite graphs, and hence for forests. In the online version of the problem, the edges are revealed one by one, and each edge must be colored irrevocably upon arrival using a palette of κ colors. The goal is again to keep κ as small as possible. The classical online greedy algorithm achieves this with κ = 2∆ − 1 colors, and the lower bound of Bar-Noy et al. [BNMN92] demonstrates that, in general, no online algorithm can use fewer colors. Dynamic edge-coloring differs from the online setting by allowing recourse , that is, the recol-oring of previously colored edges. More precisely, we need to maintain a proper κ-edge-coloring under a sequence of updates. Updates consist of edge insertions and deletions, while the maximum degree remains at most ∆ throughout. The case where edges can only be inserted (as in the online setting) is called the incremental model , while the case allowing both insertions and deletions is called the fully dynamic model . As before, we want to keep κ as small as possible, and, additionally, we want to minimize the number of recolored edges per update. It is convenient to write the palette size κ as κ = ∆ + c, where c ≥ 0. Thus, with c ≥ ∆ − 1, the online greedy algorithm maintains proper coloring with zero recourse. On the other hand, by the online lower bound above, with c < ∆ − 1, recourse is necessary, even without deletions. Therefore, the goal is to design dynamic algorithms that maintain proper (∆ + c)-edge-coloring for c ≤ ∆ − 2while minimizing the recourse per update. Ultimately, a desirable objective is to obtain per-update recourse bounds that are independent of the graph size n. This leads to the following guiding question: Can we maintain a proper (∆ + c)-edge-coloring with per-update recourse independent of n

for c ≤ ∆ − 2? How does the answer depend on c?Without additional assumptions, the general picture remains largely unsettled. The known positive results on this question require ∆ to be sufficiently large as a function of n. Interestingly, a large ∆ assumption also makes it possible to beat the online 2∆ − 1 barrier and use a few extra colors with no recourse at all [BSVW24]. Thus, such results may not capture the power of recourse itself. On the other hand, existing lower bounds do not rule out a positive answer without such assumptions. Existing lower bounds are state-based and worst-case: they show that certain colored states require high recourse to extend, but not that every algorithm can be forced into such a state, nor that this can happen often enough to imply large amortized recourse. We study this question on forests. Forests are arguably the simplest graph class, yet, the known landscape remains essentially the same as in the general setting. The online lower bound already holds on forests, so even the incremental setting remains nontrivial (requiring recourse). Furthermore, since forests are ∆-colorable, we can ask the strongest form of our guiding question, namely, what can be achieved with no extra colors at all ( c = 0)? Moreover, offline edge coloring of forests is straightforward, and thus restricting our focus to this class cleanly isolates the algorithmic difficulties that arise from the dynamic setting. We study both deterministic and randomized algorithms for this problem, focusing on two of the simplest and most natural algorithmic approaches. On the deterministic side, we focus on 3the greedy algorithm, henceforth Greedy , which restores a proper coloring after each update by recoloring as few edges as possible. On the randomized side, we focus on a distribution-maintenance 

algorithm, henceforth DistMaint , which maintains a highly random proper edge-coloring, with the goal of reducing the probability of reaching hard-to-extend states in hopes of achieving small expected recourse. As our results show, these approaches admit a rich range of recourse bounds across the dynamic models we study. On the deterministic side, we show a separation between the incremental and fully dynamic models. In the incremental model, we show that Greedy achieves sub-constant amortized recourse 

O( 1 

> c+√∆

), and that this is tight for Greedy under some tie-breaking rule. In contrast, we show that in the fully dynamic model, any deterministic algorithm must incur Ω(1) amortized recourse. We also demonstrate that Greedy can be forced to incur Ω(log ∆ n) amortized recourse, even in the more restricted rooted-forest setting. To contrast the limitations of Greedy , we give a non-greedy deterministic algorithm that achieves O(1) amortized recourse with c = ∆ − 2 in the rooted-forest setting, where the Ω(1) lower bound still applies, and is therefore asymptotically optimal. On the randomized side, we obtain stronger upper bounds, and asymptotically optimal bounds for c = 0. In the incremental setting, we show that DistMaint achieves Θ(1 /∆) expected amor-tized recourse, and prove a matching lower bound for any algorithm when c = 0. In the fully dynamic model, we show that DistMaint achieves Θ(min {∆/c, log κ−1 n}) expected recourse per-update, which, for c = 0, becomes Θ(log ∆−1 n). In this model too, we prove a matching lower bound for any algorithm when c = 0. Together, our results answer the first part of the guiding question on forests. In the incremental model, recourse independent of n is achievable even with no extra colors. In the fully dynamic model, this is impossible for c = 0, and becomes achievable again once extra colors are available. The dependence on c, however, remains only partially understood. 

Paper organization. The remainder of this section introduces notations and our main results (Section 1.1) and discusses related work (Section 1.2). In Section 2, we provide a technical overview of our deterministic and randomized approaches. Section 3 then provides a complete formal account for the deterministic setting, and Section 4 provides the same for the randomized setting. We conclude in Section 5 with open questions. Appendix A contains supplementary technical details. 

1.1 Preliminaries and Main Results 

We study a dynamic forest F = ( V, E ) where |V | = n is a fixed set of vertices. Its set of edges E

is initially empty and changes dynamically, by insertions, and/or deletions. The maximum degree of any vertex, at any time, is bounded by ∆ which is known in advance. In the incremental model , only insertions are allowed, thus the sequence has at most n − 1insertions regardless of ∆, unlike general graphs, which could accommodate Θ( n · ∆) insertions. In the fully dynamic model , edges may also be deleted, so we are still constrained to at most n − 1existing edges at any given time, but deletions remove the hard bound on the number of updates and give flexibility to change the forest’s topology. 1

Moving on from the topology to the coloring, we are given in advance a palette of size κ colors to color the edges, where κ = ∆ + c for c ≥ 0. We say that a color α is available or free at a vertex 

v if no edge incident to v is colored α. Similarly, α is available for an edge e = ( u, v ) if it is available both at u and v. Formally, we denote the set (sub-palette) of colors available at a vertex v by A(v), and for an edge e = ( u, v ) we have A(e) = A(u) ∩ A(v). With κ ≥ 2∆ − 1 every new edge e satisfies   

> 1The decremental model is irrelevant to edge coloring, which remains proper under deletions.

4|A(e)| ≥ 1, so we never need to recolor edges to update the graph. We refer to the recoloring of a previously colored edge as recourse . In particular, coloring a new edge is not considered recourse. We measure recourse with respect to a single update. For deterministic algorithms, the worst-case recourse is the maximum recourse due to a single update, while amortized recourse is the average recourse over the entire update sequence. For randomized algorithms, the recourse of an update is a random variable. We distinguish between expected recourse per-update , which bounds the expected recourse of each fixed update in the sequence, and expected amortized recourse , which is the expected average recourse over the whole sequence. Throughout the paper, update sequences start from the empty forest. The formal statement of our problem is as follows. 

Problem 1. Given a dynamic forest with maximum degree ∆, and κ = ∆ + c colors, maintain a dynamic forest such that the amortized recourse of an update is minimized. We clarify that in Problem 1, the term “dynamic forest” refers to either incremental or fully dynamic, and that “amortized recourse” may refer to expected amortized recourse when the algo-rithm under consideration is randomized. These nuances will be clear in the context of the results that we present. As noted above, the problem is only interesting when c ≤ ∆ − 2. Furthermore, in the setting of forests, ∆ edge coloring is always possible, so c = 0 is always a consideration. Therefore, it is assumed throughout the paper that c ∈ [0 , ∆ − 2]. When statements are restricted, we detail the range of c clearly, for example if c ≥ 1 or c = ∆ − 2. As for ∆, throughout the paper we assume that ∆ ≥ 3, with one exception of Section 3.3.1 that solves the problem for ∆ = 2. This is an almost trivial case because the forest is just a collection of paths. ∆ = 1 is a trivial matching with no recourse at all. Table 1 summarizes our main results. Section 3 includes additional results.                                                                               

> Thm. Algorithm Model Colors Recourse Bound Notes 2.1 Greedy Incremental c≥0O(1
> c+√∆)Any tie-breaks. 2.2 Greedy Incremental c≥0Ω( 1
> c+√∆)Specific tie-breaks. 2.4 Greedy Fully dynamic c≥0Ω(log ∆n)Any tie-breaks. 2.3 Deterministic Fully dynamic c≥0Ω(1) 2.7 ColorfulPath Fully dynamic 2∆ −2O(1) Deterministic; Rooted-forest. 2.10 DistMaint Incremental c≥0Θ( 1∆)In expectation. 2.11 Any Incremental c= 0 Ω( 1∆)In expectation. 2.12 DistMaint Fully dynamic c≥0O(min {∆
> c,log ∆n})In expectation. 2.13 Any Fully dynamic c= 0 Ω(log ∆n)

Table 1: A summary of amortized recourse bounds, for ∆ ≥ 3 and c ∈ [0 , ∆ − 2]. The model can be incremental or fully dynamic. Greedy minimizes the recourse on each update. DistMaint maintains the uniform distribution over all proper edge-colorings. ColorfulPath assumes a rooted forest (Definition 2.6). The bound of Theorem 2.12 for c = 0 is O(log ∆ n). 

1.2 Related Work 

The study of online edge coloring was initiated by [BNMN92]. See [BSVW24, BSVW25] for recent results and further references. The line of work on dynamic edge coloring is more recent. The works [DHZ19,Ber22,Chr23,BD25] study multi-Vizing chains that give worst-case recourse bounds, whose state of the art is being poly-logarithmic in n and polynomial in ∆ under different tradeoffs 5and palette sizes. Other works that use other techniques include the Nibbling Method [BCPS24b, BGW21] and Shift Trees [SK26]. Dynamic graphs with low arboricity, a natural generalization of forests, have also been studied recently [BCPS24a, CRV24, SK26]. Edge coloring is also extensively studied in the distributed model, where vertices locally compute consistent edge colors for their adjacent edges. Here the objective is commonly to minimize the number of communication rounds. See [CHL +18] for a summary of this rich literature, and [SV19, Ber22, Chr23, Dav23] for recent advances. This setting is relevant to the dynamic model because communication lower bounds imply lower bounds on the diameter (and thus size) of the components requiring recoloring. However, this is not a direct reduction, as it is not a priori clear whether centralized dynamic algorithms can be forced into the specific worst-case states considered by distributed models. Beyond the models already discussed, edge coloring has been widely studied both as a fun-damental combinatorial question and within other computational frameworks [Sti12, Cra24]. Two additional settings are adjacent to our context. The first is the offline centralized model , the orig-inal focus of Vizing’s foundational work [Viz64, Viz65a, Viz65b], which has seen significant recent progress [ABB +25, BD25]. The second is the streaming model , an online framework where the pri-mary objective is memory efficiency [CMZ24, GS24, CCZ25]. Across all these models, a substantial body of work also focuses on specific graph classes, such as bipartite, planar, and generalizations of planar graphs. 62 Technical Overview 

2.1 Deterministic Algorithms 

We begin with the deterministic setting. We study the natural greedy algorithm that minimizes the recourse due to each update, henceforth Greedy . Greedy is arguably the simplest algorithm to describe, so it is only natural to study it first. 2 In section 3.3.3 we also study another variant named GreedyShift .

Greedy can be computed easily on forests, as detailed in Section 3.3. We also show that 

Greedy is asymptotically optimal in the degenerate case of ∆ = 2 where trees are paths. This further motivates the study of Greedy , for ∆ ≥ 3. We study the recourse in two models. First, in the incremental model, where edges are only inserted, we show that a greedy approach achieves a very low amortized recourse. Second, in the fully dynamic model, we demonstrate that this greedy strategy performs poorly. To address this, we introduce a non-greedy algorithm, ColorfulPath , that is optimal up to a constant factor, within a restricted setting. 

2.1.1 Incremental Forests (Insertions Only) 

A forest has at most n − 1 edges regardless of ∆, unlike in general graphs that could accommodate Θ( n · ∆) edges. Therefore, the average degree of a vertex in a forest is typically smaller which intuitively makes edge coloring easier. Nevertheless, it is known that the worst-case recourse can be large even in trees [SK26]. Interestingly, Theorem 2.1 shows that the amortized recourse is sub-constant. 

Theorem 2.1. Assume only insertions to a forest with maximum degree ∆ ≥ 3. Greedy has amortized recourse O

 1

> c+√∆



.Proof Sketch. We charge the recourse to the edges such that each edge is charged O( 1 

> c+√∆

) recourse. To define the charging we classify each insertion either as heavy or light . An insertion is heavy if it links trees both having at least ∆+ c 

> 2

edges, and light otherwise. Let T be the smaller tree connected by an insertion of an edge e = ( u, v ). If this insertion is heavy then we charge its recourse equally to the edges of T . If c ≥ 1 this recourse is O(log (c+1) |E(T )|)by [SK26], and if c = 0 we show that it is O( 1∆−2 · plg |E(T )| · 2

√2 lg |E(T )|). 3 Since each time an edge e is charged by a heavy insertion the size of the tree containing it at least doubles, we can show that the total charge per edge by heavy insertions is O( log (c+1) ∆∆ ) for c ≥ 1 and O( 1∆ ) for 

c = 0 (which is dominated by the claimed bound). If the insertion of e is light then T may be too small to pay for the recourse, so we also charge edges incident to u, the endpoint of e in the larger tree. Specifically, since T is small we show that the recourse is either 0 or 1, and in case it is 1 then deg( u) ≥ ∆+ c 

> 2

. We aggregate this recourse at 

u and at the end of the sequence distribute it evenly among the edges incident to u and the edges in trees attached to u by these light insertions. A balancing argument shows that this charge per edge is maximized when deg( u) = ∆, u is on the larger side of Θ( √∆) light insertions that incur a unit of recourse, and each has on average Θ( c + √∆) edges on the smaller subtree attached to 

u. Then Θ( √∆) recourse is amortized over Θ(∆ + c · √∆) edges, and we get O( 1 

> c+√∆

) amortized light recourse.   

> 2Technically Greedy is a family of algorithms, that differ by their tie-breaking rules.
> 3We use lg for the logarithm in base 2.

7Theorem 2.1 shows that greedy coloring is efficient in terms of recourse when edges are only in-serted: The recourse ranges from O( 1√∆ ) for c = O(√∆) down to O( 1∆ ) for c = Ω(∆). Theorem 2.2 below shows that this analysis is tight for some tie-breaking rule. 

Theorem 2.2. There exists an insertion sequence on a forest of maximum degree ∆ ≥ 3, and a tie-breaking rule, such that Greedy has amortized recourse Ω( 1 

> c+√∆

).

2.1.2 Fully Dynamic Forests (Insertions and Deletions) 

When the graph is fully dynamic, the problem is harder. In general, o(1) amortized recourse is no longer possible as Theorem 2.3 below shows. Concretely, we show that for a sufficiently large n,the amortized recourse is Ω(1). Details of what is “sufficiently large” appear in Section A.3. 

Theorem 2.3. There exists n0 = n0(∆ , c ) such that for every deterministic algorithm ALG , every 

n ≥ n0, and every ϵ > 0, there is an update sequence on an n-vertex forest, such that the amortized recourse of ALG on this sequence is greater than 1/2 − ϵ. The amortized recourse is already Ω(1) 

after O(n0) updates. Proof. Let P be the family of sub-palettes of [ κ] of size ∆ − 1. For each such sub-palette P ∈ P ,we associate a unique owner vertex oP . From the remaining vertices, we, who play the role of the adversary, create N ≡ (c + 1) · |P| + 1 disjoint stars of degree ∆ − 1. n0 is the number of vertices needed for this construction. For a star S, we refer to the set of colors P ∈ P used on its leaf-edges as the palette of S.We now repeat the following step : take an isolated star and connect its center to the owner of its palette. Then, while there is a connected star whose palette has changed, we disconnect it from its owner. Observe that after each of our steps, at most c + 1 < ∆ stars can be connected to each owner. This is because all edges incident to oP must use distinct colors outside P , and there are only c + 1 such colors. Additionally, since N > (c + 1) · |P| , we can repeat this step indefinitely. At each step, we connect one star and may disconnect several others. Since there are at most 

c + 1 stars connected to each owner, after s steps we must have disconnected at least s − (c + 1) · |P| 

stars. Since we disconnect a star only if its palette has changed, it follows that at least s−(c+1) ·|P| 

edges have been recolored by the algorithm. The total number of updates we make in these s steps is at most 2 s, as each edge we delete was inserted in a previous step. In addition, we use at most 

n0 updates for the initial creation of the stars. Hence, the amortized recourse is at least s−(c+1) ·|P|  

> 2s+n0

,which is Ω(1) already for s = 2 · n0 and approaches 1 /2 as s → ∞ .Although Theorem 2.3 establishes a lower bound of Ω(1), which may appear small (a mere constant), contrast it with the incremental amortized recourse of Greedy (Theorem 2.1), which is O(∆ −ϵ) for ϵ ∈ [ 12 , 1], depending on c. Perhaps surprisingly, the same greedy algorithm that performs so well when there are only insertions, performs poorly in the fully dynamic model, incurring Ω(log ∆ n) amortized recourse. 

Theorem 2.4 (Greedy recourse) . Let ∆ ≥ 3. There exists a forest and coloring such that from this state onward, the amortized recourse of Greedy is Ω(log ∆ n). There exists n1 = n1(∆ , c ) such that for every n ≥ n1, this bad state can be reached from the empty graph. 

To give a high-level sketch, we need the following definition. 

Definition 2.5 (P -layered tree, P -star) . We say that a κ-colored rooted tree T (∆ ≥ 3) is P -layered for a sub-palette P ⊆ [κ] if: (1) T is full in the following sense: every non-leaf vertex at an 8Figure 1: An example for Definition 2.5 of a layered tree , for ∆ = 3, and κ = 4 with sub-palettes P =       

> {blue ,red }, and P={yellow ,green }. In layered coloring, the palette used by a vertex on edges towards its children uniquely determine the palette used by its children towards their children (the complement) and vice versa (unless it is a leaf).

even depth has |P | children, and every non-leaf vertex at an odd depth has |P | children where P

is the complementary sub-palette; 4 (2) The edge coloring of T is such that the edges from a vertex to its children are colored from P if its depth is even, and from P if its depth is odd. See Figure 1 for an example. If the tree is of depth 1 (i.e., a star graph) we refer to it as a P -star .

Proof Sketch of Theorem 2.4. The proof relies on analyzing P -layered trees. We show that when an edge is inserted between the roots of a P -layered and a P -layered trees, Greedy recolors exactly a full path from a root to a leaf v, and that the resulting combined tree, when we delete the edge of v, is itself a P -layered or a P -layered (depending on parity) rooted at the former parent of v.We start with two perfect layered trees, and perform a repeating cycle of 6 updates (3 deletions and 3 insertions) such that the path that Greedy recolors goes back-and-forth on the same edges, effectively undoing the changes so that by the end of the cycle we get back to the initial state. The topology, coloring and the cycle of updates are illustrated in Figure 2 and explained in its caption. The depths of the trees are Ω(log ∆ n) and therefore this expression lower bounds the amortized recourse. If the lower bound of Theorem 2.3 is tight, we should aim for a deterministic algorithm with 

O(1) amortized recourse. Theorem 2.4 rules out Greedy . Interestingly, if we assume that the forest is rooted (see Definition 2.6 below), and if the palette has 2∆ − 2 colors, then a very simple algorithm, which we call ColorfulPath , achieves O(1) recourse. 5 The exact claim is Theorem 2.7 below. Note that Theorem 2.3 also applies to rooted forests. 

Definition 2.6. A dynamic forest is rooted if it is a collection of trees, each with a fixed assigned root. An insertion must be of the form ( p, r ) where r is a root of its tree, that becomes a child of p.(If both are roots, the parent must be specified.) A deletion of ( u, v ) creates a new tree, such that if (without loss of generality) u remains reachable from the root of the tree that contained ( u, v ), then v becomes the root of the new tree. 

Theorem 2.7. Let ∆ ≥ 3, and let F be a dynamic rooted forest, initially empty. ColorfulPath 

maintains 2∆ −2 edge coloring on F with O(1) amortized recourse. This is optimal up to a constant factor, matching the lower bound of Theorem 2.3.                       

> 4In particular, this means that |P|+|P|=κand that |P|,|P| ≤ ∆−1; So also, |P|,|P| ≥ c+ 1.
> 5Note that the additional rooting information does not help Greedy , which by definition is agnostic to any extra information and only cares to minimize the recourse of each update.

9Figure 2: Visualization for the proof of Theorem 2.4, with sub-palettes P = {blue , red }, and P =                        

> {yellow ,green }.Bicolored squares abstract layered subtrees where the two colors are used in the next layer. Note that the depth of these subtrees is not illustrated in this figure. The actual depths are as follows: In the initial state we have two perfect layered trees where each leaf is of depth dfor d= Θ(log ∆n). The distance from rito uiin edges is ⌊d
> 3⌋ − (i−1) for i∈ { 1,2}(chosen differently to prevent ties). The cycle of updates is as follows: Starting from the initial position, delete ( u1, r 4) and ( u2, r 3) to get 4 trees, then insert (r1, r 2), insert ( u2, r 3), delete ( r1, r 2), and finally insert ( u1, r 4). This costs Θ(log ∆n) recourse and returns to the same initial state.

The high level idea of ColorfulPath is as follows, and it is exemplified in Figure 3. When we insert an edge e = ( p, r ) that connects p as the parent of a root r, we shift colors upwards in the tree, along a downward path from r, as follows. The edge e = ( p, r ) is initially uncolored. If it has an available color (i.e. A(p) ∩ A(r)̸ = ∅) we just use it and finish. Otherwise, if r has a child 

v such that ( r, v ) has an available color α ∈ A(r) ∩ A(v) then it must be that the current color β

of ( r, v ) is in A(p) (this follows since we have 2∆ − 2 colors and no free color for ( p, r )). So we shift β from ( r, v ) to ( p, r ), recur on ( r, v ) and finish in the next step (by coloring it α). If no edge (r, v ) has a free color, we pick an edge ( r, v ) whose color is different from the color of the edge 

e′′ ≡ (grandparent (p), parent (p)) (if such e′′ exists), shift its color to ( p, r ) (which again is possible since we have 2∆ − 2 colors and no free color for ( p, r )), and recur on ( r, v ) which is now uncolored. The choice color (e)̸ = color (e′′ ) essentially guarantees that we have an available color for the edge between them, e′, when we reach it next time: Suppose that we pick the color α for an edge 

e = ( v, w ) whose parent is e′ = ( u, v ) and its grandparent is e′′ = ( z, u ), in a recoloring that is not last or next to last (as part of the whole recoloring due to the recent insertion). Then by coloring 

e with a color α̸ = β where β = color (e′′ ), we guarantee that β ∈ A(v) (it was surely in A(v)when we shifted β from e′ to e′′ ). Since trees are rooted, next time we reach e′ in a preceding step we will shift β from e′′ upwards, vacating it so that β ∈ A(u) and therefore β ∈ A(e′). Thus the update would terminate before reaching e again, assuming that no additional updates occur in the neighbourhood of e′. In the proof we formalize this using a potential argument showing that if the recourse is high, the algorithm guarantees that all but O(1) of the recolored edges will have an 10 available color in a future re-visit.  

> (a) (b)
> (c)

Figure 3: Illustration of the recoloring process of ColorfulPath . ∆ = 3, and arrows indicate the rooting of the tree. Each sub-figure is mid-way of applying ColorfulPath and dashed colors are colors that were already shifted upwards. The gray edge is the currently (unique) uncolored edge, and the palette is {blue , red , yellow , green }. In (a) a recoloring path reached e. Assuming that we cannot stop on e (as in the figure) or on any of its children, it takes not-yellow from its children because color (e′′ ) = yellow. In this example e takes green, and in (b) we see it in solid green. The update in (b) happens sometime in the future, after ( x, y ) was deleted, ( x, y ′) was inserted, z′ was attached instead of z, and some other updates possibly happened but not around e′. Now, when the recoloring path arrives at e′′ it cannot stop, but it does have a single look-ahead towards e′. So 

e′′ takes the color of e′, and since yellow ∈ A(e′), in (c) the recoloring can stop on e′. We ensure yellow ∈ A(v) by not shifting yellow to e in the application of ColorfulPath in (a), and yellow got into A(u) by the following application that reaches e′ in (c). Overall the effect was that in the second application of ColorfulPath we had yellow ∈ A(e′) so we could stop. 

2.2 Randomized Algorithms 

We now turn to randomization. We consider a simple randomized approach that yields better bounds in both models (incremental and fully dynamic). The basic idea is to keep the edge-coloring highly random as the forest evolves over time. Concretely, for a forest F , we define a simple distribution D(F ) over the proper κ-edge-coloring 11 of F . The algorithm maintains the invariant that after every update, the coloring of the forest F

is distributed exactly according to D(F ). Henceforth, we use D for D(F ) when F would be clear from the context. 

2.2.1 A Randomized Distribution-Maintaining Algorithm 

To define the distribution, and then the algorithm, it is clearest to begin with rooted forests. 

Rooted Forests In the rooted setting (Definition 2.6), the distribution D has a simple top-down description. Starting from the root, each vertex assigns colors to its child-edges uniformly at random, with one restriction: the color of the edge connecting that vertex to its parent is forbidden (and thus excluded). Repeating this recursively down each tree defines the distribution. We describe how the algorithm maintains this distribution shortly. The point of maintaining this distribution is that it allows us to analyze the expected recourse of the algorithm’s maintenance operations using the exact probability to recolor any particular edge. 

The algorithm. The maintenance operations of the algorithm, henceforth DistMaint , are based on one simple observation: an update can only add (in insertion) or remove (in deletion) a forbidden color at a single vertex. DistMaint repairs this by possibly recoloring one child-edge, which pushes the same problem one level down the tree. More concretely, if an edge e = ( p, r ) is inserted (where r is the root of its tree, and it becomes a child of p), the algorithm colors e with a uniformly random color α available at p. This makes α

forbidden at r. Thus, if there is a child-edge ( r, u ) colored α, it must be recolored. The algorithm recolors ( r, u ) to a uniformly random color β that is available at r. This makes the coloring on child-edges of r distributed correctly, as in D, but now the forbidden color at u changes from α

to β. If u has a child-edge colored β, we apply a repair there as well, recoloring it from β to α.This way, the repair propagates in a single path down the tree by swapping the colors α and β on the ( α, β )-bicolored path until no forbidden color is violated, and the coloring of the new forest is distributed according to D.Deletion is similar. If an edge ( p, r ) colored α is deleted (so r becomes a new root), then α

should no longer be forbidden at r. So, with the appropriate probability, we recolor a uniformly random child-edge ( r, w ) by α. If this happens, and ( r, w ) was previously colored β, then the forbidden color of w changes from α to β. This again creates a repair process down the tree until no forbidden color is violated, and the coloring of the new forest is distributed according to D.

Theorem 2.8 (Distribution invariant) . After every update, the random coloring maintained by 

DistMaint is distributed according to the top-down distribution D of the current forest. 

General (unrooted) Forests via Rerooting To extend the algorithm to general (unrooted) forests, we show that this top-down distribution D(F ) is, in fact, the uniform distribution over all proper κ-edge-coloring of each tree in F . Thus the top-down view from a root is only a convenient way to describe the uniform distribution. This means that we can reroot any tree at any vertex and still view the coloring as distributed according to the same top-down distribution from the new root (rerooting is conceptual, no actual work is done to reroot the tree). Therefore, by rerooting appropriately before each update, we can use the same maintenance algorithm. 

2.2.2 Recourse Analysis (Incremental and Fully Dynamic Forests) 

Maintaining the distribution D allows us to compute exact recoloring probabilities, a fundamental component of our analysis. Suppose a repair procedure starts at a vertex r, and let e be an edge 12 in the subtree of r at depth d. For the repair to reach e, it must follow the unique path from r to 

e. This occurs only if each of the d child-edges along this path is colored with one specific color among the κ − 1 allowed colors, with one exception at the root, where we have κ allowed colors. Thus, e is recolored with probability 1 /(κ(κ − 1) d−1). 

Incremental Forests (Insertions Only) The exact recoloring probabilities computed above give a straightforward bound in the incremental rooted setting. 

Theorem 2.9. Assume only insertions in the rooted forest model (Definition 2.6). For ∆ ≥ 3,

DistMaint has expected amortized recourse Θ(1 /∆) .Proof Sketch of the Upper Bound. Fix an edge e. It can be recolored only when the root of its current tree is linked to another tree. Each time this happens, the depth of e in the new tree increases. Since the recoloring probability of e decays exponentially with its depth, the expected number of times e is recolored is bounded by a geometric series, which sums to O(1 /∆). This implies an O(1 /∆) expected amortized recourse. The general (unrooted) setting is more subtle. Here, the depth of an edge does not necessarily increase every time its component is linked to another tree. Rerooting may bring the same edge close to the root repeatedly, which might increase the number of times it is recolored. We show that bad rerooting choices can lead to worse expected amortized recourse. Nevertheless, we give a rerooting strategy that maintains the tight Θ(1 /∆) bound. 

Theorem 2.10. Assume only insertions in the general (unrooted) forest model. For ∆ ≥ 3,

DistMaint has expected amortized recourse Θ(1 /∆) .Proof Sketch of the Upper Bound. We choose which component to reroot according to the size of the merged trees. We call a tree small if it has at most ∆ edges, and large otherwise. When both trees are small, we reroot at the endpoint of smaller degree (and attach it as a child of the other endpoint). In this case, the dominant contribution to the expected recourse comes from edges of depth 1, so this rerooting choice keeps the main term small. Concretely, by the edge recoloring probabilities discussed earlier, each edge of depth at least 2 contributes at most 1

> κ(κ−1)

expected recourse. There are at most ∆ edges in a small tree, so their total contribution is O(1 /∆). Each edge of depth 1 contributes 1 

> κ

in expectation, so together they contribute 1 

> κ

-fraction of the smaller degree. We use a potential function argument to show that, over the entire sequence, the sum of smaller degrees is linear in the number of insertions. Hence, this case contributes O(1 /∆) expected amortized recourse. When both components are large, we reroot the smaller side by size, and charge the recourse to its edges. We then divide these insertions into buckets according to the size of the smaller side: bucket j contains insertions in which the smaller component has between 2 j and 2 j+1 − 1 edges. Each edge can be charged at most once in each bucket because, after a charge, the tree containing it at least doubles in size. Therefore, bucket j contains at most m/ 2j insertions, where m is the total number of insertions. To bound the expected recourse of an insertion in a fixed bucket j, consider the rerooted smaller tree. It has fewer than 2 j+1 edges. Since the probability that an edge is recolored decays exponentially with its depth, the expected recourse is maximized when the edges are placed as close to the root as possible. So it suffices to consider a tree of depth h = O(log ∆−1(2 j+1 )). In such a tree, the recourse is at most h (a root-to-leaf path). Multiplying this by the number of insertions in bucket j, and summing over all non-empty buckets j ≥ ⌊ lg ∆ ⌋, gives a total contribution of 

O(m/ ∆), and therefore O(1 /∆) expected amortized recourse. 13 The remaining case is when a small tree is merged into a large one. This is the simplest case. Here too, we reroot the smaller side, and charge the recourse to its edges. By the recoloring probabilities, the charge is at most O(1 /∆) per edge, and this is a one-time charge, as the resulting tree is large. 

A lower bound for c = 0 . To conclude the incremental setting, we show that our algorithm is, in fact, optimal for c = 0, by proving a matching Ω(1 /∆) lower bound for any algorithm, even on rooted forests. 

Theorem 2.11. Let ∆ ≥ 3. There is an oblivious distribution over incremental sequences on forests of maximum degree at most ∆ such that any algorithm that maintains a proper ∆-edge-coloring has expected amortized recourse Ω(1 /∆) .Proof. Create two disjoint stars of degree ∆ − 1, with centers vi and free color αi for i ∈ { 1, 2}.Observe that if α1̸ = α2 and we link v1 and v2 directly by inserting e = ( v1, v 2), at least one edge must be recolored for e to be colored. Conversely, if α1 = α2, linking them through an intermediary vertex u by inserting the edges ( v1, u ) and ( v2, u ) also forces at least one recoloring, because u cannot have two edges of color α1. Given this observation, the adversary flips a fair coin and decides whether to link v1 and v2 directly or via u. The expected recourse is therefore at least  

> 12

. Indeed, let p ≡ Pr[ α1 = α2] then the expected recourse is ≥ 12 · p · 1 + 12 · (1 − p) · 1 = 12 (the 1 terms are for the recourse that is at least 1 when it is required). The total number of insertions is either 2∆ − 1 or 2∆, thus the expected amortized recourse is Ω( 1∆ ). 

Fully Dynamic Forests (Insertions and Deletions) For the fully dynamic setting, we do not use amortization. Instead, we bound the expected recourse of each update separately. Here we have the same analysis for both rooted and unrooted forests. 

Theorem 2.12 (Expected recourse per update) . Assume ∆ ≥ 3. Against an oblivious adversary, the expected recourse per update of DistMaint is Θ min ∆/c, log κ−1 n .Proof Sketch of the Upper Bound. For simplicity, consider an insertion of an edge ( p, r ) (deletions are similar). We prove two upper bounds. For the first bound, observe that the repair process begins only if the new color α chosen for (p, r ) appears on one of the child edges of r. Since the child edges of r are uniformly colored from all κ colors, and there are at most ∆ − 1 child edges, this happens with probability at most (∆ − 1) /κ . If this happens, and ( r, u ) is recolored from α to β, the repair then continues one level deeper if β appears on a child edge of u, which happens with probability q = (∆ − 1) / (κ − 1) (the denominator is now κ − 1 because u had a forbidden color α before, so its child-edges are colored uniformly from κ − 1 colors). Thus, after the first conflict, the repair continues with probability at most q at each step. Thus, if the repair starts, its length is stochastically dominated by a geometric random variable with success probability 1 − q. Therefore, the expected repair length, conditioned on starting, is at most 1 /(1 − q). Multiplying this by the probability of at most (∆ − 1) /κ that the repair starts, and substituting the value of q, gives an O(∆ /c ) bound on the expected recourse for 

c ≥ 1. The second bound, which applies to any c ≥ 0, comes from depth considerations. By the exact recoloring probabilities discussed in the beginning of this section, the probability that the repair reaches a fixed edge e at depth d is at most ( κ − 1) −d. A union bound over all edges gives an 

O(log κ−1 n) bound on the expected recourse. 14 Thm. Algorithm Model Colors Recourse Bound Notes 3.2 Specific, Det. Fully dynamic c = 0 O( √lg n 

> ∆

· 2√2 lg n) WC; Also used to prove Theorem 2.1 for c = 0. 3.11 Greedy Incremental 2 O(log n) ∆ = 2; Optimal. 3.11 Greedy Fully dynamic 2 O(n) ∆ = 2; Optimal. 3.12 GreedyShift Incremental c = 0 Ω( 1∆ · log n 

> ∆3

) Applies to any shift-based algorithm. 3.13 GreedyShift Incremental c = 0 O( 1∆ log n)3.14 GreedyShift Fully dynamic c ≥ 0 Ω(log c+2 n 

> ∆−c

) Compare to [SK26], Thm. B.11: 

c ≥ 1: O(log c+1 n 

> ∆+ c2

) WC. 

Table 2: A summary of additional results that appear in the full analysis (Section 3), for ∆ ≥ 3 and 

c ∈ [0 , ∆ − 2], unless explicitly stated for ∆ = 2. The model can be incremental or fully dynamic. Greedy 

minimizes the recourse on each update, and GreedyShift is a greedy variant that only shifts colors (see Definition 3.10). The recourse is amortized unless stated worst case. Throughout the paper, lg is the logarithm in base 2. Bounds are amortized, unless specified worst-case (WC). 

A lower bound for c = 0 . In the fully dynamic setting as well, we conclude by proving a matching lower bound for c = 0, which applies to any algorithm, even on rooted forests. 

Theorem 2.13. Any algorithm that maintains ∆ ≥ 3 edge coloring of a forest, even of a rooted forest, has amortized recourse of Ω log ∆−1 n.Proof. The idea is similar to the incremental lower bound for c = 0 (Theorem 2.11), but here deletions let the adversary recreate the same conflict indefinitely. This makes it worthwhile to replace the stars by deep complete trees, so that resolving each conflict incurs large recourse. We start with two complete (∆ −1)-ary trees of depth h, with roots r1, r 2, and alternate between linking 

r1 and r2 directly, and linking them both to the same isolated vertex. As before, the first state requires the unique free colors at the roots to be equal, while the second state requires them to be different. Changing the free color at a root requires recoloring a full root-to-leaf path of length h,because each internal vertex has degree ∆ and thus the whole tree’s coloring can be inferred by the color of leaf-edges bottom-up. This gives Ω( h) = Ω(log ∆−1 n) amortized recourse per update. 

# 3 Deterministic Algorithms: A Formal Account 

We begin with the deterministic setting. We study the natural greedy algorithm that minimizes the recourse due to each update, henceforth Greedy . Greedy is arguably the simplest algorithm to describe, so it is only natural to study it first. 6 For completeness, Algorithm 1 is a formal description of Greedy . In section 3.3.3 we also study another variant named GreedyShift .Table 2 details additional results (of the complete analysis) that were omitted from Table 1. 

Greedy can be computed easily on forests, as detailed in Section 3.3. We also show that 

Greedy is asymptotically optimal in the degenerate case of ∆ = 2 where trees are paths. This further motivates the study of Greedy , for ∆ ≥ 3. We study the recourse in two models. First, in the incremental model, where edges are only inserted, we show that a greedy approach achieves a very low amortized recourse. Second, in the fully dynamic model, we demonstrate that this greedy strategy performs poorly. To address this, we introduce a non-greedy algorithm, ColorfulPath , that is optimal up to a constant factor, within a restricted setting.   

> 6Technically Greedy is a family of algorithms, that differ by their tie-breaking rules.

15 Algorithm 1: Greedy : a greedy dynamic edge coloring. 

Input: A sequence of edge updates over a forest F with a maximum degree ∆. 

Output: Maintains a proper coloring of F after each update.  

> 1

Function UpdateForest( Forest F , edge e = ( u, v ), insert/delete ): 

> 2

if insert e then  

> 3

Insert e to F , and determine H: a smallest subset of edges of F that can be recolored to let e have an available color. Recolor H and e accordingly.  

> 4

else  

> 5

Delete e from F , keep the coloring. 

3.1 Incremental Forests (Insertions Only) 

A forest has at most n − 1 edges regardless of ∆, unlike in general graphs that could accommodate Θ( n · ∆) edges. Therefore, the average degree of a vertex in a forest is typically smaller which intuitively makes edge coloring easier. Nevertheless, it is known that the worst-case recourse can be large even in trees [SK26]. Interestingly, Theorem 2.1 shows that the amortized recourse is sub-constant. 

Theorem 2.1. Assume only insertions to a forest with maximum degree ∆ ≥ 3. Greedy has amortized recourse O

 1

> c+√∆



.

To prove the Theorem 2.1, we require the following additional facts. Theorem 3.1 and Theo-rem 3.2 give us worst-case upper bounds that we use to argue about the recourse per update that we amortize on different edges, for the cases c ≥ 1 and c = 0, respectively. Edges are charged multiple times, and Lemma 3.3 is used to bound the total (accumulated) charge per edge. We defer the proofs of Theorem 3.2 and Lemma 3.3 to Appendix A. 

Theorem 3.1 (Theorem B.11 of [SK26]) . Consider a dynamic forest F of maximum degree ∆

that is edge colored by ∆ + c colors for c ≥ 1. When a new edge e is inserted, the coloring can be extended to e with recourse of at most log c+1 N 

> ∆+ c2

+ 2 , that recolors a path, where N is the number of edges in the smaller tree that e links. The update time is O(N ).

For our purposes, it suffices to weaken Theorem 3.1 and assume O(log c+1 N ) recourse, which is a cleaner expression. The intuition for the weaker expression is that it bounds the length of the cheapest recoloring path (see also GreedyPath in Definition 3.10), because at every vertex the algorithm has (at least) c + 1 recoloring choices that lead the path to a disjoint subtree. This path can always choose to proceed to the smallest subtree among its available options, and it stops at a leaf at the latest. 

Theorem 3.2. Consider a dynamic forest F of maximum degree ∆ ≥ 3 that is edge colored by ∆

colors. When a new edge e is inserted, the coloring of F can be extended to e with recourse of at most O( 1∆−2 · √lg N · 2√2 lg N ), where N is the number of edges in the smaller tree that e links. The update time is O(N ).

Lemma 3.3. Let {xi}i≥1 be a sequence of integers such that x1 ≥ ∆2 ≥ 1 and ∀i : xi+1 ≥ 2 ·

xi. Define the functions: f (x) ≡ lg xx and g(x) ≡   

> √lg x·2√2 lg x
> x

. Then P∞ 

> i=1

f (xi) = O( lg ∆ ∆ ) and P∞ 

> i=1

g(xi) = O(1) .

16 Proof of Theorem 2.1. We analyze and charge the amortized recourse of an edge e by considering two types of insertions, referred to as heavy and light . An insertion is heavy if it links trees both having at least ∆+ c 

> 2

edges, and light otherwise. When an insertion of edge e = ( u, v ) links two trees Tu and Tv, if the insertion is heavy we can charge the recourse immediately, equally to every edge in the smaller tree, without loss of generality, say, Tv. When the insertion is light, we cannot charge the recourse immediately because Tv is too small. Therefore we charge it to u, which only by the end of the sequence re-distributes its charge among its own edges and the edges of Tv and other trees that linked to u in a light insertion when 

u was on the large side. The goal is to show that each edge receives a total charge O( 1 

> c+√∆

) over the whole sequence. We begin with a trivial but important observation: In order to incur recourse, e must have at least ∆ + c neighbours (edges). Note that the endpoint with the higher degree has at least ⌈ ∆+ c 

> 2

⌉

edges before inserting e.

Heavy insertions. Denote the size of the connected component of e at the ith time we charge it by 

Se(i). Observe that Se(1) ≥ ∆+ c 

> 2

and that Se(i + 1) ≥ 2 · Se(i), so {Se(i)}i≥1 satisfy the conditions of Lemma 3.3. If c ≥ 1, we can loosen Theorem 3.1 (applied for N = Se(i)) and deduce a recourse of O(log (c+1) Se(i)), then e is charged its equal share: O( log (c+1) Se(i) 

> Se(i)

). Now by Lemma 3.3 for f (x), the total charge of e is: 

heavy (e) ≤ O

 1lg( c + 1) · lg ∆ ∆



= O

 log (c+1) ∆∆



.

If c = 0, similarly using Theorem 3.2, the ith charge of e is 1 

> Se(i)

-fraction out of O( 1∆−2 · plg Se(i) ·

2

√2 lg Se(i)), and again by Lemma 3.3 for g(x), the total charge is now bounded by heavy (e) = 

O( 1∆−2 ) = O( 1∆ ) (recall that ∆ ≥ 3). 

Light insertions. By the definition of light, deg( v) ≤ size (v) < ∆+ c 

> 2

. In this case we say that e

blames u for the recourse, and that u swallowed v. Observe that the recourse is at most 1 because we can color e by some color used by v on an edge e′, uncolor e′ and recolor it with an available color because |A(e′)| ≥ 1 ( size (v) < ∆ + c − 1, so every edge in the component of v prior to inserting 

e has an available color). When an insertion of e = ( u, v ) blames u for recourse, the existence of recourse implies deg( v) ≥

∆ + c − deg( u). Let ℓ ≥ 1 be the number of edges that blame u. We charge the recourse blamed on u to the edges of u (all of them) and to the edges of the neighbours it swallowed, at the time of these swallows. The total number of charged edges is at least: deg( u) + 

> ℓ

X

> i=1

(∆ + c − (deg( u) − i)) = deg( u) + (∆ + c − deg( u)) · ℓ + ℓ(ℓ + 1) 2 .

To clarify, this edge count is minimized when the last ℓ edges of u are those that swallow neigh-bours and blame u for recourse (being the latest edges of u means that the swallowed neighbours can have less edges while still incurring recourse). We charge the recourse blamed on u equally, to get 1∆+ c−deg( u)+ deg( u)  

> ℓ+ℓ+1 2

charge per edge. To upper bound this expression, it suffices to lower bound the denominator, the function f (d, ℓ ) ≡ ∆ + c − d + dℓ + ℓ+1 2 . We assumed some blame of u,then ℓ ≥ 1, then f is non-increasing in d ( ∂f ∂d = 1 

> ℓ

− 1), so choosing d = ∆ minimizes q with respect to d. Furthermore, given a fixed d, f attains minimum at ℓ = √2d ( ∂f ∂ℓ = − dℓ2 + 12 ; ∂2f∂ℓ 2 = 2dℓ3 > 0). Overall, we get that f (d, ℓ ) ≥ f (∆ , √2∆) ≥ c + 12 + √2∆. 17 Then the light charge due to blames of u is upper bounded by 11+( c− 12 )+ √2∆ = Θ( 1 

> c+√∆

). Observe that every edge can be charged with recourse up to thrice: once per endpoint (in the role of u), and once for belonging to a small tree that is being swallowed, so overall, the charge of every edge satisfies light (e) = O( 1 

> c+√∆

). To conclude, we showed for each edge e that light (e) + heavy (e) = O( 1 

> c+√∆

). Theorem 2.1 shows that greedy coloring is efficient in terms of recourse when edges are only in-serted: The recourse ranges from O( 1√∆ ) for c = O(√∆) down to O( 1∆ ) for c = Ω(∆). Theorem 2.2 below shows that this analysis is tight for some tie-breaking rule. 

Theorem 2.2. There exists an insertion sequence on a forest of maximum degree ∆ ≥ 3, and a tie-breaking rule, such that Greedy has amortized recourse Ω( 1 

> c+√∆

).Proof. Let 1 ≤ ℓ ≤ ∆ − 1 − c be a parameter that we choose later so as to optimize the resulting bound. Fix a vertex u, and insert ∆ − ℓ leaf edges incident to u. Break ties so that these edges receive the highest colors: ℓ + c + 1 , ℓ + c + 2 , . . . , ∆ + c. Thus, initially, the available colors at u

are A(u) = {1, 2, . . . , ℓ + c}.Now, for each i = 1 , 2, . . . , ℓ , create a fresh star with center vi and ℓ + c + 1 − i leaves, and break ties so that the edges incident to vi receive exactly the colors i, i + 1 , . . . , ℓ + c. Then insert the edge ( u, v i). We show by induction on i that there is a tie-breaking rule, such that when the edge (u, v i) is inserted, there is no free color for it (i.e., A(u) ∩ A(vi) = ∅), Greedy colors ( u, v i) by the color i, and recolors one existing leaf-edge of vi.The base case ( i = 1) is immediate since u and v1 together use all the colors, so we choose a tie-breaking rule that colors ( u, v 1) with the color 1, and recolors the unique leaf-edge of v1 whose color is 1 to some other free color. Next, fix i ≥ 2. By the induction hypothesis, just before inserting (u, v i), the previous i − 1 such insertions have used the colors 1 , 2, . . . , i − 1 at u, while the original leaf edges at u still use the colors ℓ + c + 1 , . . . , ∆ + c. Hence, A(u) = {i, i + 1 , . . . , ℓ + c}. On the other hand, the colors used at vi are exactly {i, i + 1 , . . . , ℓ + c}. Therefore, A(u) ∩ A(vi) = ∅, so, recourse 0 is impossible. As before, we choose a tie-breaking rule that colors ( u, v i) by the color i,and recolors the unique leaf-edge of vi whose color is i to some other available color. This concludes the induction. Thus the algorithm pays recourse of exactly 1 for each of the ℓ insertions ( u, v i). The total recourse is therefore exactly ℓ. We insert ∆ edges for u and ℓ + c + 1 − i edges for vi, so the total number of insertions is ∆ + Pℓi=1 (ℓ + c + 1 − i) = ∆ + ℓ2+(2 c+1) ℓ 

> 2

. Hence, the amortized recourse is f (ℓ) ≡ ℓ 

> ∆+( ℓ2+(2 c+1) ℓ)/2

= 2  

> 2∆
> ℓ+ℓ+(2 c+1)

. f (ℓ) is maximized when the denominator is minimized, which is when ℓ = √2∆. Since ℓ should be an integer, we get that the amortized recourse is maximized for either ℓ∗ = ⌈√2∆ ⌉ or ℓ∗ = ⌊√2∆ ⌋, and it is Ω( 1 

> c+√∆

). The choice ℓ = ℓ∗ might not be feasible, because we are constrained to ℓ ≤ ∆ − 1 − c. If this condition is violated, then ∆ − 1 − c < ℓ ∗ < √2∆ + 1, therefore c > ∆ − 2 − √2∆ ⇒ c = Θ(∆). Then choosing ℓ = 1 instead of ℓ = ℓ∗ gives f (1) = 1∆+ c+1 which is also Ω( 1 

> c+√∆

) since c = Θ(∆). 

3.2 Fully Dynamic Forests (Insertions and Deletions) 

When the graph is fully dynamic, the problem is harder. In general, o(1) amortized recourse is no longer possible as Theorem 2.3 below shows. Concretely, we show that for a sufficiently large n,the amortized recourse is Ω(1). Details of what is “sufficiently large” appear in Section A.3. 18 Theorem 2.3. There exists n0 = n0(∆ , c ) such that for every deterministic algorithm ALG , every 

n ≥ n0, and every ϵ > 0, there is an update sequence on an n-vertex forest, such that the amortized recourse of ALG on this sequence is greater than 1/2 − ϵ. The amortized recourse is already Ω(1) 

after O(n0) updates. Remark. The value of n0 is studied in detail in Section A.3. 

Proof. Let P be the family of sub-palettes of [ κ] of size ∆ − 1. For each such sub-palette P ∈ P ,we associate a unique owner vertex oP . From the remaining vertices, we, who play the role of the adversary, create N ≡ (c + 1) · |P| + 1 disjoint stars of degree ∆ − 1. n0 is the number of vertices needed for this construction. For a star S, we refer to the set of colors P ∈ P used on its leaf-edges as the palette of S.We now repeat the following step : take an isolated star and connect its center to the owner of its palette. Then, while there is a connected star whose palette has changed, we disconnect it from its owner. Observe that after each of our steps, at most c + 1 < ∆ stars can be connected to each owner. This is because all edges incident to oP must use distinct colors outside P , and there are only c + 1 such colors. Additionally, since N > (c + 1) · |P| , we can repeat this step indefinitely. At each step, we connect one star and may disconnect several others. Since there are at most 

c + 1 stars connected to each owner, after s steps we must have disconnected at least s − (c + 1) · |P| 

stars. Since we disconnect a star only if its palette has changed, it follows that at least s−(c+1) ·|P| 

edges have been recolored by the algorithm. The total number of updates we make in these s steps is at most 2 s, as each edge we delete was inserted in a previous step. In addition, we use at most 

n0 updates for the initial creation of the stars. Hence, the amortized recourse is at least s−(c+1) ·|P|  

> 2s+n0

,which is Ω(1) already for s = 2 · n0 and approaches 1 /2 as s → ∞ .Although Theorem 2.3 establishes a lower bound of Ω(1), which may appear small (a mere constant), contrast it with the incremental amortized recourse of Greedy (Theorem 2.1), which is O(∆ −ϵ) for ϵ ∈ [ 12 , 1], depending on c. Perhaps surprisingly, the same greedy algorithm that performs so well when there are only insertions, performs poorly in the fully dynamic model, incurring Ω(log ∆ n) amortized recourse. 

Theorem 2.4 (Greedy recourse) . Let ∆ ≥ 3. There exists a forest and coloring such that from this state onward, the amortized recourse of Greedy is Ω(log ∆ n). There exists n1 = n1(∆ , c ) such that for every n ≥ n1, this bad state can be reached from the empty graph. Remark. The value of n1 is studied in detail in Section A.3. We postpone the proof of Theorem 2.4 to Section 3.2.1. If the lower bound of Theorem 2.3 is tight, we should aim for a deterministic algorithm with 

O(1) amortized recourse. Theorem 2.4 rules out Greedy . Interestingly, if we assume that the forest is rooted (see Definition 2.6 below), and if the palette has 2∆ − 2 colors, then a very simple algorithm, which we call ColorfulPath , achieves O(1) recourse. 7 The exact claim is Theorem 2.7 below. Note that Theorem 2.3 also applies to rooted forests. 

Definition 2.6. A dynamic forest is rooted if it is a collection of trees, each with a fixed assigned root. An insertion must be of the form ( p, r ) where r is a root of its tree, that becomes a child of p.(If both are roots, the parent must be specified.) A deletion of ( u, v ) creates a new tree, such that if (without loss of generality) u remains reachable from the root of the tree that contained ( u, v ), then v becomes the root of the new tree.  

> 7Note that the additional rooting information does not help Greedy , which by definition is agnostic to any extra information and only cares to minimize the recourse of each update.

19 Algorithm 2: ColorfulPath : Rooted-forest dynamic edge coloring, using 2∆ −2 colors. 

Input: A sequence of edge updates over a forest F with a maximum degree ∆. 

Output: Maintains a proper coloring of F after each update.  

> 1

Function UpdateForest( Forest F , edge e = ( u, v ), insert/delete ): 

> 2

If insert e: Add e to F , uncolored (yet) and call RecursiveStep( F , e, u); Otherwise delete e from F and keep the coloring.  

> 3

Function RecursiveStep( Forest F , uncolored edge e = ( u, v ), entry vertex u): 

> 4

if A(u) ∩ A(v)̸ = ∅ then Color e by any α ∈ A(u) ∩ A(v). return . 

> 5

if ∃w ∈ children (v) such that color (v, w ) ∈ A(u) and A(w) ∩ A(v)̸ = ∅ then  

> 6

Color e by color (v, w ), uncolor ( v, w ), and call RecursiveStep( F , (v, w ), v). 

> 7

else  

> 8

Let α = ChooseColor( G,e,u ) and denote the edge of v colored by α by ( v, w ). Color e by α, uncolor ( v, w ), and call RecursiveStep( F , (v, w ), v). 

> 9

Function ChooseColor( Forest F , uncolored edge e = ( u, v ), entry vertex u): 

> 10

Let β = color (grandparent (u), parent (u)) if such edge exists, otherwise β = null . Let w

be an arbitrary child of v subject to α ≡ color (v, w )̸ = β. return α.

Theorem 2.7. Let ∆ ≥ 3, and let F be a dynamic rooted forest, initially empty. ColorfulPath 

maintains 2∆ −2 edge coloring on F with O(1) amortized recourse. This is optimal up to a constant factor, matching the lower bound of Theorem 2.3. 

We defer the proof of Theorem 2.7 to Section 3.2.2. The complete pseudo-code description of 

ColorfulPath is in Algorithm 2, it is exemplified in Figure 3, and its high level idea is as follows. When we insert an edge e = ( p, r ) that connects p as the parent of a root r, we shift colors upwards in the tree, along a downward path from r, as follows. The edge e = ( p, r ) is initially uncolored. If it has an available color (i.e. A(p) ∩ A(r)̸ = ∅) we just use it and finish. Otherwise, if r has a child v such that ( r, v ) has an available color α ∈ A(r) ∩ A(v) then it must be that the current color β of ( r, v ) is in A(p) (this follows since we have 2∆ − 2 colors and no free color for (p, r )). So we shift β from ( r, v ) to ( p, r ), recur on ( r, v ) and finish in the next step (by coloring it 

α). If no edge ( r, v ) has a free color, we pick an edge ( r, v ) whose color is different from the color of the edge e′′ ≡ (grandparent (p), parent (p)) (if such e′′ exists), shift its color to ( p, r ) (which again is possible since we have 2∆ − 2 colors and no free color for ( p, r )), and recur on ( r, v ) which is now uncolored. The choice color (e)̸ = color (e′′ ) essentially guarantees that we have an available color for the edge between them, e′, when we reach it next time: Suppose that we pick the color α for an edge 

e = ( v, w ) whose parent is e′ = ( u, v ) and its grandparent is e′′ = ( z, u ), in a recoloring that is not last or next to last (as part of the whole recoloring due to the recent insertion). Then by coloring 

e with a color α̸ = β where β = color (e′′ ), we guarantee that β ∈ A(v) (it was surely in A(v)when we shifted β from e′ to e′′ ). Since trees are rooted, next time we reach e′ in a preceding step we will shift β from e′′ upwards, vacating it so that β ∈ A(u) and therefore β ∈ A(e′). Thus the update would terminate before reaching e again, assuming that no additional updates occur in the neighbourhood of e′. In the proof we formalize this using a potential argument showing that if the recourse is high, the algorithm guarantees that all but O(1) of the recolored edges will have an available color in a future re-visit. 20 Figure 4: When merging two layered trees of complementing palettes, recoloring must reach a leaf. In this figure, the right tree is not layered, thus recoloring can be done without reaching a leaf. Recoloring multiple edges that share a vertex is known as a fan in the literature, here a fan over u suffices. 

3.2.1 Greedy Logarithmic Amortized Recourse 

In this sub-section we prove that Greedy has amortized recourse that is logarithmic in n. Before we can prove Theorem 2.4, we need to build up towards it with multiple lemmas that study the behavior of the P -layered trees gadget. 

Definition 2.5 (P -layered tree, P -star) . We say that a κ-colored rooted tree T (∆ ≥ 3) is P -layered for a sub-palette P ⊆ [κ] if: (1) T is full in the following sense: every non-leaf vertex at an even depth has |P | children, and every non-leaf vertex at an odd depth has |P | children where P

is the complementary sub-palette; 8 (2) The edge coloring of T is such that the edges from a vertex to its children are colored from P if its depth is even, and from P if its depth is odd. See Figure 1 for an example. If the tree is of depth 1 (i.e., a star graph) we refer to it as a P -star .We first show that when Greedy merges two complementing layered trees, it recolors a path to a leaf v, and that the resulting tree is itself a larger layered tree with a different root if we delete the edge of v.

Lemma 3.4. Let T1 be an P -layered tree and let T2 be a P -layered tree. If we insert a new edge between their roots, then a proper coloring must recolor at least a path to some leaf. Recoloring only a path is sufficient. Proof. First, recoloring a path to a leaf is sufficient. Indeed, color the newly inserted edge by a free color of the root of T2, and uncolor the conflicting edge. As long as there is an uncolored edge, pick its color based on the vertex that belongs to the connected component of colored edges on the side of T2 (which is growing) and uncolor a conflicting edge if such exists. This will push the uncolored edge towards a leaf of T1, where the process will end with a proper coloring. On the other hand, a path is necessary. Assume by contradiction that we can recolor a subset of edges that do not reach a leaf. Then we can recover the palette-coloring of the tree bottom-up, because given |P | siblings that are all using the palette P towards their parent, the shared parent must use a color from P towards its parent, and similarly |P | siblings that use P towards a shared parent p enforce p to use a color from P towards its parent. For example, revisit Figure 1 and consider what the four left most leaves imply for their parents. Then the color reconstruction gives us a layered coloring of T1 and T2, that results in a contradiction since we cannot color the newly inserted edge. The condition of layered-trees in Lemma 3.4 is necessary to force recoloring to reach a leaf. See Figure 4 for an example where we can stop earlier than a leaf. 

Lemma 3.5. Let T1 be a P -layered tree and let T2 be a P -layered tree. Assume that we insert an edge between their roots, and as a result Greedy recolored a path towards a leaf u, whose parent                      

> 8In particular, this means that |P|+|P|=κand that |P|,|P| ≤ ∆−1; So also, |P|,|P| ≥ c+ 1.

21 Figure 5: Visualization for Lemma 3.5, for ∆ = 3, and κ = 4 with sub-palettes P = {blue , red }, and                       

> P={yellow ,green }. A square colored by palette Q∈ { P, P }is an abstract representation of a Q-layered subtree. We begin by merging two layered trees rooted in v0and v1(top). In the end of recoloring the path from v1to u(bottom), ignoring the edge ( p, u ), the combined tree rooted at pis Q-layered, where Q∈ { P, P }
> depends on the parity of the recourse.

is p. If we delete the edge (u, p ), then the new (combined) tree, rooted at p, is either P -layered or 

P -layered depending on the parity of distance to the edge connecting the two original roots. Proof. Without loss of generality, assume that u is a leaf of T1, and denote the nodes on this path as v0 = root (T2), v 1 = root (T1), v 2 . . . , v k = u. See Figure 5 for a visualization of the proof. The argument is inductive, we consider the recoloring of the path as single steps of coloring the uncolored edge and uncoloring its successor. Note that the last step just colors the edge ( u, p ) to get a proper coloring, so if we end the argument just before coloring ( u, p ), we indeed argue about the combined tree without the edge ( u, p ) (as if right after ( u, p ) is deleted). To prove the claim notice the invariant that the vertices of the uncolored edge are always roots of complementing-palettes layered trees. This is true initially, for v0 (P ) and v1 (P ). By definition of the layering, every child of v1 is a P -layered tree, just like v0. Therefore when we shift a color, from any edge of v1 to the uncolored edge ( v0, v 1), the tree rooted at v1 remains P -layered, and the subtree we cut away from it, now rooted at v2, is P -layered. We can rename the vertices and switch the roles of P and P , and continue by induction until we reach the end of the path, where eventually p is the root of a P -layered or a P -layered tree that combines all the vertices of T1 and T2 except for u.Lemma 3.6 below constructs layered trees out of the empty graph. 

Lemma 3.6. Let ALG be a deterministic algorithm that does not recolor edges unless it is necessary. There exists n1 = n1(∆ , c ) such that for every n ≥ n1(∆ , c ) the adversary can construct multiple 

P -layered and P -layered trees, for |P | = c + 1 (then |P | = ∆ − 1), with Ω( n/ ∆) vertices. ( n1 is studied in details in Section A.3.) Proof. We play the role of the adversary. Assume that we have |P | · | P | P -stars, then we can use them to replicate additional P -stars as follows: Connect every |P | of the stars to a new vertex. No recoloring is necessary, so by assumption none is made, and we get |P | P -layered trees of depth 2. Then connect all of these trees to another new vertex v, to get a P -layered tree of depth 3. Remove the edges between the original stars and their parents, and we end up with the original 

P -stars, plus a P -star centered at v. We can also replicate a P -star out of the existing P -stars, by replicating |P | “disposable” P -stars, forming a P -layered tree of depth 2, and then deleting its leaf-edges. 22 Observe that for a sufficiently large n, we can bootstrap the replication process by forming sufficiently many stars such that by the pigeonhole principle we get enough stars with some same sub-palette. Once we have |P | · | P | P -stars we can replicate more P -stars and then construct, bottom-up, large balanced P -layered and P -layered trees using an Ω( 1∆ ) fraction of them: To increase the depth of a tree by 1, we connect |X| X-layered trees to a single shared parent for 

X ∈ { P, P }, to form a X-layered tree. Increasing the depth requires additional vertices, but naively we can dedicate an extra vertex to each P -star, and only lose a constant factor because a 

P -star has |P |+1 = c+2 vertices. We can utilize at least a 1∆−1 fraction of the stars to construct the desired trees (otherwise, we can increase the depth of each tree by 1). Accordingly, the construction of our trees utilizes Ω( n/ ∆) vertices. We are ready to prove Theorem 2.4. We restate it for convenience. 

Theorem 2.4 (Greedy recourse) . Let ∆ ≥ 3. There exists a forest and coloring such that from this state onward, the amortized recourse of Greedy is Ω(log ∆ n). There exists n1 = n1(∆ , c ) such that for every n ≥ n1, this bad state can be reached from the empty graph. Proof. Let the initial state be as follows: Two perfect layered trees T ∗ 

> i

of depth d = Θ(log ∆ n)(every leaf has depth d) with roots ri, for i ∈ [2]. T ∗ 

> 1

is P -layered, while T ∗ 

> 2

is P -layered, for 

|P | = c + 1 and |P | = ∆ − 1. Assuming that the algorithm’s tie-breaking is deterministic (per the setting of this section), we can construct this initial state by Lemma 3.6. Now the cycle of updates begins. The initial two updates delete one edge from each tree. Denote the edges ( u1, r 4) in T ∗ 

> 1

and ( u2, r 3) in T ∗ 

> 2

, where in both edges u is the parent of r. The distance between ri and ui for i ∈ [2] is di = ⌊ d 

> 3

⌋ − (i − 1), this exact choice will be clarified later. Now the forest contains 4 trees Ti each rooted at ri for i ∈ [4]. The next update inserts ( r1, r 2). By Lemma 3.4 Greedy recolors a path. Since d2 < d 1, the smallest recourse would recolors over the path from r2 to u2. Then, because u2 has one less child, the algorithm can finish the recoloring, with recourse d2. To see clearly why recoloring can stop at u2, imagine that u2 had another leaf child u′ (instead of the former child r3), for T2 to be a proper layered tree. In this case, the recolored path to a leaf would be to u′ and include ( u2, u ′), since any other leaf of T2 is deeper. The color of ( u2, u ′) would have been exactly the color of the edge ( u2, r 3) that was deleted, and this color is used to color ( parent (u2), u 2) when the recoloring is applied. Then by Lemma 3.5 the new combined tree of T1 ∪T2 can be thought of as a tree T ′ 

> 2

rooted at u2, such that T ′ 

> 2

is Q-layered compared to T3 which is Q-layered, where Q ∈ { P, P } depends on the parity of di (in Figure 2, Q = P ). Next, insert the edge ( u2, r 3), which again connects two layered trees with complementing palettes. Then again Greedy will recolor a path. This time, we want the path to go back through the edge ( r1, r 2) and towards u1. This is satisfies if d1 + d2 < (d − d2) (otherwise the shortest recourse goes towards a leaf of T3), which holds by how we defined d1 and d2. By Lemma 3.5, 

T1 ∪ T2 ∪ T3 is now a Q′-layered tree rooted at u1 where Q′ ∈ { P, P }, and by a similar argument as before, we have that T4 is Q′-layered (in Figure 2, Q′ = P ). The next insertion would be of ( u1, r 4), but first it is important to delete ( r1, r 2). Note that this deletion recovers T ∗ 

> 2

of the initial state. Now we insert ( u1, r 4), which has the same effect as with the previous insertion: the edge connects T1 that is Q′-layered when viewed as rooted at u1,and T4 that is Q′-layered. To ensure that smallest recourse would be to recolor on a path from u1

to r1, because any other leaf in T1 ∪ T4 is farther from u1, we ensured that d1 < (d − d1). (Recall that r1 is not a leaf, but has one less child than its siblings, which is why the recoloring can stop at r1.) By similar arguments as before the recoloring stops such that T1 ∪ T4 becomes a P -layered tree when rooted at r1, which is exactly T ∗ 

> 1

of the initial state. 23 In total, the recourse paid during the cycle was d2 + ( d2 + 1 + d1) + d1 subject to the constraints that d2 < d 1, d1 + 1 + d2 < (d − d2) and d1 < (d − d1). These constraints are why we chose d1 = ⌊ d 

> 3

⌋

and d2 = d1 − 1. Overall, we get an amortized recourse of Ω( d). Given n vertices, we can have 

d = Ω(log ∆ n). To clarify d, note that the expansion rate of the layered trees is (∆ − 1) · (c + 1) per two layers, which is at least ∆ − 1 and at most (∆ − 1) 2, per two layers. The adversary can force 

Greedy to reach this state from the empty graph by Lemma 3.6, subject to n ≥ n1(∆ , c ). 

Remark 3.7 (Laziness) . The proof of Theorem 2.4 also implies that any lazy algorithm that does not incur recourse when it does not have to, has a worst-case recourse of Ω(log ∆ n) because it allows the adversary to construct the bad configuration. Note that unlike Greedy , an arbitrary lazy algorithm might not be forced to maintain this state once it must pay some recourse, therefore the lower bound applies only in worst-case and not amortized. A non-lazy algorithm can theoretically amortize its recourse by distributing it gradually over multiple updates to achieve an overall reduced worst-case recourse. 

3.2.2 O(1) Recourse with 2∆ − 2 Colors on Rooted Forests 

In this section we prove Theorem 2.7. Note that in this context, we only consider c = ∆ − 2, and only consider a rooted dynamic forest (Definition 2.6). In this setting we show that ColorfulPath 

(Algorithm 2) has amortized recourse of O(1), which is independent of n, “breaking” the Ω(log ∆ n)lower bounds of [SK26] thus showing the importance of amortization, 9 and the lower bound of Theorem 2.13 thus showing the importance of extra colors. Intuitively, extra colors break “long-distance correlations”. 10 This also shows that an averaged-analysis helps, whether as expected recourse or amortization (or both). Intuitively speaking, ColorfulPath shifts colors over a path originating at the root of one of the trees that the new edge links, downwards until it can stop. The path is made “as farthest as possible” from being bicolored in the following sense: In a bicolored path an edge and its grandparent-edge have the same color, and the algorithm explicitly refrain from this. This can be leveraged to show a low amortized recourse. 

Definition 3.8 (Step) . A step is a single coloring of an uncolored edge, possibly uncoloring one of its neighbours. For example, the function RecursiveStep in Algorithm 2 implements a step. We say that a step stops on an edge if it does not recursively call another step, otherwise it moves to the next edge we call it on. A step on edge ( u, v ) exits from v if it moves to another edge ( v, x )(x̸ = u). Then we also say that it enters from u, even if ( u, v ) was just inserted. A step either colors a new edge or recolors an edge (that was previously colored). Recall that we defined the recourse as the number of edges that we recolor . So in this section we bound the number of steps that recolor edges. The number of steps that color new edges is at most T where 

T is the number of updates. 

Observation 3.9 . Assume 2∆ −2 colors. Consider a coloring step on ( u, v ) that enters from u. Denote the set of colors used in v by A(v). Then the step does not stop if and only if deg( u) = deg( v) = ∆ and A(u) = A(v). A neat implication of having ∆ + c = 2∆ − 2 colors is that the whole palette is divided to two disjoint sets of size ∆ − 1, one for the even and one for the odd numbered steps.       

> 9Theorem 2.9 in [SK26], when we substitute arboricity α= 1. This is lower bound that applies for any c∈[0 ,∆−2], but it applies in worst-case, for a given graph with a given edge coloring.
> 10 For example, think of a 2 edge colored path where the colors of every pair of edges are correlated, but with 3 colors we cannot say as much on the correlation of the colors of non-adjacent edges.

24 We restate Theorem 2.7 for convenience, and then prove it. 

Theorem 2.7. Let ∆ ≥ 3, and let F be a dynamic rooted forest, initially empty. ColorfulPath 

maintains 2∆ −2 edge coloring on F with O(1) amortized recourse. This is optimal up to a constant factor, matching the lower bound of Theorem 2.3. Proof. In simple words, Algorithm 2 recolors in steps that lead on a path towards (eventually) a leaf, so it must stop successfully. Each step can be out of three types: 1. If a step on edge e can choose an available color for it, do it and stop (first if in Algorithm 2). 2. Otherwise, try to step towards a neighbour e′ that has an available color (second if in Al-gorithm 2). By Observation 3.9, if e has no available color, we are guaranteed to be able to step to such e′ if there is one (it is not guaranteed if c < ∆ − 2). 3. Otherwise (and finally), if no such e′ exists, just step to e′′ such that the color we pick for e

does not match the color we picked 2 steps earlier, to ensure that we are not shifting colors over a bicolored path ( else in Algorithm 2). We can always pick a color for e that is different than 2 steps before, because we have c + 1 ≥ 2 options and at most one color is not allowed. We proceed to analyze the amortized recourse. Let v0, v 1, v 2, v 3, v 4 such that vi = parent (vi+1 ) and denote ei = ( vi, v i+1 ) for i ∈ { 0, 1, 2, 3}.We also assume that the edges e1, e 2, e 3 have an initial color αi = color (ei) ( e0 may be a newly inserted edge). Consider an update that causes steps sequentially on e0 through e3. If the step on 

e2 is of type (3), we say that e1 becomes ready . Intuitively, it is ready because the next step on e1

should be able to stop. To see why, notice that the step on e0 freed α1 from e1 so now α1 ∈ A(v2). The step on e1 did not change A(v2), and the step on e2 ensured (by definition of type (3)) that 

α1 ∈ A(v2). If another step arrives at e1 from e0 then it means that α1 is no longer used at v1

(was either deleted from e0 or shifted upward in the tree), therefore α1 ∈ A(v1) ∩ A(v2) so we can stop the step on e1 by coloring it with α1. Note that we relied on the fact that the forest is rooted, for the consistency of the recoloring path arriving to e1 from the parent e0. A ready edge does not remain ready forever. We say that an edge becomes unready if one of the following occurs: 1. An edge e becomes unready when a step is applied on a sibling-edge e′ of e. To clarify why, note that e1 above became ready because the next shift of colors frees α1 in v1, but a step on a sibling e′ = ( v1, v ′

> 2

) of e1 might color e′ by α1, ruining the readiness of e1.2. When a step stops on e, it makes e, the neighbour edges of e, and the grandparent edge of e

(if it exists) unready. To clarify why a grandparent edge is also affected, notice that above, in order for e1 to become ready we required the step on e2 to be of type (3). However if the step on e3 stops it might be because the step on e2 stepped towards e3 on purpose, type (2). So we are being conservative by assuming that the grandparent of e becomes unready when a step stops on e.3. A ready edge may be deleted, and newly inserted edges are always unready. When an edge is inserted, also all of its neighbour-edges, and its grandparent-edge (if it exists), become unready. Observe that by definition, there can be at most one ready edge between a vertex u to its children. To see why, consider a path of steps that arrives at u, such that v ∈ children (u) and ( u, v ) is ready. Either the step on ( parent (u), u ) stops thereby making all the edges of u unready, or the algorithm 25 proceeds by a type (2) step towards ( u, v ) or to another edge of u over which the next step stops, again making all the edges of u unready. Let Φ ≥ 0 be a potential that counts the number of unready edges. Φ( t = 0) = 0 because the graph is initially empty. We claim that the amortized recourse is O(1). For deletion of e, there is no recourse, and Φ also does not increase. For insertion, we increase the potential by at most 

O(1) due to the newly inserted edge, and by another O(1) due to the vicinity of the edge we stop on. Each O(1) is at most 4 because there is at most one ready edge among the child-edges of e,at most one among sibling-edges of e, and the remaining possible 2 are due to its parent-edge and grandparent-edge. Finally, say that the recourse is ℓ, on a path over the vertices u, v 0, v 1, v 2, . . . , v ℓ

where ( u, v 0) is the newly inserted edge. Then every edge on this path becomes ready except for the newly inserted edge and the last three (the stopping edge, its parent, and its grandparent). On the other hand, for every i ∈ [0 , ℓ − 2] and y̸ = vi+1 the edge e = ( vi, y ) (if it exists) was not ready before shifting colors, so we did not change ready edges to unready. Indeed, the algorithm did not stop on ( vi, v i+1 ), which means that vi+1 was chosen over y by a type (3) step. However, if e was ready then the algorithm would have picked y instead of vi+1 and stop on e (a type (2) step). If some ( vℓ−1, y ) was ready and becomes unready, this was already charged to the stopping step on (vℓ−1, v ℓ). In conclusion, the potential decreases by ℓ − O(1), and therefore the amortized recourse of insertion is also O(1). Theorem 2.7 fails for unrooted trees because when a step enters ( u, v ) from u and exits through 

v, we are not guaranteed that the next step on ( u, v ) also enters ( u, v ) from u. This issue can be slightly mitigated if the algorithm directs edges and attempts in some clever way to pass through them only according to their orientation. 11 This still does not truly help because our argument actually requires that we enter ( u, v ) consistently from the same edge of u and not just from any edge of u. Furthermore, if we restrict the options of where the next step may proceed from one edge to the next, we introduce a difficulty as in the case c < ∆ − 2, and then we cannot ensure that a step can proceed to a neighbour edge with a free color. To demonstrate why orientation might be crucial for designing an algorithm with low recourse, recall Theorem 2.4 and Section 3.2.1 where the adversary causes the greedy algorithm to recolor the exact same paths repeatedly in opposite directions. 

3.3 Greedy Algorithms: Additional Variants and Discussion 

So far most of our discussion on greedy algorithms regarded only Greedy . This is not the only greedy variant one can think of. It is the most natural definition when considering recourse min-imization per update, but in the realm of edge coloring many algorithms restrict their generality and only focus on shifting colors along paths, or along chains of edges. Indeed, any (multi-) Vizing chain which is the base of many edge recoloring algorithms [Viz64, DHZ19, Ber22, Chr23, BD25], is such algorithm. Other algorithms also rely on paths and chains [BCPS24a, CRV24, SK26]. With this perspective in mind, we can define two additional greedy variants. Then in the remainder of this section we explain that each variant is simple (polynomial) on forests, and detail how the results we derived differ for the new variants.               

> 11 As an example, say that we flip an unbiased coin to decide the orientation of an edge when it is inserted, and that when a step exits via a vertex vwe only choose available colors based on outgoing edges of v, unless there is at most 1 so we pick among all of them (to maintain a random choice). Then the probability that we exit von an edge directed towards vis exponentially small in ∆: Only if deg( v) is large (at least c+ 1, or else there should be an available color to stop), and if at least deg( v)−2 edges of vare oriented towards v.

26 Definition 3.10. Given a forest F with a proper edge coloring except for one edge e ∈ F , we define three greedy recoloring algorithms (variants) as follows. 1. Greedy (re-stated for completeness): This algorithm determines and recolors a smallest set of edges H ⊆ F \ { e} needed to be recolored to extend the coloring to e. Note that H ∪ { e}

is a connected component (single, by minimality). 2. GreedyShift : This algorithm picks the minimal H from a special subset: iteratively, let 

e′ = ( u, v ) be the current uncolored edge (initially e′ = e). Pick a color for e′ that is available at either u or v or both. If both, then we are done. Otherwise, uncolor the conflicting edge 

e′′ , and re-iterate on e′′ .3. We can define a sub-type of GreedyShift which is GreedyPath , such that the chain of edges over which we shift colors must form a path (that is, we do not allow fans ). Observe that the greedy algorithms in Definition 3.10 are listed in non-decreasing order of computation simplicity and recourse for a given (same) state. It is simpler to compute more restricted options, and more options can only reduce the recourse. Furthermore, each algorithm is in fact a class of algorithms, because we did not define the exact behavior in case of tie breaks. Such tie breaks are always necessary, even when the minimal recourse is unique, because there may be multiple recoloring options. The greedy hierarchy does not immediately imply a hierarchy in terms of amortized recourse, not even in worst-case when starting from the empty graph: Hypothetically, perhaps some clever invariant holds for one version but not for another. 

3.3.1 Greedy Optimality for ∆ = 2 The case of ∆ = 2 behaves quite differently than ∆ ≥ 3. Intuitively, such trees are paths, and their depth is linear in their size rather than logarithmic. Moreover, any connected component is a path, so Greedy , GreedyShift and GreedyPath are the same. We briefly state optimal bounds in this mostly trivial case. 

Theorem 3.11. Let F by a dynamic forest with maximum degree ∆ = 2 , and assume ∆ edge coloring. Greedy (Algorithm 1) has O(log n) amortized recourse in the incremental model, and 

O(n) amortized recourse in the fully dynamic model, which are both optimal up to a constant factor (in particular, randomization does not help). Proof. Consider the fully dynamic model first. Since the forest is a collection of paths (∆ = 2), the worst-case recourse, and in particular the greedy recourse, is O(n). Theorem 2.13 proves amortized recourse of Ω( h) where h = Θ(log ∆−1 n) for ∆ ≥ 3, by constructing (∆ − 1)-trees of depth h.Repeating the proof verbatim for ∆ = 2, the only difference is that now h = Θ( n) because the trees are unary. This concludes the analysis in the fully dynamic model. Next consider the incremental model. When an edge is inserted, it links two paths of lengths 

d ≤ d′. If recourse is required, Greedy pays d which we charge equally to the shorter path (1 per edge). For a fixed edge e, notice that the path that contains it at least doubles in size when we charge e, therefore the total charge of e is bounded by lg n. Then the amortized recourse is O(log n). To show a matching lower bound against any algorithm, including a randomized algorithm, observe that when a path has an even length, its endpoints have different free colors. Therefore, given an even path with endpoints u and v, when we link it to another path with endpoint to w,regardless of the available color at w, if we insert the edge ( u, w ) or the edge ( v, w ) with equal probability, there is probability of exactly 12 that recourse will be incurred. The recourse must 27 recolor one of the paths, so it is best for the adversary to link paths of comparable lengths. If the algorithm is deterministic, we can guarantee the recourse by choosing ( u, w ) or ( v, w ), but henceforth assume a randomized algorithm (harder to fail). Therefore, the adversary acts as follows. Initially, it inserts edges to form paths of length 1. Then, it links paths of length 1 by first extending one of them by an edge so that its length is even (2), and then adds another edge, so we get paths of length 4. Then, pairs of paths of length 4 are linked to form paths of length 9. The process continues, such that whenever each path in the collection has even length d we merge pairs to get paths of length 2 d + 1 and an expected recourse of (at least) d,and whenever each path in the collection has odd length d we extend one path in each pair to length 

d + 1, and then merge the pair to form a path of length 2 d + 2 with expected recourse of (at least) d.The lengths satisfy the recursive relation: d1 = 1 and di+1 = 2 · di + 1 + ( di mod 2), whose closed form is di = 4·2i−4−(i mod 2) 3 .12 In each level i the number of paths is halved, until it is a single long path in the last level ℓ where dℓ = Θ( n) (by maximality of ℓ), which implies (by the closed form) that 2 ℓ = Θ( n). Then the total expected recourse is at least: Pℓi=1 2ℓ−i · di ≥ Pℓi=1 2ℓ−i · 2i−1 =

ℓ · 2ℓ−1 = Θ( n log n). Therefore, the amortized expected recourse of any algorithm is Ω(log n). 

3.3.2 The Greedy Algorithms Are Efficient on Trees 

The greedy variants are simple to compute on trees. When an edge ( u1, u 2) is inserted between trees u1 ∈ T1 and u2 ∈ T2, assume that Ti is rooted at ui, GreedyPath simply checks all the paths from ui to w ∈ Ti to see if shifting the colors on this path ends with ( parent (w), w ) having an available color. Every leaf of Ti satisfies that a color is available, to GreedyPath just has to find the closest such w.For GreedyShift we also consider the path to every w. The difference is that GreedyPath 

immediately rules out paths with consecutive edges e1 = ( x, y ) and e2 = ( y, z ) if the color of e2

cannot be shifted to e1, while GreedyShift checks if this transition is possible when we perform a fan around y. Computing the smallest fan that lets the chain proceed from e1 to e2 is taken into account when considering the total recourse of the path, and GreedyShift picks the shortest chain. An alternative perspective is this: We compute the shortest path in the line-graph, subject to being able to shift colors. To compute the smallest fan to enable the path to proceed from ( x, y ) to ( y, z ), observe that a minimal fan shifts each color around y at most once. 13 Define the directed sub-line-graph on the edges of y such that there is an arc from ( y, a ) to ( y, b ) if the color of ( y, b ) can be shifted to ( y, a ), and compute the shortest path from ( y, x ) to ( y, z ). 

Greedy is more complicated, but is still polynomially computable on trees, using dynamic-programming (DP) as follows. Given a newly inserted edge e = ( u1, u 2), define the natural rooting on the tree of ui with root ui (i ∈ { 1, 2}). To clarify, in the tree of ui, an edge ( x, y ) is defined such that x = parent (y) if x is closer than y to ui. For every vertex v denote by α(v) ≡ color (parent (v), v ). We define subproblems P (v, β ) as minimizing the recoloring within the subtree rooted at v such that the color of its edge toward its parent is colored by β. We abuse notation and use P (v, β ) to                 

> 12 The recursion flips the parity with each element, and one can verify that the odd indices satisfy d2i+1 = 4 d2i−1+5 and that the even indices satisfy d2i+1 = 4 d2i−1+ 4, to solve explicitly and separately and get d2i−1=4·22i−1−53and
> d2i=4·22i−43.
> 13 Consider the coloring around ybefore and after applying all the changes. Then every edge either changed its color, or not. The edges that do change their color can be ordered starting at ( x, y ) such that each edge takes its color from the next. If at some point an edge does not take its (final and new) color from its next changed edge, then it is colored by a color that does not conflict with the unchanged edges, and the recoloring is finished, in contradiction to the minimality of the fan.

28 refer to both the recourse and the actual recoloring. If v is a leaf, then P (v, β ) = δβ,α (v) where δ is the Kronecker delta function. For a non-leaf, P (v, β ) = min α′

n

δβ,α (v) + P 

> w∈children (v)

P (w, α ′(w)) 

o

where α′(w) must be unique for each child v, and not equal to β. Finding an assignment α′ that minimizes the expression for P (v, β ) is the Assignment Problem , which can be solved, for example, by the Hungarian algorithm . There are at most ∆ − 1 children, and ∆ + c − 1 colors that are not 

β, so we can compute P (v, β ) in O(∆ 3) time. To pick the smallest recourse, we should color e by 

β such that P (u1, β ) + P (u2, β ) is minimized. There are O(n∆) problems P (·, ·) (per vertex, per color), so the total running time is O(n · ∆4). 

3.3.3 What Changes for the new Greedy Variants 

Interestingly, most of the results that we derived for Greedy apply to GreedyShift and its sub-variant GreedyPath . We list them briefly, with pointers to what change or doesn’t change: 1. Theorem 2.1: This theorem applies verbatim for c ≥ 1. To see why, note that the proof relies in this case on Theorem 3.1 which applies to recoloring a path (which is a special case of a chain). The case c = 0 is completely different, as shown in Theorem 3.12 below. 2. Theorem 2.2 is unchanged. Each recourse in the proof is at most 1, which is always a path. 3. Theorem 2.4 is unchanged. The recourse in the proof is already due to recoloring a path (by Lemma 3.4). However, we can strengthen the lower bound against these variants even further from Ω(log ∆ n) to Ω(log c+2 n 

> ∆−c

), as shown in Theorem 3.14 below. This improved lower bound shows that Theorem 3.1 is tight up to a constant factor for c ≥ 1. 

Theorem 3.12. Let c = 0 . Any shift-based deterministic algorithm has amortized recourse of 

Ω( 1∆ log( n 

> ∆3

)) even in the incremental model. Proof. Let the adversary start by dividing the n vertices to sets of ∆ − 1 vertices, and forming a star of degree ∆ − 2 out of each set. The algorithm must color each star using ∆ − 2 different colors. There are B =  ∆2

 = Θ(∆ 2) different sub-palettes of ∆ − 2 colors, denote by ki for 

i ∈ { 1, . . . , B } the number of stars that use sub-palette i. Since each star contains ∆ − 1 vertices, we have PBi=1 ki = ⌊ n 

> ∆−1

⌋ ≡ K = Θ( n 

> ∆

). Next, the adversary acts on each group of same-palette stars separately. It will only link the centers of the stars, and since the algorithm only shifts colors, the problem is reduced to maintaining a proper 2-coloring of these newly inserted edges. 14 

For 2-coloring, we have shown in the proof of Theorem 3.11 that the total incremental recourse is Ω( n log n) for n vertices. Then for each reduced subproblem with ki vertices, the total recourse is Ω( ki log ki). By applying the adversarial insertions for each group of stars separately, we get a total recourse of Ω( PBi=1 ki log ki). By convexity of the function f (x) = x log x and Jensen’s inequal-ity, the sum is minimized when the parts are equal, so PBi=1 (ki log ki) ≥ B · (K/B ) log( K/B ) = 

K log( K/B ). Finally, substitute K = Θ( n 

> ∆

) and B = Θ(∆ 2) to get Ω( n 

> ∆

log( n 

> ∆3

)) total recourse, and amortize it over Θ( n) insertions. Recall that this bound applies only if the algorithm only shifts colors. Other algorithms could 

recolor the stars, to drastically reduce the recourse when merging long paths.  

> 14 Recall that a shift-based algorithm never colors an edge by a color that is used at both of its ends, because this would cause two edges to become uncolored. In each subset of stars, all the colors except for 2 are used by both endpoints of the uncolored edge: Initially by definition of the insertion, and then by induction over the shifting of colors.

29 Next we show that the bound from Theorem 3.12 is almost tight for GreedyShift and 

GreedyPath .

Theorem 3.13. Assume only insertions to a forest with maximum degree ∆. Given ∆ colors, 

GreedyShift and GreedyPath each have amortized recourse O( 1∆ log n).Proof. When an edge is inserted between two trees, we charge the recourse equally to each edge of the smaller tree. Each edge is charged O(log n) times because the size of its tree at least doubles each time we charge it. Thus, to complete the proof we show that the charge due to a single merge is O( 1∆ ) per edge. Instead of analyzing the charge due to recourse of GreedyShift or GreedyPath , it would be easier to use an alternative recourse that bounds them. We define a recolored path as follows: its trajectory is towards a leaf of the smaller tree, and in each single color shift, it moves further away from the root, in the direction of a smallest subtree option. This is clearly a path, and it is guaranteed to finish successfully at a leaf (possibly earlier), therefore the recourse is an upper bound to the recourse of both GreedyShift and GreedyPath .Consider an insertion, and say that ( u, v ) is uncolored such that the recoloring path pro-ceeds to the tree of v whose size in edges is E(v) (either ( u, v ) is the new edge, or we are in the process of recoloring the path). The algorithm now chooses a color for ( u, v ). Unless 

A(u) ∩ A(v)̸ = ∅, the algorithm chooses a color from A(u) which, since A(u) ∩ A(v) = ∅, belongs to some edge ( v, w ). |A(u)| = ∆ − (deg( u) − 1) ≥ 1. Since we choose the smallest subtree option, we get a recursive function R that upper bounds the recourse: R(E(v)) ≤ 1 + R(E(w)) where E(w) ≤ ⌊ E(v)−(deg( v)−1)  

> A(u)

⌋. Note that R is monotone because it represents the worst possible recourse given a fixed number of edges. If z is the next vertex after w, then: 

E(z) ≤ E(w)−(deg( w)−1)  

> A(v)

< E(v)−(deg( v)−1)  

> A(v)

= E(v)−(deg( v)−1+ A(v))+ A(v) 

> A(v)

= E(v)−∆ 

> A(v)

+ 1 < E (v) − ∆ + 1. For every 2 steps we remove at least ∆ − 1 edges, thus R(E(v)) ≤ 2 · E(v)∆−1 , or, 2∆−1 per edge. We now state a stronger version of Theorem 2.4, against the new greedy variants. 

Theorem 3.14 (Shift-based Greedy recourse) . Assume ∆ ≥ 3 colors. There exist a forest and a coloring such that from this state onward, the amortized recourse of GreedyShift and Greedy-Path is Ω(log c+2 n 

> ∆−c

). There exists n2 = n2(∆ , c ) such that for every n ≥ n2, this bad state can be reached from the empty graph. Remark. The value of n2 is studied in detail in Section A.3. 

Proof. The proof reduces the case of maximum degree ∆ and extra c colors to a problem where the maximum degree is ∆ ′ = c + 2 colors, such that GreedyPath and GreedyShift behave like 

Greedy on the reduced problem. To reduce the problem, we need to make some colors unusable. The reduction is similar to other cases where we make colors unusable: We form stars such that the actual dynamic updates are only on edges between centers. Assuming that all the stars use the same sub-palette P , the colors of P can never be used by a shift-based algorithm. Each star is of degree ∆ − (c + 2), has ∆ − c − 1 vertices, so we have n′ = ⌊ n 

> ∆−c−1

⌋ stars in total. Provided that we are given these stars to begin with, or that n ≥ n2(∆ , c ) so that we can bootstrap them from the empty graph, we now have n′ vertices (star centers), which would be of maximum degree ∆ ′ = c + 2 in the reduced problem. Since there are c = ∆ ′ − 2 extra colors, we get a lower bound of Ω(log ∆′ n′) and the theorem follows. 30 4 Randomized Algorithms: A Formal Account 

We now turn to randomization. We consider a simple randomized approach that yields better bounds in both models (incremental and fully dynamic). The basic idea is to keep the edge-coloring highly random as the forest evolves over time. Concretely, for a forest F , we define a simple distribution D(F ) over the proper κ-edge-coloring of F . The algorithm maintains the invariant that after every update, the coloring of the forest F

is distributed exactly according to D(F ). Henceforth, we use D for D(F ) when F would be clear from the context. 

4.1 A Randomized Distribution-Maintaining Algorithm 

To define the distribution, and then the algorithm, it is clearest to begin with rooted forests. 

4.1.1 Rooted Forests 

In the rooted setting (Definition 2.6), the distribution D has a simple top-down description. Start-ing from the root, each vertex assigns colors to its child-edges uniformly at random, with one restriction: the color of the edge connecting that vertex to its parent is forbidden (and thus ex-cluded). Repeating this recursively down each tree defines the distribution. The formal definition is given in Definition 4.2 below. We describe how the algorithm maintains this distribution shortly. The point of maintaining this distribution is that it allows us to analyze the expected recourse of the algorithm’s maintenance operations using the exact probability to recolor any particular edge. 

A top–down coloring distribution. Fix ∆ ≥ 2 and κ ≥ ∆. We define D(F ) using a single local sampling primitive. 

Definition 4.1 (Uniform coloring) . Let v be a vertex with ℓ = |children (v)| children, and let 

X ⊆ [κ] be of size at least ℓ. A uniform coloring from X of the child edges of v is obtained by choosing an ℓ-subset Y ⊆ X uniformly at random and then assigning the colors of Y to the ℓ child edges of v by a uniformly random permutation. 15 

For a vertex v, let Tv denote the subtree consisting of v and all its descendants. 

Definition 4.2 (The distributions D and Dα). Let T be a rooted tree with root r.For a color α ∈ [κ], the distribution Dα(T ) is defined recursively as follows. Uniformly color the child edges of r from [ κ] \ { α}. Then, independently for each child u ∈ children (r), generate the coloring of the subtree rooted at u, Tu, according to Dβ (Tu), where β = color (r, u ). The distribution D(T ) is defined in the same way, except that the child edges of the root are uniformly colored from [ κ]. For a rooted forest F , the distribution D(F ) is obtained by sampling each rooted tree component 

T independently from D(T ). We will repeatedly use the following two probabilities, which follow immediately from Defini-tion 4.1. Let v be a non-root vertex with ℓ children and parent-edge color α = color (parent (v), v ).   

> 15 Equivalently, it is a uniformly random injective mapping from children (v) to X.

31 Algorithm 3: Top–Down Random Edge Coloring Maintenance (calls Algorithm 4) 

Input: A sequence of edge updates over a forest F with a maximum degree ∆. 

Output: Maintains a proper coloring of F after each update.  

> 1

Function UpdateForest( Forest F , edge (p, r ) where p = parent (r), insert/delete ): 

> 2

if insert then  

> 3

Insert ( p, r ) and choose color (p, r ) uniformly from A(p) (available colors at p).  

> 4

Call RootToChild( r, color (p, r )). 

> 5

if delete then  

> 6

Let α ← color (p, r ) and delete the edge ( p, r ).  

> 7

Call ChildToRoot( r, α ).Under D(F ), the set of colors on child edges of v is a uniformly random ℓ-subset of [ κ] \ { α}. Hence, for any fixed β̸ = α,Pr[ β appears on some child edge of v] = ℓκ − 1 ≤ ∆ − 1

κ − 1 . (1) Similarly, for a root r with ℓ children and any fixed β,Pr[ β appears on some child edge of r] = ℓκ ≤ ∆

κ . (2) 

The algorithm. Our algorithm, Algorithm 3, maintains the following invariant: at every time 

t, the current proper edge-coloring is distributed exactly as D(Ft) for the current rooted forest Ft.Each update is handled by a local recoloring that may change the parent-edge color of one child. This triggers a recursive repair at that child, and the same mechanism propagates along a single downward path until no constraint is violated. At the top level, an insertion chooses a feasible color for the new edge at the parent endpoint and then repairs the former root that became a child using RootToChild (Algorithm 4). A dele-tion removes the parent edge of a child r, after which r becomes a root and we repair it using 

ChildToRoot (Algorithm 4). We now describe these repair procedures. When a non-root vertex v changes its parent-edge color from α to β, the only new constraint is that β becomes forbidden on edges from v to its children. The procedure FixForbidden (Algo-rithm 4) repairs this locally: if some child edge uses β, there is exactly one such edge, and it is recolored to α. This fixes v, but it changes the parent-edge color of that child, so the same repair is applied recursively. Observe that since we only exchange the colors α and β down a path in the tree, the global effect of applying local repairs is simply to flip the colors on an ( α, β )-bicolored path down the tree. The local presentation is simpler for the analysis. When a root r gains a parent edge of color β, the color β becomes forbidden on child edges of r. The procedure RootToChild repairs r so that the colors of its child-edges have the correct distribution conditioned on forbidding β: if a child edge uses β, it is recolored to a uniformly random color α not used on the other child edges of r. This restores the correct distribution at r

and reduces to a forbidden-color change at the affected child, which is handled by FixForbidden 

(The colors β and α define the bicolored path over which a flip will be applied down the tree). When a non-root vertex r becomes a root, its former parent-edge color α stops being forbidden. The procedure ChildToRoot restores the root distribution by inserting the color α onto a uniformly random child edge with probability ℓ/κ , where ℓ = |children (r)| (see (2)). If the color α was inserted, let e = ( r, x ) be the edge that was chosen, and let β be its former color. Now β becomes forbidden 32 Algorithm 4: Helper functions for Algorithm 3 and Algorithm 5  

> 1

Function RootToChild( vertex r, color β): 

> 2

// Root r becomes child with parent-edge color β. 

> 3

If no child edge ( r, w ) has color β: return . 

> 4

Let w be the unique child with color (r, w ) = β. 

> 5

Choose α ∈ A(r) uniformly at random and recolor ( r, w ) to α. 

> 6

Call FixForbidden( w, β, α ). 

> 7

Function ChildToRoot( vertex r, color α): 

> 8

// Vertex r becomes root; parent-edge color α removed.  

> 9

ℓ ← | children (r)|. 

> 10

With probability ( κ − ℓ)/κ return . 

> 11

Choose a uniformly random child w ∈ children (r).  

> 12

β ← color (r, w ).  

> 13

Recolor ( r, w ) to α. 

> 14

Call FixForbidden( w, β, α ). 

> 15

Function FixForbidden( non-root vertex v, color α, color β): 

> 16

// Parent-edge color changed α → β. 

> 17

If no child edge ( v, w ) has color β: return . 

> 18

Let w be the unique child with color (v, w ) = β 

> 19

Recolor ( v, w ) to α 

> 20

Call FixForbidden( w, β, α )

for x, and this change of constraint is repaired by FixForbidden . Again, from a global perspective, a bicolored path of colors α and β is now being flipped from r downwards. 

Distribution invariant. We analyze the algorithm against an oblivious adversary : the up-date sequence is fixed in advance and is independent of the randomness of the algorithm. Let Ft

be the rooted forest after t updates, and let Ct be the random coloring maintained by Algorithm 3 at time t. The goal of this subsection is to show that Ct is distributed exactly as D(Ft) for every t.The proof reduces to three local statements, one for each repair procedure. Each statement is formulated for an entire subtree and therefore already accounts for the full downward cascade created by the recursive calls. 

Theorem 4.3 (Distribution invariant) . Let Ct be the random coloring maintained by Algorithm 3. For every t ≥ 0 we have Ct ∼ D (Ft).

Lemma 4.4 (FixForbidden ). Let v be a non-root vertex, and let α, β ∈ [κ] with α̸ = β.Assume the current coloring restricted to the subtree Tv is distributed as Dα(Tv). After execut-ing FixForbidden( v, α, β ) (Algorithm 4), the resulting coloring restricted to Tv is distributed as 

Dβ (Tv).Proof. We prove the statement by induction on the size of Tv. If v has no children, the procedure makes no changes and Dα(Tv) = Dβ (Tv). Assume ℓ = |children (v)| ≥ 1 and that the claim holds for all strict descendant subtrees. Under 

Dα(Tv), the ℓ child edges of v are uniformly colored from [ κ] \ { α}. The procedure FixForbidden 

changes these colors only as follows: if no child edge has color β it does nothing, and otherwise it 33 replaces the unique occurrence of β by α. Hence, it defines a bijection from the proper colorings of the child edges from [ κ] \ { α} to the proper colorings of the child edges from [ κ] \ { β}.Conditioned on the child-edge colors at v, Definition 4.2 makes the child subtrees independent, and each subtree Tu is distributed as Dcolor (v,u )(Tu). If no recoloring occurs at v, no parent-edge color changes and there is no recursive call, so the subtree distributions already match Dβ (Tv). Otherwise, let w be the unique child with color (v, w ) = β before recoloring; after recoloring, the parent-edge color of w becomes α, while every other child keeps the same parent-edge color. The recursive call FixForbidden( w, β, α ) is then executed. Before this call, Tw is distributed as Dβ (Tw); by the induction hypothesis applied to the strict subtree Tw, the call transforms it into Dα(Tw). All other child subtrees are unchanged. Together with the previous paragraph, this is exactly the recursive definition of Dβ (Tv). 

Lemma 4.5 (RootToChild ). Let r be a root vertex and fix β ∈ [κ]. Assume the current coloring restricted to the tree Tr is distributed as D(Tr). After executing RootToChild( r, β ) (Algorithm 4), the resulting coloring restricted to Tr is distributed as Dβ (Tr).Proof. Let ℓ = |children (r)|. Under D(Tr), the ℓ child edges of r are uniformly colored from [ κ]. Let Y be the set of these ℓ colors. If β / ∈ Y , the procedure does nothing at r. Conditioned on β / ∈ Y , the set Y is a uniformly random ℓ-subset of [ κ] \ { β}, and conditioned on Y the assignment of Y to the child edges is a uniformly random permutation. If β ∈ Y , write Y = Z ∪ { β} where Z is an ( ℓ − 1)-subset of [ κ] \ { β}. Under a uniform coloring from [ κ], the set Z is uniformly random among ( ℓ − 1)-subsets of [ κ] \ { β}, the unique edge colored 

β is a uniformly random child edge, and the colors of Z are assigned to the other ℓ − 1 child edges by a uniformly random permutation. The procedure chooses α uniformly from [ κ] \ Y , which equals [κ] \ (Z ∪ { β}) and has size κ − ℓ, and replaces β by α on that uniformly random child edge. Thus, the new set of child-edge colors is Z ∪ { α}. For any fixed ℓ-subset X ⊆ [κ] \ { β},Pr[ Z ∪ { α} = X | β ∈ Y ] = X

> α∈X

Pr[ Z = X \ { α}] · Pr[ α is chosen | Z]= ℓ · 1

 κ−1

> ℓ−1

 · 1

κ − ℓ = 1

 κ−1

> ℓ

 ,

so Z ∪ { α} is uniform over ℓ-subsets of [ κ] \ { β}. Moreover, conditioned on Z ∪ { α} = X, the assignment of X to the ℓ child edges is a uniformly random permutation: the edge receiving the new color α is uniformly random (it is the former β-colored edge ( r, w )), and the remaining ℓ − 1colors are uniformly permuted on the remaining edges. Therefore, after the local step of RootToChild at r, the child edges of r are uniformly colored from [ κ] \ { β}, as required by Dβ .Finally, if the procedure recolors ( r, w ) from β to α, then the parent-edge color of w changes from β to α and the procedure calls FixForbidden( w, β, α ). Conditioned on the colors on child edges of r, by Definition 4.2 the child subtree colorings are independent and each Tu is distributed as Dcolor (r,u )(Tu). Thus, before the call, Tw is distributed as Dβ (Tw), and by Lemma 4.4 the call transforms it into Dα(Tw). All other child subtrees are unchanged. This matches the recursive definition of Dβ (Tr). 

Lemma 4.6 (ChildToRoot ). Let r be a non-root vertex, and let α = color (parent (r), r ). As-sume the current coloring restricted to the subtree Tr is distributed as Dα(Tr). After executing 

ChildToRoot( r, α ) (Algorithm 4), the resulting coloring restricted to Tr is distributed as D(Tr).

34 Proof. Let ℓ = |children (r)|. Under Dα(Tr), the ℓ child edges of r are uniformly colored from [κ] \ { α}. Let Y be the set of these ℓ colors. We first show that after the local step at r, the set of colors on child edges of r is a uniformly random ℓ-subset of [ κ], and conditioned on this set the assignment to the ℓ child edges is a uniformly random permutation. Fix any ℓ-subset X ⊆ [κ]. If α / ∈ X, then ChildToRoot can output the set X only by taking the do-nothing branch (probability ( κ − ℓ)/κ ) and having Y = X (probability 1 / κ−1

> ℓ

). Hence: Pr[output set = X] = κ − ℓκ · 1

 κ−1

> ℓ

 = 1

 κℓ

 .

If α ∈ X, write X = Z ∪ { α} where |Z| = ℓ − 1. The procedure outputs X only in the recoloring branch (probability ℓ/κ ). This branch chooses a uniformly random child edge, which is equivalent to choosing a uniformly random element of Y to remove (since the assignment of Y to child edges is a uniformly random permutation). Thus the output set equals X exactly when Y = Z ∪ { y} for some y ∈ [κ] \ (Z ∪ { α}) and the removed element is y. There are κ − ℓ choices for such y, and for each one, Pr[ Y = Z ∪ { y}] = 1 / κ−1

> ℓ

 and Pr[remove y | Y ] = 1 /ℓ . Therefore: Pr[output set = X] = ℓκ · (κ − ℓ) · 1

 κ−1

> ℓ

 · 1

ℓ = κ − ℓκ · 1

 κ−1

> ℓ

 = 1

 κℓ

 .

So in all cases the output set is uniform over ℓ-subsets of [ κ]. Moreover, conditioned on the output set, the assignment to child edges is a uniformly random permutation: in the do-nothing branch nothing changes, and in the recoloring branch the edge that receives α is chosen uniformly among the ℓ child edges. Finally, if a recoloring occurs, let w be the chosen child and let β be the old color of ( r, w ). The procedure calls FixForbidden( w, β, α ). Conditioned on the colors on child edges of r, by Defini-tion 4.2 the child subtree colorings are independent and each Tu is distributed as Dcolor (r,u )(Tu). Thus before the call, Tw is distributed as Dβ (Fw), and by Lemma 4.4 the call transforms it into 

Dα(Tw). All other child subtrees are unchanged. This matches the recursive definition of D(Tr). 

Proof of Theorem 4.3. We prove by induction on t that Ct ∼ D (Ft). The base case t = 0 is the empty forest with the empty coloring. For the inductive step, assume that Ct ∼ D (Ft) and consider the update made at t + 1. 

Insertion. Suppose the update attaches a root r as a child of a vertex p in a different component, and let β = color (p, r ) be the color chosen for the new edge. Under D(Ft) the colorings of different components are independent, so the current coloring of Tr is independent of the choice of β.Consider the endpoint p. Under D(Ft), the child edges of p are uniformly colored from the allowed palette at p (either [ κ] if p is a root, or [ κ] \ { color (parent (p), p )} otherwise). Algorithm 3 chooses β uniformly from the colors in this palette that are not used on the existing child edges of 

p. This extends the current uniform coloring on the old child edges by one additional child edge using a uniformly random unused color, which yields a uniform coloring on the new set of child edges of p from the allowed colors. At r, the update changes r from a root to a non-root with parent-edge color β. By Lemma 4.5, the call RootToChild( r, β ) transforms the coloring on Tr from D(Tr) to Dβ (Tr), as required. All other vertices are unchanged. Therefore the resulting coloring is distributed as D(Ft+1 ). 

Deletion. Suppose the update deletes an edge ( p, r ) where p = parent (r), and let α = color (p, r ) be its color before deletion. Removing this edge deletes one child edge of p. Under D(Ft), the child edges of p are uniformly colored from the same allowed palette as above. Restricting a uniform 35 coloring to a subset of the edges preserves uniformity, hence after deleting ( p, r ) the remaining child edges of p are still uniformly colored from that palette. At r, the update changes r from a non-root with parent-edge color α, to a root. By Lemma 4.6, the call ChildToRoot( r, α ) transforms the coloring on Tr from Dα(Tr) to D(Tr), as required. All other vertices are unchanged. Therefore the resulting coloring is distributed as D(Ft+1 ). 

4.1.2 General (unrooted) Forests via Rerooting 

We now extend the algorithm to the standard model for (unrooted) forests, where an insertion adds an edge between two arbitrary vertices in different trees (both may be non-roots), and a deletion removes an existing edge. The key point is that the distribution D from Definition 4.2 is not merely a convenient rooted distribution: On a tree it is exactly the uniform distribution over all proper 

κ-edge-colorings. Consequently, the maintained distribution does not depend on which vertex is chosen as the root of a component, and we may reroot components freely (without recoloring) in order to interpret every update as a rooted update handled by Algorithm 3. The revised unrooted algorithm is given in Algorithm 5, note that it is almost identical to Algorithm 3. 

Lemma 4.7 (Uniformity of D). Fix κ ≥ ∆, and let T be a rooted tree. The distribution D(T )

(Definition 4.2) is the uniform distribution over all proper edge-colorings of T with colors [κ].Proof. Let r be the root of T . For a vertex v, denote ℓ(v) = |children (v)|.Fix any proper edge-coloring σ of T with colors [ κ]. We compute the probability of producing σ

under D(T ). In the top–down process, each vertex v produces a uniform coloring of its child edges from an allowed palette: [ κ] at the root, and [ κ] \ { α} at a non-root vertex whose parent-edge color is α. Therefore the probability of realizing σ is the product, over all vertices, of the probabilities that each vertex produces the child-edge coloring specified by σ.If v is a root, then D(T ) assigns to its ℓ(v) child edges a uniform coloring from [ κ]. The number of such assignments is κ!(κ−ℓ(v))! , hence the probability that v produces the assignment specified by σ

is (κ−ℓ(v))!  

> κ!

. If v is not a root, then the parent-edge color is fixed to some α, and D(T ) assigns to the 

ℓ(v) child edges a uniform coloring from [ κ]\{ α}. The number of such colorings is (κ−1)! (κ−1−ℓ(v))! , hence the probability that v produces the child-edge coloring specified by σ is (κ−1−ℓ(v))! (κ−1)! . Multiplying over all vertices, we get the probability (κ − ℓ(r))! 

κ! · Y 

> v̸=r

(κ − 1 − ℓ(v))! (κ − 1)! = 1

κ · Y

> v

(κ − deg( v))! (κ − 1)! ,

where the last equality follows from the fact that deg( r) = ℓ(r) and deg( v) = ℓ(v) + 1 for all v̸ = r.This expression depends only on the degrees and is, in particular, independent of σ.16 Therefore, every proper edge-coloring has the same probability, i.e., D(T ) is uniform. We maintain a uniform random proper κ-edge-coloring of an unrooted forest. The algorithm reroots only to apply the update in the rooted model. Rerooting does not change any edge colors and incurs zero recourse. 

Theorem 4.8 (Uniformity invariant for unrooted forests) . For every t ≥ 0 the random coloring maintained by Algorithm 5 is distributed uniformly over all proper edge-colorings of the current (unrooted) forest with colors [κ]. 

> 16 Note that it is also invariant to the choice of root r.

36 Algorithm 5: DistMaint : Uniform Edge Coloring for Unrooted Forests (calls Algo-rithm 4) 

Input: A sequence of edge updates over a forest F with a maximum degree ∆. 

Output: Maintains a proper coloring of F after each update.  

> 1

Function UpdateForest( Forest F , edge (u, v ), insert/delete ): 

> 2

if insert then  

> 3

Let Tu, Tv be the components containing u and v, respectively.  

> 4

if |E(Tv)| ≤ ∆ and |E(Tu)| ≤ ∆ then  

> 5

w.l.o.g. let v and u be such that deg( v) ≤ deg( u).  

> 6

else  

> 7

w.l.o.g. let v and u be such that |E(Tv)| ≤ | E(Tu)|. 

> 8

Reroot Tv at v, and let u = parent (v).  

> 9

Insert ( u, v ) and choose color (u, v ) uniformly among A(u).  

> 10

Call RootToChild( v, color (u, v )) 

> 11

if delete then  

> 12

w.l.o.g. assume that u = parent (v) by the current rooting of their tree.  

> 13

Let α ← color (u, v ) and delete the edge ( u, v ).  

> 14

Call ChildToRoot( v, α ).

Proof. By induction on t. The base case is trivial. Assume the claim holds at time t, so the current coloring is uniform over proper colorings of the current (unrooted) forest. Algorithm 5 may reroot one component (upon insertion), changing only parent/child relations. By Lemma 4.7, for any choice of roots, the same uniform distribution can be viewed as the rooted distribution D(Ft). The algorithm then performs exactly the same recoloring steps as Algorithm 3. By Theorem 4.3, after these steps the resulting rooted coloring is distributed as D(Ft+1 ) for the new rooted forest representation, which by Lemma 4.7 is the uniform distribution over all proper 

κ-edge-colorings of the updated forest. Now that we have established that the randomized algorithm maintains the uniform distribution over proper edge colorings, we can proceed to analyze its recourse. 

4.2 Recourse Analysis 

We begin with two useful lemmas that quantify the exact probability that a fixed edge is recolored due to FixForbidden and due to an insertion. 

Lemma 4.9 (Recoloring probability of an edge due to FixForbidden ). Let v be a non-root vertex, let α, β ∈ [κ] be two distinct colors, and assume that the current coloring of 

Tv is distributed as Dα(Tv). Let e ∈ E(Tv) be an edge at depth d ≥ 1 from v. Then 

Pr[ FixForbidden( v, α, β ) recolors e] = 1 /(κ − 1) d.Proof. By induction on d. For d = 1, e is a child edge of v. Conditioned on the parent-edge color of v being α, by Definition 4.2, the child edges of v are uniformly colored from [ κ] \ { α}. Therefore, 

e has color β with probability 1 /(κ − 1). Since FixForbidden( v, α, β ) recolors exactly the unique child edge of color β, it follows that e is recolored with probability 1 /(κ − 1). Now let d ≥ 2, and let e1 = (v, w ) be the first edge on the unique v-to-e path. For 

FixForbidden( v, α, β ) to recolor e, it must first recolor e1. By the base case, Pr[ e1 is recolored] = 37 1/(κ − 1). Now, condition on the event that e1 is recolored. Before the recoloring, e1 had color β,so by Definition 4.2, the subtree Tw is distributed as Dβ (Tw). After recoloring e1, the procedure makes the recursive call FixForbidden( w, β, α ). The edge e is now at depth d − 1 from w, so by the induction hypothesis, conditioned on recoloring e1, the probability that the recursive call recolors e is 1 /(κ − 1) d−1. Hence, Pr[ FixForbidden( v, α, β ) recolors e] = = Pr[ FixForbidden( v, α, β ) recolors e | e1 is recolored] · Pr[ e1 is recolored] = 1(κ − 1) d−1 · 1

κ − 1 = 1(κ − 1) d .

Lemma 4.10 (Recoloring probability of an edge due to insertion) . Consider an insertion of an edge (p, r ). Let Tr be the tree rooted at r prior to this insertion, and let e ∈ E(Tr) be an edge at depth d ≥ 1 from r. Then, the probability that e is recolored in this insertion is 1/ κ(κ − 1) d−1.Proof. Let r = v0, v 1, . . . , v d be the unique root-to-e path in Tr, and let ei = ( vi−1, v i) for i ∈ [d], so ed = e. For e to be recolored, the recoloring walk must follow this path. Let β be the color chosen for the new parent-edge ( p, r ). By Theorem 4.3, before the insertion, the coloring of Tr is distributed as D(Tr). Also, the choice of β is made in the other component (uniformly among the available colors at p), so it is independent of the coloring of Tr. By Defini-tion 4.2, the child edges of r are uniformly colored from [ κ]. Hence, for every fixed β ∈ [κ], the edge e1 has color β with probability 1 /κ . So Pr[ e1 is recolored] = 1 /κ .If d = 1, we are done. For d ≥ 2, condition on the event that e1 is recolored. Let β′ be the new color assigned to e1 by RootToChild . Before the recoloring, e1 had color β, so by the recursive definition of D(Tr) (Definition 4.2), the subtree Tv1 is distributed as Db(Tv1 ). The procedure then calls FixForbidden( v1, β, β ′). We have Pr[ e is recolored] = Pr[ e is recolored | e1 is recolored] · Pr[ e1 is recolored] = Pr[ FixForbidden( v1, β, β ′) recolors e] · 1

κ . (3) Since e is at depth d − 1 from v1, by Lemma 4.9 we have Pr[ FixForbidden( v1, β, β ′) recolors e] = 1/(κ − 1) d−1. Substituting this in (3) concludes the proof. 

4.2.1 Incremental Forests (Insertions Only) 

We now analyze the expected amortized recourse of the distribution maintenance algorithm in the incremental setting. We show a tight Θ(1 /∆) bound, both for rooted and general forests. We begin with the rooted forests case, which is simpler to analyze. In fact, for this case we prove a stronger guarantee. We show that for any fixed edge e, the expected number of times e is recolored throughout the entire insertions sequence is at most O(1 /∆). 

Theorem 4.11. Assume only insertions in the rooted-forest model. For ∆ ≥ 3, Algorithm 3 has expected amortized recourse Θ( 1∆ ).Proof. We first prove the upper bound. Fix the final rooted forest, and let e be one of its edges. We show that the expected number of times the color of e changes is O(1 /∆). Let e = ( p, u ), where p is the parent of u in the final rooted forest. The color of e can change only when a rooted tree containing e is attached at an ancestor of p. If that ancestor is at distance d − 1 above p,then at that moment e is at depth d in the attached rooted tree. By Lemma 4.10, the probability 38 that this insertion recolors e is exactly 1 

> κ(κ−1) d−1

. Summing over all possible ancestors above e, the expected number of recolorings of e is at most 

X

> d≥1

1

κ · (κ − 1) d−1 < κ − 1

κ · (κ − 2) = O

 1

κ



= O

 1∆



.

We now prove the lower bound. Insert two edges, ( v, w ) followed by ( u, v ) where v is a parent of w and a child of u. With probability 1 

> κ

, ( u, v ) picks the color of ( v, w ) and causes a recourse of 1, thus we get Ω( 1∆ ) expected recourse per insertion. A similar lower bound can be shown for longer paths, and for d-ary trees for d = Ω(∆) whose edges are inserted bottom-up. We now turn to general forests. To use the same distribution maintenance operations as in the rooted case, the algorithm must reroot at least one component before each insertion. Although the algorithm maintains the same distribution, the rooted proof does not apply to the unrooted case. This is because in the rooted setting, a fixed edge e can be recolored only when the root of its current tree is linked to another tree, and each time this happens, the depth of e in the merged tree increases. This is not the case in the unrooted setting. For example, several edges incident to 

e may be inserted, and if the component of e is rerooted several times due to these insertions, e

becomes a child-edge of the root many times. This can increase the expected number of times e

is recolored. This also suggests that the choice of which component to reroot is important, as the following remark illustrates. 

Remark 4.12 (Rerooting carefully is essential) . When two small components are linked by an edge (u, v ), Algorithm 5 reroots the endpoint with a smaller degree. This choice is essential for the o(1) bound. To demonstrate this, consider a sequence that builds a star of degree ∆ centered at v. The smaller degree in every insertion is 0 (new leaf). Rerooting the leaf side causes no recourse. On the other hand, suppose that we reroot the star side upon every insertion, and make it a child of the new leaf. On the i-th insertion, v has 

i − 1 child-edges. The new parent-edge is colored uniformly at random from a palette of size κ.Hence, with probability i−1 

> κ

, it collides with a color of a child-edge, and recourse is incurred. Thus, the expected total recourse is P∆  

> i=1 i−1
> κ

= Ω( ∆2 

> κ

) = Ω(∆), which implies Ω(1) expected amortized recourse. 

Theorem 4.13. Assume only insertions to a forest of maximum degree at most ∆ ≥ 3. Algorithm 5 has expected amortized recourse Θ  1∆

.

We begin with a simple bound that will later be used in the proof of the theorem. 

Proposition 4.14. Let {(ui, v i)}mi=1 be a sequence of insertions. Then Pmi=1 min {deg i−1(ui), deg i−1(vi)} ≤ m, where deg i−1(·) is the degree just before the ith in-sertion. Proof. For a tree T , let δ(T ) ≡ max w∈T deg T (w). We define Φ( T ) ≡ | E(T )| − δ(T ), and for an entire forest F , Φ( F ) ≡ P  

> T∈F

Φ( T ). Let Fi−1 be the forest just before the ith insertion. Consider the insertion of ei = ( ui, v i). Let Tu

and Tv be the two trees that are merged (we omit the i for readability), and let Te = Tu ∪ Tv ∪ { ei}

39 be the merged tree. The change in potential due to this insertion is Φ( Fi) − Φ( Fi−1) = Φ( Te) − (Φ( Tu) + Φ( Tv)) = |E(Te)| − δ(Te) − (|E(Tu)| − δ(Tu) + |E(Tv)| − δ(Tv)) = δ(Tu) + δ(Tv) − δ(Te) + 1 

≥ δ(Tu) + δ(Tv) − (max {δ(Tu), δ (Tv)} + 1) + 1 = min {δ(Tu), δ (Tv)} ≥ min {deg i−1(ui), deg i−1(vi)},

where the first inequality is due to the fact that adding one edge can increase the maximum degree by at most 1. Therefore, we get that Φ( Fm) − Φ( F0) = Pmi=1 (Φ( Fi) − Φ( Fi−1)) ≥Pmi=1 min {deg i−1(ui), deg i−1(vi)}. Also, Φ( F0) = 0, and Φ( Fm) = P  

> T∈Fm

(|E(T )| − δ(T )) ≤P  

> T∈Fm

|E(T )| = m. Combining the last two inequalities concludes the proof. We are now ready to prove Theorem 4.13. 

Proof of Theorem 4.13. We first prove the lower bound. Proving the lower bound is almost as in Theorem 4.11. The only difference is that we insert 3 edges, instead of 2, in the following order: (u, v ), ( w, z ) and then ( v, w ). Now, regardless of how Algorithm 5 breaks symmetry and chooses its rooting, the total expected recourse is 1 

> κ

= Θ( 1∆ ), averaged over 3 insertions. (This argument shows that whenever an edge is inserted between two existing edges, it contributes expected recourse of at least 1 

> κ

.) 

We now prove the upper bound. In what follows, we refer to a component T as small if it contains at most ∆ edges, i.e., |E(T )| ≤ ∆, and large otherwise. We partition the recourse-causing insertions of edges e = ( u, v ) into three types according to the sizes of the two components being merged. Let Tu and Tv be the components containing u and v, respectively. 

• Type 1: both components are small. 

• Type 2: one component is small and the other is large. 

• Type 3: both components are large. 

Type 1 analysis: Consider a Type 1 insertion ( u, v ). The algorithm reroots the endpoint of smaller degree. Assume, without loss of generality that deg( v) ≤ deg( u). So the algorithm reroots 

Tv at v, and then calls RootToChild on v.We first bound the expected recourse due to the edges at depth at least 2 from v. By Lemma 4.10, each such edge is recolored with probability at most 1 

> κ(κ−1)

. There are at most ∆ edges in Tv, so the total contribution of depth ≥ 2 edges is at most ∆ 

> κ(κ−1)

= O(1 /∆). We therefore charge this part directly to the insertion of ( u, v ). It remains to bound the contribution of the edges at depth 1. Again, by Lemma 4.10, their expected recourse is exactly deg( v)/κ = min {deg( v), deg( u)}/κ . We amortize this quantity over all insertions. By Proposition 4.14, the sum of this quantity over all m insertions is upper bounded by m/κ . Thus, the expected amortized Type 1 recourse is O(1 /∆) per insertion. 

Type 2 analysis: Consider a Type 2 insertion ( u, v ), where v belongs to the small component 

Tv. Thus, only edges of Tv can be recolored. By Lemma 4.10, each edge of Tv is recolored with probability at most 1 /κ . We charge the recourse of a recolored edge directly to that edge. So, the expected charge of e ∈ E(Tv) due to this insertion is at most 1 /κ .Now, each edge can be charged due to Type 2 insertion at most once. Consider the first time such a charge is made to an edge e. One of the merged components is large, so after this insertion, 40 e is part of a large component and since we only perform insertions, it can never again lie in the small side of a Type 2 insertion. Thus, the total expected Type 2 recourse per edge is O(1 /∆). 

Type 3 analysis: When both components are large, the algorithm reroots the smaller compo-nent. We define buckets according to the size of the smaller component. For an integer j, bucket 

j consists of those insertions for which the smaller component has between 2 j and 2 j+1 − 1 edges. Note that since both components are large in this case, the first ⌊lg ∆ ⌋ − 1 buckets are empty. Fix a bucket j. If an insertion occurs in bucket j, then the smaller component has at least 2 j

edges. After the insertion, the merged component has at least 2 j+1 edges, and thus leaves bucket 

j. Hence bucket j contains at most m/ 2j recourse-causing insertions. It remains to bound the expected recourse of one insertion in bucket j. Let Tv be the smaller component, rooted at the attachment vertex, and for d ≥ 1 let nd be the number of edges in 

E(Tv) at depth d from the root. By Lemma 4.10, an edge at depth d is recolored with probability  

> 1
> κ(κ−1) d−1

. Hence, 

E[recourse] = X

> e∈Tv

Pr[ e is recolored] = 1

κ

X

> d≥1

nd

(κ − 1) d−1 . (4) Every non-root vertex has at most ∆ − 1 children, so nd ≤ (∆ − 1) d for every d. For fixed 

|E(Tv)|, (4) is maximized by placing as many edges as possible as close to the root as possible. Thus, if h =

l

log (∆ −1) (|E(Tv)| + 1) 

m

, then: 

E[recourse] = 1

κ

X

> d≥1

nd

(κ − 1) d−1 ≤ 1

κ

> h

X

> d=1

(∆ − 1) d

(κ − 1) d−1 = ∆ − 1

κ

> h−1

X

> d=0

 ∆ − 1

κ − 1

d

.

Now since ∆ −1 ≤ κ−1, each term in the last sum is at most 1. Therefore, E[recourse] ≤ ∆−1 

> κ

·h < h .Since |E(Tv)| < 2j+1 , we get E[recourse] ≤ log (∆ −1) (2 j+1 ) = j+1 lg(∆ −1) . Therefore, every insertion in bucket j has expected recourse at most j+1 lg(∆ −1) . Summing over all the buckets, and recalling that the first ⌊lg ∆ ⌋ − 1 are empty, we get a total contribution of at most: 

X

> j≥⌊ lg ∆ ⌋

m

2j · j + 1 lg(∆ − 1) = m

lg(∆ − 1) · X

> j≥⌊ lg ∆ ⌋

j + 1 2j = m

lg(∆ − 1) · O

 lg ∆ ∆



= O

 m

∆



.

In other words, we showed O(1 /∆) Type 3 recourse per edge. The theorem follows by combining the three types, each contributes O(1 /∆) expected amortized recourse. 

A lower bound for c = 0 .

Theorem 4.11 and Theorem 4.13 present tight analyses of Algorithm 3 and Algorithm 5. The following theorem shows that they are in fact optimal for c = 0. 

Theorem 2.11. Let ∆ ≥ 3. There is an oblivious distribution over incremental sequences on forests of maximum degree at most ∆ such that any algorithm that maintains a proper ∆-edge-coloring has expected amortized recourse Ω(1 /∆) .Proof. Create two disjoint stars of degree ∆ − 1, with centers vi and free color αi for i ∈ { 1, 2}.Observe that if α1̸ = α2 and we link v1 and v2 directly by inserting e = ( v1, v 2), at least one edge must be recolored for e to be colored. Conversely, if α1 = α2, linking them through an 41 intermediary vertex u by inserting the edges ( v1, u ) and ( v2, u ) also forces at least one recoloring, because u cannot have two edges of color α1. Given this observation, the adversary flips a fair coin and decides whether to link v1 and v2 directly or via u. The expected recourse is therefore at least  

> 12

. Indeed, let p ≡ Pr[ α1 = α2] then the expected recourse is ≥ 12 · p · 1 + 12 · (1 − p) · 1 = 12 (the 1 terms are for the recourse that is at least 1 when it is required). The total number of insertions is either 2∆ − 1 or 2∆, thus the expected amortized recourse is Ω( 1∆ ). 

4.2.2 Fully Dynamic Forests (Insertions and Deletions) 

Next, we bound the expected number of recolorings performed by one update in the fully dynamic setting. 

Theorem 4.15 (Expected recourse per update) . Assume ∆ ≥ 3. Against an oblivious adversary, the expected recourse of Algorithm 3 and Algorithm 5 per update is at most 

∆

κ · min 

 κ − 1

c , 2 + log κ−1 n

if c ≥ 1,

and at most 

2 + log ∆−1 n if c = 0 .

Proof. The proof analyzes the recourse given a uniformly distributed proper coloring. Since both Algorithm 3 and Algorithm 5 maintain it (by Theorem 4.3 and Theorem 4.8 respectively), the proof applies to both. Also note that instead of separating the statement for c = 0 and c ≥ 1, we can regard κ−1 

> c

= ∞ and then the statement for c ≥ 1 subsumes c = 0. Fix a time t and condition on the current forest Ft. By Theorem 4.3 (or Theorem 4.8), the current coloring is distributed as D(Ft). Let E be the event that the update recolors an existing edge at the vertex r where RootToChild (in an insertion) or ChildToRoot (in a deletion) is invoked. Let L be the number of edges recolored by the ensuing FixForbidden cascade (if any). Then: 

E[recourse] = Pr[ E] · E[ 1 + L | E ] = Pr[ E] · (1 + E[ L | E ]) . (5) We first bound Pr[ E]. Let ℓ = |children (r)| at the moment the procedure at r is invoked. For an insertion, r is a root under D(Ft) and E is the event that the parent-edge color β appears on some child edge of r, which by (2) has probability exactly ℓκ . For a deletion, ChildToRoot recolors at r

with probability exactly ℓκ by its own coin flip. In both cases, Pr[ E] = ℓκ ≤ ∆ 

> κ

.We now upper bound E[L | E] in two ways. 

A geometric bound (for c ≥ 1). At a visited vertex v, the cascade continues past v if and only if the new forbidden color appears on some child edge of v. By (1), this happens with probability at most q ≡ ∆−1 

> κ−1

. Thus L is stochastically dominated by a geometric random variable, with success probability 1 − q = cκ−1 , that counts the number of failures before the first success. Thus, 

E[L | E] ≤ q 

> 1−q

= ∆−1 

> c

. And so, 1 + E[L | E] ≤ κ−1 

> c

.

A depth bound (for all c ≥ 0). Conditioned on E, the remaining recoloring process is a 

FixForbidden cascade. Thus, by Lemma 4.9, for any fixed edge at depth i below the start vertex, the probability that it is recolored is at most ( κ − 1) −i. By a union bound over all vertices, we have Pr[ L ≥ i | E] ≤ min {1, n · (κ − 1) −i}. Using E[L | E] = P 

> i≥1

Pr[ L ≥ i | E], and since 

κ − 1 ≥ ∆ − 1 ≥ 2, we get: 

E[L | E] ≤ 

> ⌈log κ−1n⌉

X

> i=1

1 + X 

> i> ⌈log κ−1n⌉

n · (κ − 1) −i ≤ ⌈ log κ−1 n⌉ + X

> j≥1

(κ − 1) −j ≤ 1 + log κ−1 n .

42 To conclude, combine the two bounds on 1 + E[L | E], and substitute Pr[ E] ≤ ∆ 

> κ

in (5). We now show that this analysis is tight. 

Theorem 4.16. Theorem 4.15 is tight up to constant factors for both Algorithms 3 and Algorithm 5. Proof. Let Th be a complete rooted (∆ − 1)-ary tree of height h. Consider an adversary which first construct two copies of Th with roots r1 and r2. Then, it repeatedly inserts and deletes ( r1, r 2). To get the lower bound, it suffices to consider the insertions of ( r1, r 2). Consider one insertion, and let r be the root that plays the role of the child (where a repair may start). As discussed in the proof of the upper bound (Theorem 4.15), the repair starts if and only if the color α chosen for (r1, r 2) appears on one of the ∆ −1 child-edges of r, which happens with probability (∆ −1) /κ . Then, conditioned on the repair starting, at each subsequent level the FixForbidden cascade continues with probability p ≡ (∆ − 1) /(κ − 1), since the tree is complete. Since Th has height h, the repair path has expected length ∆−1

> κ

Ph−1 

> i=0

pi, and this is the expected recourse of each ( r1, r 2) insertion. If c ≥ 1, then Ph−1 

> i=0

pi = Θ  min  ∆ 

> c

, h . If c = 0, then p = 1, so the sum is Θ( h). Now, since Th has Θ((∆ − 1) h) vertices, we can have h = Θ(log ∆−1 n) = Θ(log κ−1 n). Thus, for a long enough sequence of updates, the expected amortized recourse per update is Ω  min  ∆ 

> c

, log κ−1 n .

A lower bound for c = 0 . In the fully dynamic setting as well, we conclude by proving a matching lower bound for c = 0, which applies to any algorithm, even on rooted forests. 

Theorem 2.13. Any algorithm that maintains ∆ ≥ 3 edge coloring of a forest, even of a rooted forest, has amortized recourse of Ω log ∆−1 n.Proof. The idea is similar to the incremental lower bound for c = 0 (Theorem 2.11), but here deletions let the adversary recreate the same conflict indefinitely. This makes it worthwhile to replace the stars by deep complete trees, so that resolving each conflict incurs large recourse. We start with two complete (∆ −1)-ary trees of depth h, with roots r1, r 2, and alternate between linking 

r1 and r2 directly, and linking them both to the same isolated vertex. As before, the first state requires the unique free colors at the roots to be equal, while the second state requires them to be different. Changing the free color at a root requires recoloring a full root-to-leaf path of length h,because each internal vertex has degree ∆ and thus the whole tree’s coloring can be inferred by the color of leaf-edges bottom-up. This gives Ω( h) = Ω(log ∆−1 n) amortized recourse per update. 43 5 Concluding Remarks 

Although forests are structurally simple graphs, dynamically edge coloring them proves to be a fascinating and non-trivial problem. In this paper, we investigated the recourse required to maintain edge coloring in forests. We provided a tight analysis for natural greedy algorithms (up to tie-breaking rules), as well as for a simple randomized distribution maintenance algorithm. Despite our understanding of these natural algorithms, the problem itself remains far from settled, leaving several intriguing questions open for future work. The main ones are as follows. 1. Theorem 2.2 shows that Greedy is tight in the incremental model only under a particular tie breaking. Could our upper bound of O

 1

> c+√∆



on the amortized recourse of Greedy in Theorem 2.1 be improved by choosing a good tie breaking rule, or by a different algorithm? 2. What is the optimal recourse that fully dynamic deterministic algorithms can achieve? The-orem 2.3 gives an Ω(1) lower bound, but we have a matching upper bound only for rooted forests and 2∆ − 2 colors in Theorem 2.7 using the ColorfulPath algorithm. Can we get a tight bound for a larger family of forests and palettes? 3. Can we prove lower bounds on the recourse of randomized algorithms for c ≥ 1? These are required to understand if DistMaint is optimal in the incremental or in the fully dynamic models. 44 A Additional Technical Analyses 

This section provides the remaining technical details that were deferred to maintain the flow of the core amortized analysis. 

A.1 Basic Summation Calculus 

In this section we prove Lemma 3.3 which is restated below for convenience. 

Lemma 3.3. Let {xi}i≥1 be a sequence of integers such that x1 ≥ ∆2 ≥ 1 and ∀i : xi+1 ≥ 2 ·

xi. Define the functions: f (x) ≡ lg xx and g(x) ≡   

> √lg x·2√2 lg x
> x

. Then P∞ 

> i=1

f (xi) = O( lg ∆ ∆ ) and P∞ 

> i=1

g(xi) = O(1) .Proof. Consider the function f (x) in the domain x ≥ 1. Since f ′(x) = 1ln 2 · 1−ln xx2 the function is decreasing for x ≥ 3. Let j be smallest index such that xj ≥ 3, then f (x) is decreasing from xj .

j ≤ 3 since x3 ≥ 4 · x1 ≥ 4. Now: 

σj ≡ X

> i≥j

f (xi) ≤ X

> i≥j

f (2 i−j · xj ) = X

> i≥j

i − j + lg xj

2i−j · xj

= 2 + 2 lg xj

xj

Since xj ≥ 3, we have that σj = O( lg xj 

> xj

) = O(f (xj )). To conclude, we divide to cases: 1. If ∆ ≥ 6: Then x1 ≥ 3 which implies f (x1) ≤ f ( ∆2 ) = O( lg ∆ ∆ ), and j = 1. Then σ1 =

O(f (x1)) = O( lg ∆ ∆ ). 2. If ∆ < 6: Then lg ∆ ∆ = Θ(1). For every specific xi we have that f (xi) = O(1). Since j ≤ 3, we have that σ1 ≤ f (x1) + f (x2) + O(f (xj )) = O(1) = O( lg ∆ ∆ ). Next, consider g(x) in the domain x ≥ 1. It can be shown that g(x) decreases from around 

x ≈ 3.0778. 17 Furthermore, let h(x) ≡ g(x) 

> g(2 x)

= 2 ·

q lg x 

> lg(2 x)

· 2√2 lg x−√2 lg(2 x). One can verify that h(x) is increasing ( 

q lg x 

> lg(2 x)

and the exponent each increases separately). Then for x ≥ 4: 

h(x) ≥ h(4) > 1.19, thus, g(2 x) < 0.9 · g(x). Let j be the smallest index such that xj ≥ 4, and note that j ≤ 3 ( x3 ≥ 4x1 ≥ 4). Since g is decreasing for x ≥ 4 and since g decays exponentially when its argument grows exponentially, we get: 

σj ≡ X

> i≥j

g(xi) ≤ X

> i≥j

g(2 i−j xj ) ≤ X

> i≥j

0.9i−j · g(xj ) = O(g(xj )) Notice that ∀i : g(xi) = O(1), then σ1 = ( j − 1) · O(1) + σj = O(1). 

A.2 Sublinear Worst-Case Recourse for ∆ Edge Coloring 

Theorem 2.11 of [SK26] shows a linear worst-case recourse lower bound of Ω( n/ ∆) for shift-based algorithms when c = 0. A similar lower bound can also be seen in the proof of Theorem 3.12 (Section 3.3.3) where most of the amortized recourse is due to few expensive insertions. In this 

> 17

Denote y(x) = √lg x, then g(x) = y·exp(ln 2 ·√2·y) 

> x

and y′ = 12 ln 2 ·y·x . By the chain rule, g′(x) = 

> (y′+y·(√2 ln 2 ·y′)) ·x−yx2

·exp(ln 2 ·√2·y) = ( 12 ln 2 ·y + 1√2 −y)· exp(ln 2 ·√2·y) 

> x2

, so g′(x) is negative when (1+ √2 ln 2 ·y−2 ln 2 ·y2)is, which is when x > x 0 where x0 ≈ 3.0788. 

45 section we analyze an algorithm that circumvents these bounds and achieves a sublinear worst-case recourse, by doing more than shifting colors. Loosely speaking, the algorithm implied by our analysis has a few decision points in which it is allowed to color an edge such that it conflicts with two of its neighbours, in order to reduce the overall recourse. Note that the analysis is tight if the adversary is allowed to present a graph with a given coloring (then this would be the worst-case being analyzed). We restate the claim for convenience. 

Theorem 3.2. Consider a dynamic forest F of maximum degree ∆ ≥ 3 that is edge colored by ∆

colors. When a new edge e is inserted, the coloring of F can be extended to e with recourse of at most O( 1∆−2 · √lg N · 2√2 lg N ), where N is the number of edges in the smaller tree that e links. The update time is O(N ).Proof. Because the graph is always a forest, when a new edge e = ( u, v ) is inserted we can think of it as linking two trees Tu and Tv (one may be empty). If there is an available color shared by both 

u and v, we use it without recourse at all. Otherwise, let αu and αv be available colors in u and v

respectively, we can swap colors on the ( αu, α v)-bicolored-path from v to a leaf (or possibly a closer vertex), and color ( u, v ) with the color αu which becomes available at v after the color swap. This is guaranteed to work because the graph has no cycles, however the recourse might be large. In order to reduce the recourse, we may decide to color-swap only up to d1 edges, and truncate the process at some point, by uncoloring the ith edge on this bicolored path for i ≤ d1, denote it ( u′, v ′). This moves the problem down in Tv. Since we uncolored ( u′, v ′) (temporarily) we may consider the available colors of u′ and v′ and repeat the process. However, since we only have ∆ colors, if u′ and v′ are of degree ∆ we might have no choice but to pick again the same bicolored path. So we must use a different approach... which would be to choose a color not available at either end, and now we need to fix two color conflicts, see Figure 6 for a visual example. We increased the number of problems, but perhaps we can get for each of them a short bicolored path that reaches a leaf of Tv such that the overall recoloring is smaller. Note that since the graph is a tree, each of the two new problems has a disjoint path of edges to leaves of Tv.18 

We can generalize further the technique as follows: let each of the new bicolored paths be of length at most d2. If we can finish it, be done. Otherwise, choose an index i ≤ d2 where we truncate the color-swap, and then again we choose a color that results in two conflicts. Next, again, define a cap of at most d3, etc. Overall, at level ℓ we may have up to 2 ℓ unresolved color conflicts that we try to fix using bicolored paths of length at most dℓ. Note that when we choose a color, there are ∆ − 2 ≥ 1 options (2 colors are actively part of the bicolored path). Recall that the graph is a tree, so whenever the color conflict diverges (when we color an edge (x, y ) with a color unavailable at both x or y), we proceed to different parts of the graph. Due to partial overlap between the choices, as clarified in Figure 6, we can choose a truncation out of the first 1 ≤ i ≤ di options such that we proceed into two subtrees with total size that is at most  

> 2
> di·(∆ −2)

fraction of the current tree. The term di is due to our di options for truncation, the 2 is due to the overlap, and (∆ − 2) is for the number of new colors to choose from, each leads us to a different, disjoint, subtree. So, by choosing i deterministically based on subtree sizes, we can ensure that at level ℓ of the process, each subtree with a color-conflict has size at most Sℓ ≡ N ·2ℓ 

> (∆ −2) ℓ·d1·... ·dℓ

.We require Sℓ ≈ 1 for the recoloring problem to be finished. The total recourse is bounded by 

Rℓ ≡ Pℓi=1 2i−1 · di, because there are at most 2 i−1 uncolored edges to fix at level i of the process,      

> 18 In fact, we can apply the choice of unavailable color already to the initial edge, and get that we have to fix the coloring in both Tuand Tv(one edge each). For simplicity we do not analyze this case, which is similar up to a constant factor, and depends on the sizes of both trees.

46 Figure 6: An example where we fix the coloring of an edge by choosing a color unavailable at both ends. This choice converts a single problem into two, but may be useful in the long-run. In this example, let ∆ = 4 and use only 4 colors. Assume that we need to apply a bicolored flip on the red-blue right spine of the initial coloring (left), and that we choose to truncate the flip using green. We can choose to stop the flip on ( u, v )(middle) or on ( v, w ) (right). In each case, we get two new conflicts, ( v′, v ), and either ( u, u ′) or ( w, w ′), respectively. Both choices overlap in the problem over ( v, v ′) which can no longer be green, and in both cases the new bicolored path must proceed on a red-green path towards x, so we have overlap between the two choices. 

and at this level we recolor (bicolor-swap) at most di edges per fix. Before we optimize, let us re-write the expressions in a cleaner way. Define Di ≡ 2i−1 · di, then Sℓ = N ·2ℓ·2ℓ(ℓ−1) /2 

> (∆ −2) ℓ·D1·... ·Dℓ

, and 

Rℓ = Pℓi=1 Di. Finally, it remains to minimize Rℓ by choosing ℓ and the values D1, . . . , D ℓ.For a fixed value of ℓ, observe that minimizing Rℓ for a fixed Sℓ ≈ 1, is analogues to maximizing 

D1 · . . . · Dℓ for a fixed sum Pℓi=1 Di, thus the best choice is a uniform value ∀i : Di ≡ D. Then we get: Sℓ = N ·2ℓ(ℓ+1) /2 

> (∆ −2) ℓ·Dℓ

≈ 1 ⇒ D = N 1/ℓ ·2(ℓ+1) /2 

> ∆−2

⇒ Rℓ ≈ ℓ · N 1/ℓ ·2(ℓ+1) /2 

> ∆−2

.19 To finish, we need to determine the minimizing ℓ. Interestingly, ∆ affects the analysis only as a simple factor, so the minimization does not depend on ∆. We can use calculus to differentiate and find a minimum, but since we do not care for the exact constants, we can roughly balance N 1/ℓ ≈ 2ℓ/ 2 (neglecting the 

ℓ), and get that ℓ ≈ √2 lg N . Substitute this back, we get: Rℓ ≈ 1∆−2 · √2 lg N · 2√2 lg N +(1 /2) .Finally, consider the running time. Our logic requires to know subtree sizes, but because the forest is not rooted we cannot trivially update those in logarithmic time. However, upon insertion of ( u, v ) we get a natural rooting on the trees Tu, Tv rooted at u and v respectively, and can compute subtree sizes for Ti in O(|Ti|) time. Once we have subtree sizes, the recoloring logic dictates that at each point we consider diverging the bicolored path, and when we do, we have to check O(∆) colors for the subtree sizes. The extra ∆ factor cancels out with 1∆−2 in the recourse term, so in effect the contribution to the running time of this part is sublinear. Overall, the running time is 

O(N ), dominated by computing subtree sizes. 

Remark A.1 . It is important to note that Theorem 3.2 gives a guarantee for the worst-case tree. However, ˜O(2 √2 lg n) might be far from being tight, for example consider a balanced tree, then we should expect only O(log n) recourse. This is indeed what we get: In terms of the proof of Theorem 3.2, d1 = D1 = D ≈ 2√2 lg n 

> ∆−2

≫ log n, therefore we will not have the “opportunity” to truncate the first bicolored path, instead we would just reach its end, and finish recoloring with only O(log n) recourse.                 

> 19 Recall that when we proceed from level ito i+ 1, we get two subtrees of total size of at most 2
> di·(∆ −2) fraction. Even if they are balanced and we can bound the size of each of them by only 1
> di·(∆ −2) , we get Rℓ≈ℓ·N1/ℓ ·2(ℓ−1) /2
> ∆−2
> which is effectively the same (saved a factor of 12).

47 A.3 Detailed Analysis of the Relation between n to ∆ and c

Some of our lower bounds require n to be sufficiently large. In this section we explicitly analyze these quantities. We have the following debt: 

Theorem A.2. In Theorem 2.3, n0(∆ , c ) = Θ(( c + 1) · ∆ ·  ∆+ cc+1 

). In Theorem 2.4 and Lemma 3.6, 

n1(∆ , c ) = Θ(( c + 1) · ∆2 ·  ∆+ cc+1 

/  ∆

> c+1

). In Theorem 3.14, n2(∆ , c ) = max {n′

> 2

(∆ , c ), n 1(c + 2 , c )}

where n′

> 2

(∆ , c ) = Ω 



∆ · x · (∆ + c − x) ·  ∆+ cx

/ ∆

> x



for x = min {2c + 2 , ∆ − (c + 2) }.Proof. The common thread of all ni(∆ , c ) is that we need to construct N stars, each of degree ∆ − d, until M of them use the same sub-palette. The values of N , M and d differ according to the scenario. 

Theorem 2.3: n0(∆ , c ) = Θ(( c + 1) · ∆ ·  ∆+ cc+1 

). Let 1 ≤ d ≤ ∆ − 1 − c. We need M =

c + d + 1, therefore N = ( M − 1) · B + 1 so that we can apply the pigeonhole principle, where 

B ≡  ∆+ c

> ∆−d

 =  ∆+ cc+d

 is the number of different possible sub-palettes. One can verify that d = 1 minimizes B.20 Even though d = 1 maximizes M , because B is binomial while M is linear, it is still best to optimize for B. In total, including B additional vertices that are not part of the stars (the owners in the proof), we get the constraint that: n ≥ N · (∆ − d + 1) + B = Θ( N · ∆ + B) = Θ( M · B · ∆) = Θ(( c + 1) · ∆ ·  ∆+ cc+1 

). 

Theorem 2.4 and Lemma 3.6: n1(∆ , c ) = Θ(( c + 1) · ∆2 ·  ∆+ cc+1 

/  ∆

> c+1

). We need M =(c + 1) · (∆ − 1) for the number of P -stars in the proof to bootstrap. Also, d = c + 1 because each 

P -star is a star of degree c + 1, and there are B =  ∆+ cc+1 

 different sub-palettes of this size. For the pigeonhole principle to apply in this proof, we require N ≥ (M − 1) · B + 1. Then naively we would get n1 = Θ( M · B · ∆) as with n0 (note that M has a different value here). However, we can optimize and actually construct stars of degree ∆, from which we later delete edges to get stars of degree c + 1. Given the freedom to delete the edges that we want, each ∆-star represents   ∆

> c+1

 different ( c + 1)-stars, so we only need N ′ ∆-stars such that N ′ ·   ∆

> c+1

 = ( M − 1) · B + 1. In conclusion, n1(∆ , c ) = Θ( N ′ · ∆) = Θ(( c + 1) · ∆2 ·  ∆+ cc+1 

/  ∆

> c+1

). 

Theorem 3.14: n2(∆ , c ) is best described by two constraints that must both be satisfied: 1. The proof of this theorem first reduces the problem by grouping all the vertices to form stars of degree ∆ − c − 2 that use the exact same sub-palette. This can be achieved by either forming and replicating stars of degree ∆ − c − 2 (directly), or by forming and replicating stars of the complementing sub-palette of size 2 c + 2, which can be complemented later. The process of replicating stars and their complement is explained in the proof of Lemma 3.6. So denote x ≡ min(2 c + 2 , ∆ − (c + 2)), the first condition is that n2(∆ , c ) = Ω 



∆ · x · (∆ + 

c − x) ·  ∆+ cx

/ ∆

> x



.21 (Note that this expression and n1 are both derived from the common expression f (∆ , c, z ) ≡ ∆ · z · (∆ + c − z) ·  ∆+ cz

/ ∆

> z

 where we either substitute z = c + 1 for 

n1 or z = x in this case.) 2. Once the reduction to the scenario of Theorem 2.4 occurs, the second condition is simply 

n2(∆ , c ) ≥ n1(c + 2 , c ) = Θ(( c + 1) 2 ·  2c+2 

> c+1

).                                                                                            

> 20 The binom function B(d) =  ∆+ cc+d
> has a single maximum, thus minimizing Bfor d∈[d1, d 2]≡[1 ,∆−1−c] is achieved for either d1or d2.d2is the unique minimizer if and only if (∆ + c)−(c+d2)<(c+d1)−0, which is false.
> 21 The expression is dominated by the division of binomial terms, and for them choosing xas the smallest is best: Let y≡max(2 c+ 2 ,∆−(c+ 2)). Therefore x+y= ∆ + c, then  ∆+ cx
> = ∆+ cy
> and we need to show that  ∆
> x
> ≥ ∆
> y
> .It cannot be that x≤y≤∆2. If ∆2≤x≤ythen  ∆
> x
> ≥ ∆
> y
> . Finally, if x≤∆2≤y, then ( ∆2−x)−(y−∆2) = −c < 0which shows that xis closer to ∆2than y, thus again,  ∆
> x
> ≥ ∆
> y
> .

48 Remark A.3 . The conditions n ≥ ni(∆ , c ) in Theorem A.2 for i ∈ { 1, 2} are only necessary to guarantee adversarial success under any circumstances. However, if recoloring choices are less arbitrary, for example chosen by the algorithm at random when possible, the conditions might not be required. To clarify, in such randomized case, instead of attempting to collect simultaneously a large number of stars that use the same sub-palette, the adversary can create the stars one by one, recreating each of them until (eventually) the star will have the desired sub-palette. 

Remark A.4 . To get an idea how n0(∆ , c ) and n1(∆ , c ) in Theorem A.2 behave, consider the extreme values of c:1. c = O(1): Then n0 = Θ(∆ c+2 ). Also,  ∆+ cc+1 

/  ∆

> c+1

 ≈ 1, so n1 = Θ(∆ 2). Conversely, the corresponding statements apply for ∆ = O(n1/(c+2) 0 ) and ∆ = O(n1/21 ). 2. c = ∆ −2: Then   ∆

> c+1

 = ∆, and using Stirling’s approximation,  ∆+ cc+1 

 =  2(∆ −1) ∆−1

 ≈ 4∆−1

√π(∆ −1) .So both n0 and n1 are exponential in ∆. Conversely, the corresponding statements apply for ∆ = O(log ni) for both i ∈ { 0, 1}.

# References 

[ABB +25] Sepehr Assadi, Soheil Behnezhad, Sayan Bhattacharya, Mart´ ın Costa, Shay Solomon, and Tianyi Zhang. Vizing’s theorem in near-linear time. In STOC , page 24–35, 2025. [BCPS24a] Sayan Bhattacharya, Mart´ ın Costa, Nadav Panski, and Shay Solomon. Arboricity-dependent algorithms for edge coloring. In SWAT , pages 12:1–12:15, 2024. [BCPS24b] Sayan Bhattacharya, Mart´ ın Costa, Nadav Panski, and Shay Solomon. Nibbling at long cycles: Dynamic (and static) edge coloring in optimal time. In SODA , pages 3393–3440, 2024. [BD25] Anton Bernshteyn and Abhishek Dhawan. A linear-time algorithm for (1 + ϵ)∆-edge-coloring, 2025. https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.04887. [Ber22] Anton Bernshteyn. A fast distributed algorithm for (∆+1)-edge-coloring. Journal of Combinatorial Theory, Series B , 152:319–352, 2022. [BGW21] Sayan Bhattacharya, Fabrizio Grandoni, and David Wajc. Online edge coloring algo-rithms via the nibble method. In SODA , pages 2830–2842, 2021. [BNMN92] Amotz Bar-Noy, Rajeev Motwani, and Joseph Naor. The greedy algorithm is optimal for on-line edge coloring. Information Processing Letters , 44(5):251–253, 1992. [BSVW24] Joakim Blikstad, Ola Svensson, Radu Vintan, and David Wajc. Online edge coloring is (nearly) as easy as offline. In STOC , page 36–46, 2024. [BSVW25] Joakim Blikstad, Ola Svensson, Radu Vintan, and David Wajc. Online edge coloring: Sharp thresholds. In STOC , 2025. [CCZ25] Shiri Chechik, Hongyi Chen, and Tianyi Zhang. Improved streaming edge coloring. In 

ICALP , pages 48:1–48:18, 2025. 49 [CHL +18] Yi-Jun Chang, Qizheng He, Wenzheng Li, Seth Pettie, and Jara Uitto. The complexity of distributed edge coloring with small palettes. In SODA , pages 2633–2652, 2018. [Chr23] Aleksander Bjørn Grodt Christiansen. The power of multi-step Vizing chains. In STOC ,page 1013–1026, 2023. [CMZ24] Shiri Chechik, Doron Mukhtar, and Tianyi Zhang. Streaming edge coloring with sub-quadratic palette size. In ICALP , pages 40:1–40:12, 2024. [Cra24] Daniel W. Cranston. Graph Coloring Methods . Daniel Cranston, 2024. [CRV24] Aleksander B. G. Christiansen, Eva Rotenberg, and Juliette Vlieghe. Sparsity-parameterised dynamic edge colouring. In SWAT , pages 20:1–20:18, 2024. [Dav23] Peter Davies. Improved distributed algorithms for the Lov´ asz local lemma and edge coloring. In SODA , pages 4273–4295, 2023. [DHZ19] Ran Duan, Haoqing He, and Tianyi Zhang. Dynamic edge coloring with improved approximation. In SODA , pages 1937–1945, 2019. [GS24] Prantar Ghosh and Manuel Stoeckl. Low-memory algorithms for online edge coloring. In ICALP , pages 71:1–71:19, 2024. [K¨ on16] D´ enes K¨ onig. ¨Uber graphen und ihre anwendung auf determinantentheorie und men-genlehre. Mathematische Annalen , 77(4):453–465, 1916. [SK26] Yaniv Sadeh and Haim Kaplan. Beyond vizing chains: Improved recourse in dynamic edge coloring, 2026. https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.09497. [Sti12] Michael Stiebitz. Graph Edge Coloring: Vizing’s Theorem and Goldberg’s Conjecture .Wiley, 2012. [SV19] Hsin-Hao Su and Hoa T. Vu. Towards the locality of Vizing’s theorem. In STOC , page 355–364, 2019. [Viz64] V. G. Vizing. On an estimate of the chromatic class of a p-graph. Diskret. Analiz. ,3:25–30, 1964. [Viz65a] V. G. Vizing. The chromatic class of a multigraph. Cybernetics 1 , 3:32–41, 1965. [Viz65b] V. G. Vizing. Critical graphs with a given chromatic class. Diskret. Analiz. , 5:9–17, 1965. 50