Title: Root laminations of arbitrary degree

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.23607v1

Published Time: Tue, 28 Apr 2026 00:57:11 GMT

Number of Pages: 52

Markdown Content:
ROOT LAMINATIONS OF ARBITRARY DEGREE 

ALEXANDER BLOKH, LEX OVERSTEEGEN, AND VLADLEN TIMORIN 

Abstract. This paper studies the space of degree d > 1 invari-ant q-laminations, i.e., geodesic laminations invariant under the d-tupling map of the circle and associated with equivalence relations. Our main construction associates a q-lamination with any degree d

critical portrait in a canonical way . Even though somewhat tech-nical, this is the initial step in the program of classification of all degree d invariant q-laminations. 

1. Introduction 

s:intro-new 

Invariant geodesic laminations play important roles in low-dimensional geometry and topology. The spaces of laminations invariant under a Fuchsian group and equipped with certain transverse measures (1) compactify Teichmüller spaces of surfaces, (2) represent pseudo-Anosov dynamics in the classification theorem of surface diffeomorphisms, (3) describe geometry of ends of hyperbolic 3-manifolds (via ending lami-nations), and (5) bridge hyperbolic geometry, topology, and measured foliations. A similar but less studied version of invariant laminations appears in complex polynomial dynamics [16]. Here, invariance is un-derstood with respect to the d-tupling map σd of the circle (see Sections 4 and 5 for definitions), where d > 1 is the degree of polynomials under consideration. Given a single variable degree d > 1 complex polynomial P : C → C

with a locally connected Julia set JP , one associates an invariant lami-nation L∼P with P , which can be understood in two equally important ways. On the one hand, L∼P visualizes a certain equivalence relation on the unit circle S so that the quotient of S under this equivalence 

Date : April 25, 2026. 2010 Mathematics Subject Classification. Primary 37F20; Secondary 37F10, 37F46. 

Key words and phrases. Complex dynamics; laminations; Mandelbrot set; Julia set. The first named author was partially supported by NSF grant DMS–2349942. The second named author was partially supported by NSF grant DMS–1807558. The third named author was supported by the HSE University Basic Research Program.  

> 1
> arXiv:2604.23607v1 [math.DS] 26 Apr 2026 2A. BLOKH, L. OVERSTEEGEN, AND V. TIMORIN

relation is homeomorphic to JP . Moreover, the homeomorphism can be chosen to topologically conjugate the quotient dynamics of σd on 

S/ ∼P with that of P : JP → JP . Laminations representing equiv-alence relations are called q-laminations (or clean laminations, in the language of Thurston [16]). There are ways of associating q-laminations with more general polynomials P , where JP is connected but not nec-essarily locally connected, however, given P , an associated lamination may fail to be unique. Classification of q-laminations is important for understanding of the topology of the polynomial connectedness locus. On the other hand, invariant geodesic laminations are interesting geometric objects on their own right, even if they fail to represent equivalence relations. General invariant laminations are studied for the following reasons: (1) they are easier to construct (it suffices to take finitely many chords and add all their iterated pullbacks and lim-its thereof), (2) the space they form is compact, (3) subspaces of the latter space give rise to combinatorial models for certain subspaces of complex polynomials. Still, in this paper, we are mostly interested in q-laminations. An attempted classification of all q-laminations must in-volve, as the first step, a way to label q-laminations with more tractable combinatorial objects. Such objects have been known since [16]; these are critical portraits (combinatorial objects with a very similar role are called majors in [15]). A chord ab of the unit circle S with endpoints a, b ∈ S is said to be ( σd)-critical if σd(a) = σd(b). By a ( σd-) critical portrait , we mean a collection of d − 1 critical chords that do not form cycles. Having fixed a critical portrait allows one to take pullbacks of chords in an almost unambiguous fashion, therefore, it allows one to construct invariant laminations. Still, there may be more than one invariant lamination as-sociated with the same critical portrait, and these laminations may fail to be q-laminations. Thus, the problem is to associate a q-lamination with every critical portrait in a canonical way . We produce such an association, and this is the main result of this paper. Even though this result is somewhat technical, it is an important initial step in the program of classification of all q-laminations. Say that a q-lamination L∼ associated with an equivalence relation ∼

is a root lamination of a critical portrait P if (1) whenever a component of S P does not contain σd-periodic points, all points of S P are ∼-equivalent, and (2) if a component C of S P contains a periodic point 

a of σd, then C lies in the closure U of a complementary component of S L∼ so that the period of U ∩ S is the same as the period of a, and ROOT LAMINATIONS OF ARBITRARY DEGREE 3

the topological degree of σd : U ∩ S → σd(U ∩ S) is the same as the number of critical chords in C.

Main Theorem. Each critical portrait corresponds to a unique root lamination. 

Existence is proved in Theorem 11.4, and the uniqueness is proved in Theorem 11.9. 2. Previous work and notation 

> s:intro

We assume familiarity with complex polynomial dynamics and its notation ( Kf is the filled Julia set of a polynomial f , Jf is the Julia set of f , etc) as well as with some classical notation of various concepts. The boundary of X ⊂ C is denoted by Bd( X).Let Poly d be the space of all monic centered polynomials of degree 

d > 1, i.e. maps f : C → C of the form f (z) = zd + ad−2zd−2 + · · · + a0

(for instance, Poly 2 consists of polynomials Qc(z) = z2 + c). Evidently, polynomials from Poly d come in groups of conjugate maps (where the conjugation is the multiplication by any (d − 1) -st root of unity). This creates the symmetry, with respect to such multiplication, of the space. The connectedness locus Md of Poly d is the set of all 

f ∈ Poly d with connected Kf . The principal hyperbolic domain PHD d

of Poly d consists of all f ∈ Poly d with an attracting fixed point a and all critical points in the immediate basin of a (then the immediate basin of a is an invariant Jordan disk U while U = Kf is a closed Jordan disk). Topologically, PHD d is an open ball in the (d − 1) -dimensional complex space, symmetric under the rotation by any (d − 1) -st root of unity. In particular, M2 identifies with the celebrated Mandelbrot set 

M = {c ∈ C | Qnc (0) ̸ → ∞} , and the boundary of PHD 2 is called the 

Main Cardioid . This paper is inspired by the work of Thurston [16] who introduced the notion of an invariant lamination and used it to construct a model of M2.From the topological point of view, transparent dynamics takes place on locally connected (and therefore connected) Julia sets. Indeed, if 

JP is locally connected then, by Caratheodory theory, all external rays land. In this case one can introduce the concept of a laminational equivalence relation ∼P under which the arguments of external rays landing on the same point are declared to be equivalent. The corre-sponding topological polynomial f∼P of degree d is the map induced by 

σd, the angle d-tupling map, on S/ ∼P ; the continuum S/ ∼P is called the topological Julia set of f∼P and is denoted Jf∼P , or J∼P . Since JP

is locally connected, then f∼P and P |Jp are topologically conjugate. 4 A. BLOKH, L. OVERSTEEGEN, AND V. TIMORIN 

The notion of a laminational equivalence relation ∼ can be intro-duced without referring to any polynomial. It is an equivalence rela-tion on the unit circle S which has all the essential properties of ∼P

described in the previous paragraph. Moreover, for an invariant lami-national equivalence relation ∼ one can define the associated topological Julia set J∼ = S/ ∼, and the topological polynomial f∼ : J∼ → J∼ in-duced on J∼ by the action of σd : S → S.For A ⊂ C we define the (closed) convex hull CH( A) as the intersec-tion of all closed convex sets containing A. Thus, CH( A) = CH( A) by definition. Given an invariant laminational equivalence relation ∼ one can consider the family L∼ of edges of the convex hulls of all ∼-classes. More precisely, by construction, L∼ is the family whose elements are (1) edges of convex hulls of ∼-classes, and (2) all points of the unit cir-cle S; the chords forming L∼ are said to be leaves (of L∼). Thurston’s laminations L∼ associated with laminational equivalence relations ∼

(or with their topological polynomials f∼) provide a geometric visuali-sation for the latter and are called q-laminations . In fact, as topological polynomials, q-laminations, and laminational equivalence relations are in one-to-one correspondence, we talk about them interchangeably. Studying topological polynomials is motivated by the fact that they can be viewed as an ideal version of complex polynomials. The inter-play between the two notions can be key in constructing models of con-nectedness loci. Indeed, denote the set of all topological polynomials of degree d by TPoly d. Observe that the set of topological polynomials does not have a natural topology because they are not defined on the same domain. This gives rise to the problem of finding a natural way of defining a topology on the set of topological polynomials of degree 

d. The hope here is that when it is done, the resulting space of topo-logical polynomials will serve a model for the corresponding space of polynomials, i.e. for the corresponding connectedness locus. By a model in this setting we mean that there exists a monotone continuous map from the degree d connectedness locus to the space of topological polynomials of degree d (i.e., to the set TPoly d endowed with the appropriate topology) with fibers of the modeling map iden-tifying polynomials with similar dynamics. Finding such a model is a challenging task, so it is all the more surprising and inspiring that it was fulfilled by Thurston in his seminal preprint [16] in the quadratic case. Polynomials Qc(z) = z2 + c are parameterized by c, i.e. by their crit-ical values. The role of a critical point in a quadratic q-lamination L∼

is played by the unique critical set of L∼, at least in the case when the ROOT LAMINATIONS OF ARBITRARY DEGREE 5

Julia set J(Qc) is locally connected and the critical point 0 belongs to 

J(Qc). The assumption 0 ∈ J(Qc) rules out certain important classes of polynomials, namely those with attracting/parabolic periodic points. However, the polynomials with locally connected Julia sets and no at-tracting/parabolic points still remain available in the above sense. For them one can define the associated invariant laminational equivalence relation ∼c and the associated invariant q-lamination L∼c = Lc.Since we exclude (for now) polynomials with attracting/parabolic periodic points, the associated topological polynomials fc will not have 

periodic Fatou domains of degree greater than 1 (called in what follows 

periodic hyperbolic domains ). Then the topological polynomial fc will have a unique critical point in J(fc) associated with a finite ∼c-class Cc

and its convex hull CH( Cc) from Lc. Mimicking complex polynomials 

Qc that are tagged with their critical values, one can tag fc with the set 

CH( σ2(Cc)) . Alternatively, one can use the set CH( Cc) itself. Observe that since CH( Cc) is critical, one way of characterizing CH( Cc) is by listing all critical leaves (in the quadratic case these are diameters )contained in CH( Cc). One can show that diameters of all CH( Cc) for all c are precisely diameters with non-periodic endpoints. Call them 

non-periodic diameters ; such diameters are dense in all diameters. So, to each set CH( Cc) as above we associate the collection of diameters contained in CH( Cc). These collections partition the space of non-periodic diameters. Moreover, this partition is upper semicontinuous 

in itself in the following sense: if non-periodic diameters ci and yi are contained in one critical set CH( Cc), ci → c, y i → y, and c is non-periodic, then so is y, and, moreover, c and y are contained in one set 

CH( Ct) for some complex parameter t. This generates the quotient space of the space of non-periodic diameters. Observe that to see that the quotient space is planar one should use the sets CH( σ2(Cc)) .The idea is to extend this equivalence onto all diameters by consid-ering limits of classes as new classes of equivalence. This results into a transparent family of classes of equivalence among all diameters, asso-ciated with topological polynomials in the one-to-one fashion and yields the desired creation of the space of quadratic topological polynomials. An amazing achievement by Thurston [16] was to prove that this space of quadratic topological polynomials can serve as a monotone model of the boundary of the Mandelbrot set M2. The famous MLC conjecture states that this model is actually homeomorphic to M2.6 A. BLOKH, L. OVERSTEEGEN, AND V. TIMORIN 

3. Problem statement and main results 

In this paper, we move towards implementing the same program and set up a framework for that in the higher degree case. We approach the problem from a slightly different angle. An analog of the diameters in the higher degree d cases are the so-called critical portraits , i.e. col-lections of d − 1 distinct σd-critical leaves which are pairwise disjoint inside the open unit disk and whose union contains no loops (if loops are allowed then there will be room to enter at least one more critical chord disjoint from the already given ones which means that the given critical chords do not exhaust the criticality of the map while we want critical portraits to completely define criticality). We consider all critical portraits P and develop tools allowing us to associate with them specific q-laminations which we call root q-laminations and denote them by Lroot  

> P

.In the process we aim to clarify the connection between q-laminations and critical portraits.  

> d:introlegal

Definition 3.1. Given a q-lamination L a critical portrait P is legal 

for L (and vice versa) if: (1) no chord in P crosses any leaf of L inside the unit disk, (2) for every critical chord of P with a periodic endpoint x = x0

of period n, there exist a cycle of hyperbolic gaps U0, . . . , U n−1,also of period n so that if σd|Bd( Ui) has degree di, then di − 1

critical chords of P are contained in Ui with σd-images equal to 

σi+1  

> d

(x) = xi+1 .We also say that (P, L) is a legal pair .As was mentioned above, in the degree two case there is only one q-lamination that is legal for a critical portrait P. But, if d ⩾ 3, then there may be multiple q-laminations legal for P. In the construction of the root lamination associated with P we introduce the notion of a 

web : a collection of chords in the disk that may cross each other but otherwise satisfy the properties of an invariant lamination. This allows us to consider all possible iterated pullbacks of chords in P, which form a web. In this way we construct the smallest lamination legal for P, and call it the root lamination of P. It follows that all other q-laminations legal for P can be obtained from Lroot  

> P

by adding leaves in hyperbolic gaps of Lroot  

> P

in specific ways and, as a result, that there are only finitely many such q-laminations. We then consider special class of critical portraits, namely critical portraits whose chords have non-periodic endpoints . To explain the ROOT LAMINATIONS OF ARBITRARY DEGREE 7

upcoming terminology consider q-laminations that do not have periodic hyperbolic gaps. Their topological Julia sets may be dendrites (i.e., locally connected planar continua that contain no Jordan curves) in which case the corresponding q-lamination is said to be dendritic , and any critical portrait P compatible with L is said to be dendritic .Otherwise, i.e., if the Julia sets contain Jordan curves, these curves are mapped forward onto their image Jordan curves a few times until the eventual image Jordan curve is periodic with the first return map being an irrational rotation. Recall that such curves can be a part of a polynomial Julia set in which case they are boundaries of the so-called Siegel domains inside the filled Julia set containing neutral periodic points of the same period with irrational argument of the multiplier. This explains why we call q-laminations like that Si-egel-

de-ndritic , or simply Side q-laminations. A Side critical portrait is a critical portrait all of whose leaves have non-periodic endpoints. We prove that a critical portrait is Side if and only if there exist a Side q-lamination compatible with it. For each Side critical portrait P we show that its root lamination Lroot  

> P

is the only q-lamination with finite critical sets compatible with P. Varying the critical portrait P we can get all q-laminations with finite critical sets. 4. Laminations 

> s:lami-gen

Set S = {z ∈ C | | z| = 1 }. We parameterize the external rays of a polynomial f ∈ M d by elements of R/Z (so, the full angle is 1 rather than 2π). The external ray of argument θ ∈ R/Z is denoted by Rf (θ);

f maps Rf (θ) to Rf (dθ ). Let σd : S → S be the self-mapping of S ⊂ C

that takes z to zd (if we represent S as R/Z then σd(t) = d · t mod 1 ). A chord ab is a closed segment connecting points a, b of S, often repre-sented by their arguments (thus, 1323 is the chord connecting the points 

e2πi/ 3 and e4πi/ 3). Two chords cross if their endpoints alternate on S;an important class of families of chords are prelaminations , i.e. families of chords that pairwise do not cross; if such a family is closed then it is called a lamination . In this context chords from a (pre)lamination are called leaves .Convex hulls of closed nowhere dense subsets T of S are called poly-gons and are denoted by CH( T ) (without assuming that the cardinality of T is finite). In the context of laminations, if such a set T consists of more than two points, then it convex hull is called a gap provided all boundary chords of CH( T ) are leaves of a given lamination L and no leaf of L enters the interior of CH( T ). Moreover, polygons are called 

finite, infinite, countable, uncountable depending on the cardinality of 8 A. BLOKH, L. OVERSTEEGEN, AND V. TIMORIN 

T . We define the σd-image of a chord ab as the chord σd(a)σd(b), i.e. through the action of σd on a and b (when we say that we apply σd to a chord ab we apply it to the endpoints of ab ). 

> ss:lclam

4.1. Laminational equivalence relations. For f ∈ M d let ψ be the Riemann map ψ : C \ D → C \ Kf with ψ′(∞) > 0 so that f ◦

ψ(z) = ψ(zd). For f ∈ M d with locally connected Jf , the map ψ can be continuously extended over the boundary of C \ D so that for the extended map ψ we can define ψ(e2πiθ ), the landing point of Rf (θ); then 

ψ : S → Jf is a semi-conjugacy between σd : S → S and f : Jf → Jf

called the Caratheodory loop . Define an equivalence relation ∼f on 

S as follows: x ∼f y if and only if ψ(x) = ψ(y) and call ∼f the 

laminational equivalence relation (generated by f ). The relation ∼f

is σd-invariant; ∼f -classes have pairwise disjoint convex hulls. The quotient space S/ ∼f = J∼f is called a topological Julia set . Clearly, 

J∼f is homeomorphic to Jf . The map f∼f : J∼f → J∼f , induced by σd

and called a topological polynomial , is topologically conjugate to f |Jf .Equivalence relations analogous to ∼f can be introduced with no reference to polynomials (see [12, 16], see also [2]). Let ∼ be an equiv-alence relation on S. Equivalence classes of ∼ will be called (∼-)classes . 

> d:lameq

Definition 4.1. An equivalence relation ∼ on S is a (σd-) invariant laminational equivalence relation if it is: (E1) closed : the graph of ∼ is a closed set in S × S;(E2) unlinked : if g1 and g2 are distinct ∼-classes, then their convex hulls CH( g1), CH( g2) are disjoint in D;(E3) finite : all ∼-classes are finite; (D1) forward invariant : for a class g, the set σd(g) is a class too; (D2) backward invariant : for a class g, its preimage σ−1 

> d

(g) = {x ∈

S : σd(x) ∈ g} is a union of classes; (D3) orientation preserving : for any ∼-class g with more than two points, the map σd|g : g → σd(g) is a covering map with positive orientation , i.e., for every connected component (s, t ) of S \ g

either σd(s) = σd(t) or the arc in the circle (σd(s), σ d(t)) is a connected component of S \ σd(g).Here, conditions (E1) – (E3) are requirements on the Equivalence relation, while conditions (D1) – (D3) deal also with the Dynamics of 

σd. Note that (D1) implies (D2). Let us introduce two extreme equivalence relations.  

> d:fullempty

Definition 4.2 (Full and empty) . The equivalence relation such that all points of the circle are equivalent is said to be full . The equivalence ROOT LAMINATIONS OF ARBITRARY DEGREE 9

relation such that no distinct points of the circle are equivalent is said to be empty .(Invariant) laminational equivalence relations have visual counter-parts (in what follows the degree d ⩾ 2 is fixed).  

> d:q

Definition 4.3. Let ∼ be an (invariant) laminational equivalence re-lation. Then the family of all edges of the convex hulls of ∼-classes, together with all points of S, is called an (invariant) q-lamination (gen-erated by ∼) and is denoted by L∼; chords in L∼ are said to be the 

leaves of L∼.It follows that L∼ and ∼ completely define each other. However, the construction of L∼ makes sense for a much wider class of equivalence relations, namely for those satisfying requirements (E1) and (E2) of Definition 4.1. If we do not require (E3), i.e. allow for infinite classes, then L∼ no longer defines ∼. For example the full equivalence relation 

∼1 and the empty equivalence relation ∼2 generate the same sets L∼1

and L∼2 , and the pictures look the same, i.e. as the circle with no chords in it. Sometimes extremes meet. 4.2. General properties of laminations. Thurston [16] defined in-variant laminations as families of chords with dynamical properties like those of q-laminations but weaker. One reason for that was the fact that some polynomials have connected but not locally connected Julia sets. However the idea is to associate combinatorial dynamic struc-tures to all polynomials , including those with non-locally connected Julia sets. A natural way of handling this is to approximate a poly-nomial P by polynomials with locally connected Julia sets, and then to associate to P the Hausdorff limit point(s) of the corresponding se-quence of q-laminations. Such limits have properties similar to those of q-laminations but may not be q-laminations. Thurston’s definition aims at taking care of this issue using geometric and dynamic properties of chords forming laminations.  

> d:geolam

Definition 4.4 (Laminations) . Two distinct chords cross (or are lin-ked ) if they intersect inside D (equivalently, if their endpoints alternate on S). A prelamination is a family of chords L called leaves such that distinct leaves are unlinked and all points of S are (degenerate) leaves. If the set S L is compact, then L is called a lamination . Two (pre)laminations are compatible if their leaves do not cross (thus, the union of two compatible (pre)laminations is a (pre)lamination). 10 A. BLOKH, L. OVERSTEEGEN, AND V. TIMORIN 

Observe that, formally speaking, a set, consisting of one chord and all individual points of S, is already a prelamination. From now on, L

always denotes a (pre)lamination.  

> d:gaps

Definition 4.5 (Gaps and edges) . Gaps of a lamination L are the closures of components of D \ S L. A gap G is countable (finite, un-countable ) if G ∩ S is countable infinite (finite, uncountable). Un-countable gaps are called Fatou gaps. For a closed nowhere dense set 

X ⊂ S, consider its convex hull CH( X); then edges of CH( X) are max-imal straight non-degenerate segments in Bd(CH( X)) , and vertices of 

CH( X) are points of X. Some additional terminology (described in what follows) will apply to invariant laminations. Convergence of (pre)laminations Li to a set of chords E is understood as the Hausdorff metric convergence of leaves of Li to chords from E

so that all limits, in terms of the Hausdorff metric, of sequences of chords from Li form E. Evidently, E is a lamination. A lamination L

is nonempty if it has nondegenerate leaves and empty otherwise (the empty lamination is denoted by L∅; note that it is not the empty set as it contains all points of S). Say that L is countable if it has countably many nondegenerate leaves and uncountable otherwise; L is perfect if it has no isolated leaves. In this paper by countable we always mean 

infinite countable .If G ⊂ D is the convex hull of G ∩ S, let σd(G) be the convex hull of 

σd(G ∩ S). Observe that this is not the action of a map from D to D

restricted on the set G. Rather, it is a map from the family of convex hulls of closed subsets of S to itself. The most important particular case here is when G = ab is a chord. In that case, σd(G) = σd(ab ) = 

σd(a)σd(b), and we call ab a pullback chord of σd(a)σd(b). In some cases it is useful to consider a special extension of σd onto D. The map σd

can be extended continuously over S L so that it acts linearly on every leaf of L. We also denote this extended map by σd.A map m : X → Y of a topological space X to a topological space 

Y is monotone if for each y ∈ Y , m−1(y) is connected. 

Definition 4.6. [16, Thurston Invariant Lamination] A lamination Ldfn-Thurston 

is Thurston ( σd)-invariant if it satisfies the following conditions. (1) Forward d-invariance: for any leaf ℓ = pq ∈ L , we have that 

σd(p)σd(q) = σd(ℓ) ∈ L .(2) Backward invariance: for any leaf pq ∈ L , there exists a collec-tion of d disjoint leaves in L (this collection of leaves may not be unique), each joining a pre-image of p to a pre-image of q.ROOT LAMINATIONS OF ARBITRARY DEGREE 11 

(3) Gap invariance: For any gap G, the convex hull H of σd(G ∩ S)

is a gap or a leaf. If H is a gap, σd|Bd( G) : Bd( G) → Bd( H) maps as the composition of a monotone map and a covering map to the boundary of the image gap, with positive orientation (the image of a point moving clockwise around Bd( G) must move clockwise around the image Bd( H) of G). By [2, Lemma 2.1], any q-lamination is Thurston invariant .5. (Sibling) invariant laminations and webs 

> ss:sib-prop

In Definition 4.6 one deals with gaps, i.e. closures of components of the complement D \ S L. This is a direct way to ensure that σd has a nice extension over the plane. A drawback of Definition 4.6 is that while L otherwise is defined as a family of chords of D (leaves), in gap invariance we talk about different objects (gaps). As a result, it is hard to verify gap invariance for specific collections of chords even though other properties listed in Definition 4.6 are easy to check. A different approach was suggested in [3], largely borrowing terminol-ogy (and inspiration) from [16]. This new definition has the advantage of dealing only with chords (leaves); this makes verifications easier. We call collections of leaves satisfying the new definition (sibling) invariant laminations and prove in [3] that they all are Thurston invariant. To simplify navigating through the notation we adopt the agreement according to which families of chords (more generally, families of sets) are denoted by calligraphic letters (for example, A, B, N , L etc). The union of the corresponding chords (sets) will then be denoted by S A,S B, S N , S L etc. Moreover, the terminology for families of chords (sets) and their unions will be related, too. For example, if L is a lamination, then S L will be called a lamination(-al) set . Recall that a leaf ℓ∗ ∈ L with σd(ℓ∗) = ℓ is called a pullback of ℓ (within L).  

> d:sipro

Definition 5.1 (Sibling property and webs) . Fix an integer d > 1. A 

sibling of a chord ℓ is a chord ℓ′ different from ℓ with σd(ℓ′) = σd(ℓ).Also, two points with the same σd-image are called sibling points or just siblings . A family W of chords is said to have the sibling property (for σd) if for any non-critical chord ℓ ∈ W there exist d pairwise disjoint chords ℓ1, . . . , ℓd in W such that ℓ1 = ℓ and σd(ℓ1) = · · · =

σd(ℓd). Any collection of chords {ℓ1, . . . , ℓd} with these properties is called a (full) sibling collection . Any family of chords with sibling property is called a (σd-)web .Chords in a sibling collection cannot intersect even on S. On the other hand, if W is a web, then Definition 5.1 allows for the possibility 12 A. BLOKH, L. OVERSTEEGEN, AND V. TIMORIN 

that chords in W cross each other. In fact, any web can be obtained as follows: take a family of sibling collections and then the set of all chords of all these collections. According to the general principle, if S W has a topological property (for example, connected, closed etc) then the web is called accordingly (for instance, connected web , closed web etc). The union of chords from a web is called a web set .A web does not have to have any invariance properties under the action of σd. Rather, the web establishes a certain level of symmetry that a family of chords with sibling property must possess. In the quadratic case (i.e., when d = 2 ) a chord is critical if and only if it is a diameter of D. Then the sibling chord of a non-critical chord ℓ is a  

> 12

-rotation of ℓ, and a set of chords is a σ2-web if and only if it is the set of chords invariant under the rotation by 12 .Clearly, the assumption that ℓ is non-critical in Definition 5.1 is a must. Indeed, if ℓ is σd-critical, then its sibling chords are also critical and map to the same point, say, x ∈ S. The point x has, overall, d

preimages. Hence the maximal number of disjoint (critical) leaves that map to x is the integer part ⌊d 

> 2

⌋ of d 

> 2

which is less than d. Thus, we cannot have d disjoint chords that have the same degenerate image and a sibling collection of a σd-critical leaf does not make sense. We endow the family of all sibling collections with the natural topol-ogy and talk about the space of sibling collections. This space is not compact as some sequences of sibling collections can converge to collec-tions of critical chords (just take sibling collections whose image chords converge to a point). Still, the following lemma holds.  

> l:clos-sibl-1

Lemma 5.2. The closure of a web is a web. Proof. We need to show that if a sequence of sibling collections con-verges while their image chords do not converge to a point then the limit collection of chords is a sibling collection. Let Z = {ℓ1, . . . , ℓ d} be the limit of a sequence of sibling collections. Then all chords ℓi, 1 ⩽ i ⩽ d

have the same non-degenerate image. By continuity, ℓ1, . . . , ℓ d are pair-wise disjoint except, perhaps, for the endpoints. We claim that ℓ1 and 

ℓ2 are disjoint. Indeed, otherwise we may assume that ℓ1 = ab and 

ℓ2 = bc and σd(a) = σd(c)̸ = σd(b). A sibling collection near Z must in-clude disjoint leaves a′b′ ≈ ab and b′′ c′ ≈ bc with the same image which is impossible because σd(b′)̸ = σd(b′′ ), a contradiction. Similarly we can show that all chords ℓ1, . . . , ℓ d are pairwise disjoint as desired. □

The sibling condition is not very restrictive.  

> l:all-aboard

Lemma 5.3. Any non-critical chord ℓ = xy can be included in a sibling collection. ROOT LAMINATIONS OF ARBITRARY DEGREE 13 

Proof. Left to the reader. □

> sss:invaweb

5.1. Invariant webs and laminations. Let us add dynamics to the just introduced concepts.  

> d:web

Definition 5.4 (Invariant webs) . A web WB is (σd)-invariant if it has the following additional properties: (1) if c ∈ WB , then σd(c) ∈ WB and all points of S are included in 

WB ;(2) for each c ∈ WB there exists q ∈ WB so that σd(q) = c.Invariant webs survive the operation of taking the closure.  

> l:closke

Lemma 5.5. It WB is an invariant web, then its closure WB is a closed invariant web. The union of any collection of invariant webs is an invariant web. Proof. To prove the lemma we check properties (1) and (2) from Defi-nition 5.4 using the continuity of σd.(1) If c ∈ WB , then, clearly, σd(c) ∈ WB or σd(c) is a point. (2) For any c ∈ WB choose chords ℓi ∈ WB such that ℓi → c, then their pullbacks within WB , and then a subsequence of the pullbacks converging to a chord from WB which maps to c.Together with Lemma 5.2 this proves the first claim. The second claim is immediate. □

Definition 5.6 introduces invariant laminations which are a particular case of an invariant web. This concept extends that of a lamination similar to how the concept of an invariant web extends that of a web. 

Definition 5.6. [3, Definition 3.1] A prelamination L is (σd-)invari-d:sibli 

ant if it is an invariant web. A closed ( σd-)invariant prelamination L

is called a (σd)-invariant lamination. Note that if {L α}α∈A is a family of invariant prelaminations totally ordered by inclusion then S 

> α∈A

Lα is an invariant lamination. While superficially (invariant) webs are, in a sense, opposite of (in-variant) laminations (chords of webs may well cross each other inside 

D), they are a useful tool in studying invariant laminations as they allow one to simultaneously consider various laminations compatible with a given prelamination. Let us explain now which topology we consider on the family of all webs and related families. The space of chords (all chords in D,including degenerate chords) with the Hausdorff metric is, evidently a compact metric subspace of the space 2D of all compact subsets of the 14 A. BLOKH, L. OVERSTEEGEN, AND V. TIMORIN 

closed unit disk. Two collections of chords are close if the corresponding collections of points in 2D are close. Theorem 5.7 combines parts of Corollary 3.20, Theorem 3.21 and Corollary 3.22 of [3] into one statement. An alternative proof of The-orem 5.7 may rely on Lemma 5.5.  

> t:laclo

Theorem 5.7. The closure of an invariant prelamination is an invari-ant lamination. The space of all sibling invariant laminations of degree 

d is compact. 

Here is another useful property of invariant laminations.  

> l:clos-sibl

Lemma 5.8. The family of all non-isolated leaves of an invariant lam-ination L is an invariant lamination. Proof. All non-isolated leaves in L form a forward invariant closed fam-ily of leaves. We claim that if ℓ ∈ L is non-isolated then it has a preim-age q ∈ L which is also non-isolated. Indeed, we can choose leaves 

qi → q with σd(qi) → ℓ so that leaves σd(qi) are pairwise distinct. It follows that σd(q) = ℓ, qi’s are pairwise distinct, and, hence, q is non-isolated in L. Now, let ℓ be non-isolated and non-critical. Choose pairwise distinct ℓi → ℓ and their sibling collections. We may assume that these sibling collections of leaves converge; by Lemma 5.2 they converge to a sibling collection that includes ℓ. □

Theorem 5.9 combines some results of [3] into one. 

Theorem 5.9. [3, Lemma 3.1, Theorem 3.2] Any q-lamination is an t:gapin 

invariant lamination. Any invariant lamination is gap invariant, and, hence, Thurston invariant. 

From now on, unless stated otherwise, all laminations are σd-invariant for some d ⩾ 2. 

> l:samep

Lemma 5.10. If L∼ is a invariant q-lamination, x is a periodic point of period n, and xy is a leaf of L∼, then y is also of period n. Thus, if a chord ℓ eventually maps to a chord that connects an n-periodic point with a point which is not n-periodic then ℓ cannot be a leaf of any q-lamination. Proof. Since classes of laminational equivalence relations are finite and 

x is periodic, then y is periodic as otherwise properties of invariant laminations imply that xy can be pulled back n times to give rise to a leaf xz with σnd (x) = x and σnd (z) = y; clearly, yz ̸ = xy is concatenated with xy , and repeating the pullback procedure we will obtain an infinite cone of leaves of L∼, and hence an infinite ∼-class, a contradiction. On the other hand, by [8, Lemma 2.25] y is (pre)periodic of period n.Hence y is in fact periodic of period n as claimed. □ROOT LAMINATIONS OF ARBITRARY DEGREE 15 

> ss:propela

5.2. Proper laminations. As was remarked above, the origin of the concept of a lamination is the construction from Definition 4.3. For a given laminational equivalence ∼ this construction produces the asso-ciated q-lamination L∼ that consists of the edges of the convex hulls of ∼-classes. On the other hand, invariant laminations appear naturally as Haus-dorff limits of q-laminations often reflecting convergence of the corre-sponding polynomials. Therefore, it is desirable to construct a lamina-tional equivalence relation based on a given invariant lamination (i.e., not necessarily an invariant q-lamination). This requires reversing of the process described in Definition 4.3. Below, in Definition 5.11, we describe how, for a given invariant lamination, a natural laminational equivalence relation can be defined. In doing so we follow [3]. 

Definition 5.11. [3, Definition 2.3] Let L be a lamination. Define the d:lamtoeq 

equivalence relation ≈L by declaring that x≈Ly if and only if there exists a finite concatenation of leaves of L joining x to y.Clearly, ≈L is an equivalence relation. However it may well hap-pen that ≈L is not a laminational equivalence. Reasons for that is the fact, that in many cases ≈L will not be closed and/or will have infinite classes. The concept is still valid, but it is the most useful in the case when L has additional properties guaranteeing that ≈L is alaminational equivalence.  

> d:proper-chord

Definition 5.12. A chord ℓ is said to be proper if no image of ℓ con-nects an n-periodic point and a point which is not n-periodic; other-wise ℓ is said to be improper . An invariant lamination is proper if all its leaves are proper. A useful fact about proper laminations is established in [3]. 

Lemma 5.13. [3, Lemma 4.2] Any q-lamination is proper. l:4.2 

Proper laminations can be defined differently. If two distinct leaves of L have a common endpoint v and equal images, then their union is said to be a critical wedge (with vertex v). 

> l:crit-equiv

Lemma 5.14. A lamination L is proper if and only if the following holds: 

(1) no critical leaf of L has a periodic endpoint, and 

(2) no critical wedge of L has a periodic vertex. Moreover, if L is proper, then ≈L is a laminational equivalence re-lation. 16 A. BLOKH, L. OVERSTEEGEN, AND V. TIMORIN 

Proof. By Theorem 4.9 [3] if (1) and (2) hold then ≈L is an invariant laminational equivalence relation. Hence by Lemma 5.10 all leaves of 

L are proper. Let us prove that if L is proper then (1) and (2) hold. The fact that 

L cannot contain a critical leaf with a periodic endpoint easily follows. Suppose by way of contradiction that W is a critical wedge consisting of leaves wa and wb with w periodic of period n, σd(a) = σd(b). Then one of the points a, b is not of period n, hence the leaf connecting that point and w is improper, a contradiction with L being proper. The last claim of the lemma follows from Theorem 4.9 [3]. □

Lemma 5.14 justifies the following definition.  

> d:gen-prop

Definition 5.15. Let L be a proper lamination. Then the q-lamination 

L≈L is said to be generated by L.Lemma 5.16 is related to Theorem 5.7.  

> l:prop-clos

Lemma 5.16. Let L be a (non-empty) proper prelamination. Then the closure L of L is a (non-empty) proper lamination. Proof. By Theorem 5.7, L is an invariant lamination. We need to show that it is proper. Suppose that there is a leaf xy of L where x is n-periodic while σnd (y)̸ = y. Replacing σd by σnd , we may assume that 

σd(x) = x is fixed while σd(y)̸ = y. Set xy = ℓ and consider several cases. (1) Let σd(y)̸ = x. Assume that x < σ d(y) < y in the sense of the positive direction on the circle. Since xy is not proper, it cannot belong to L and must be the limit of a non-constant sequence of leaves 

ℓi = xiyi ∈ L with xi → x and yi → y. We may assume that xi ≈ x

and yi ≈ y (with ≈ meaning “is very close to”). Since L is proper, 

xi̸ = x and hence σd(xi)̸ = xi. Clearly, either x < x i < σ d(xi), or 

σd(xi) < x i < x . Then in the former case ℓi crosses σd(ℓ), and in the latter case σd(ℓi) crosses ℓ, a contradiction. (2) Let σd(y) = x. As before, choose a sequence of leaves ℓi =

xiyi ∈ L such that xi → x and yi → y. Consider possible locations of the points xi, y i with respect to x and y. Observe that leaves ℓi do not cross xy ; then it easily follows (for geometric reasons and because 

σd is locally expanding) that the images of ℓi will cross leaves ℓi, a contradiction. □ROOT LAMINATIONS OF ARBITRARY DEGREE 17 

6. Critical portraits 

> s:cripo

We mentioned in the Introduction that we want to relate q-lami-nations and critical portraits . In this section we define critical por-traits and study their general properties. We then consider pullbacks of chords in the setting of sibling invariant laminations . 

> d:crpt

Definition 6.1 (Critical portraits) . A collection CP of distinct pair-wise unlinked σd-critical chords is said to be a critical collection . An endpoint of a chord from CP is said to be a vertex of CP . A criti-cal collection is full if for every component B of D \ S CP the map 

σd|Bd( B)∩S is injective (except for the endpoints of critical edges of B). A full critical collection CP consisting of d − 1 chords is called a critical portrait . The space of all (unordered) critical portraits of degree d with the natural topology is denoted by CrP d.The proof of the next lemma is left to the reader.  

> l:1d

Lemma 6.2. In a full critical collection CP there is a chord c with a circle arc connecting its endpoints of length 1 

> d

.

Let us list basic properties of the just defined concepts.  

> l:basic

Lemma 6.3. For a full critical collection CP , there are at least d

components of D \ S CP . A critical collection is full if and only if it contains a critical portrait. Given a critical portrait P, there are 

exactly d components of D \ S P. A critical collection CP of d − 1

chords is a critical portrait if and only if no chords from CP form a loop. Proof. Left to the reader. □

Let us emphasize that, by definition, the order of critical chords in a critical collection CP does not matter.  

> l:dynama

Lemma 6.4. Let A be a component of D \ S CP where CP is a full critical collection. Then A is an open Jordan disk whose boundary is the union of some chords from CP and (possibly no) open circle arcs. If at least one of the circle arcs is included, the map σd sends Bd( A)

onto the entire unit circle S in a one-to-one order preserving fashion except for the chords of CP contained in Bd( A) that collapse to points. Proof. Left to the reader. □

We will use the following definition based on Lemma 6.4.  

> d:dynama

Definition 6.5 (Components of D \ S CP ). Let A be a component of 

D \ S CP where CP is a full critical collection. If Bd( A) is the union of 18 A. BLOKH, L. OVERSTEEGEN, AND V. TIMORIN 

some critical chords from CP we call A all-critical . Otherwise we call 

A partially critical .7. Pullbacks 

> s:pullbacks

Let C∗ be the space of all chords in D with the usual metric (this includes degenerate chords). The map σd is defined on C∗ as follows: 

σd(ab ) = σd(a)σd(b); thus, it acts on the space of chords and sends a collection of chords A to another collection of chords σd(A). However, the map σd does not act on D. Recall also, that the sibling property is only stated for non-critical chords (see Definition 5.1). Finally, if pullbacks are defined for a specific full critical collection CP we talk of 

(σd, CP )-pullbacks . If it does not cause ambiguity (for example, if d and 

CP are fixed), the “ (σd, CP )”-part of the notation may be (partially) omitted or replaced by the word “immediate”. Moreover, if instead of 

σd one considers σnd for all non-negative values of n then we will use the word iterated or eventual pullbacks. 

The Description of Pullback Chords 

Consider a partially critical component A of D \ S CP . By Lemma 6.4 there are several possibilities for various pullback chords of a chord 

ℓ = xy into A. Let us list such possibilities below. (i) The endpoints of ℓ do not belong to the union of images of critical chords from CP that are contained in Bd( A). Then there is a unique pullback chord of ℓ into A; also, ℓ will never intersect pullback chords of ℓ into other components of D \ S CP . In particular, if no image of a chord from CP is an endpoint of ℓ, then ℓ has d pairwise disjoint 

CP -pullback chords (disjoint from chords of CP ). (ii) One endpoint of ℓ (say, x) equals σd(c) for some critical chord 

c ∈ CP lying on the boundary of A; on the other hand, y is not equal to σd(d) for any other critical chord d ∈ CP that is contained in Bd( A).Let X be the component of (S CP ) ∩ Bd( A) that contains c and set 

X′ = X ∩ S; let y′ ∈ Bd( A) be such that σd(y′) = y. Evidently, y′ is unique, y′ ∈ S \ S CP , and all possible CP -pullback chords of ℓ into A

are chords that connect y′ and points of X′.(iii) We have that x = σd(c) for some c ∈ CP , c ⊂ Bd( A) and 

y = σd(d) for some d ∈ CP , d ⊂ Bd( A). Denote by X the component of (S CP ) ∩ Bd( A) that contains c and set X′ = X ∩ S; denote by Y

the component of (S CP ) ∩ Bd( A) that contains d and set Y ′ = Y ∩ S.All CP -pullback chords of ℓ in A are all the chords connecting a point of X′ to a point of Y ′.ROOT LAMINATIONS OF ARBITRARY DEGREE 19  

> l:sipul

Lemma 7.1 (Sibling property for CP -pullback chords) . Let CP be a full critical collection. Let ℓ = xy be a chord in D. Then the family B

of all CP -pullback chords of ℓ has the sibling property. 

Observe that in the setting of Lemma 7.1 ℓ can be any chord, in particular ℓ does not have to be compatible with CP . In other words, one can think of ℓ as being a chord of another copy of the unit disk D,distinct from the one in which CP is contained. 

Proof. The case when neither x nor y belongs to σd(CP ) is already considered in the Description of Pullback Chords (i). So we may assume that at least one endpoint of ℓ (say, x) belongs to σd(CP ). To establish the sibling property for the family B we use induction on d.First, assume that d = 2 . Then CP = {c} = {tz } is a diameter, and by the assumption σd(c) = x. In this case if a CP -pullback chord d

of ℓ shares an endpoint z with c and is contained in A where A is a component of D \ c, then we can choose the pullback y of ℓ contained in the closure of the other component B̸ = A of D \ c sharing an endpoint 

t with c. Clearly, d ∩ y = ∅; since d was an arbitrarily chosen CP -pullback chord of ℓ, this proves the lemma for d = 2 .We now prove the lemma for some d ⩾ 3 while assuming that the lemma holds for d − 1. By Lemma 6.2 we can choose a critical chord 

c = tz ∈ CP such that the arc [t, z ] (with positive direction within [t, z ]

being from t to z), is of length 1 

> d

(and the length of the arc [z, t ] is d−1 

> d

). Now, pinch D along the chord c, i.e. identify t and z; this produces a figure eight topological space T = π(S) where π is the associated quotient map (“pinching map”). The space T is the union of a Jordan curve E = π([ z, t ]) and a Jordan curve F = π([ t, z ]) . Moreover, E∩F =

π(t) = π(z) is the branchpoint v of T . The map σd induces two locally one-to-one maps, gE : E → S of degree d − 1 and gF : F → S of degree one (thus, gF is a homeomorphism preserving orientation). Moreover, 

π-images of critical chords from CP with endpoints in [z, t ] form a full 

gE -critical collection π(CP ).Suppose that q is a CP -pullback chord of ℓ and show that q can be completed to a sibling collection for σd of chords compatible with CP ;evidently, all the chords from the collection belong to B.First we choose, by induction applied to gE , d − 1 pairwise disjoint topological (π(CP ), g E )-pullback chords of ℓ. If q has endpoints in [t, z ]

then the choice of these chords can be arbitrary, but if q has endpoints in [z, t ] then one of these chords must be π(q). In either case the desired choice of topological chords is possible by induction. Denote 20 A. BLOKH, L. OVERSTEEGEN, AND V. TIMORIN 

the collection of these d − 1 chords by X . Next we develop a strategy of lifting these chords to the original circle using the map π.If σd(t) = σd(z) is not an endpoint of ℓ, this can be done uniquely so that the lifted chords are still pairwise disjoint; adding to the resulting 

d − 1 pullbacks of ℓ the CP -pullback chord of ℓ with the endpoints in 

(t, z ) we get the desired sibling collection of CP -pullback chords of ℓ

containing q.Suppose that σd(t) = σd(z) is an endpoint of ℓ. Then among the 

d − 1 chords of X there is one, denoted by y, whose endpoint is π(t).Now consider cases depending on q. Suppose that q has endpoints in 

F . Then one of them is either t or z. Suppose it is t. Then we choose the lifting of y with an endpoint z. If however q has an endpoint t,then we lift y to a chord with an endpoint z. The other liftings are well-defined and all of them are pairwise disjoint. This gives rise to a desired sibling collection of chords. Suppose now that q has the endpoints in E. Then we choose the liftings of chords of X so that q is among the liftings. If q has t or z

as an endpoint it defines the lifting of y. Otherwise the choice of the lifting of y is either with t as an endpoint, or with z as an endpoint. In any case once the liftings are defined, we can choose a sibling chord of them with the endpoints in F so that in the resulting collection of chords all chords are pairwise disjoint. This shows that for any choice of q we can find a full sibling collection containing q as desired. □

8. Preroot laminations, or how to bypass portals 

> s:preroot

The notion of an invariant web (see Definitions 5.1 and 5.4) is new and mimics that of a sibling invariant lamination ([3]). However, this notion is too broad for our purposes. For example, the family of all chords is a web. To make webs more like laminations, we add new restrictions and define webs with regard to full critical collections CP .This provides for a natural way to construct an invariant web compat-ible with CP .8.1. Basic notions. Recall that by compatible chords we mean chords that do not cross each other.  

> d:poext2

Definition 8.1 (Notation) . Let CP be a full critical collection. Then 

{K i(CP ) = Ki} are collections of critical chords forming components of S CP called critical chordial continua (of CP ). For each i denote by 

Ci(CP ) = Ci the family of edges of the convex hull CH( S Ki) of the set S Ki. All endpoints of chords from Ci (or chords from Ki) map to the same point denoted σd(Ci). Denote by CP + the collection of all-critical ROOT LAMINATIONS OF ARBITRARY DEGREE 21 

polygons of the form CH( Ki); note that edges of sets from CP + form a full critical collection. Call endpoints of chords from Ci vertices of 

Ci. Call components of the set D \ S(CH( Ki)) (CP +-)complementary components (if CP + is fixed, we omit it from terminology). Observe that any set Ci has at most one periodic vertex. Evidently, sets CH( Ki) are pairwise disjoint, and sets S Ci are pairwise disjoint. If a chord ℓ ∈ CP is disjoint from all other chords of CP , then the cor-responding sets Ki and Ci coincide with {ℓ}. Also, S Ci = Bd(CH( Ki)) 

for each i. Finally, the boundary of any CP +-complementary compo-nent is the union of alternating critical chords from CP + and circle arcs. E.g., suppose that CP = P is a critical portrait. It is easy to see that then P = P+ if and only if P consists of d − 1 pairwise disjoint critical chords. Thus, if P is a conic cubic critical portrait consisting of two critical chords ℓ′ = xy and ℓ′′ = xz that share a vertex x then 

P+ = {ℓ′, ℓ ′′ , yz }.From now on we work with CP + rather than CP . Our motivation is as follows. A critical portrait P describes all q-laminations in which endpoints of a leaf from P are equivalent whenever possible, e.g. when the corresponding critical leaf is proper. Thus, if Ki contains no pe-riodic points then CH( S Ki) is contained in the convex hulls of the associated equivalence classes. Hence we can work with convex hulls of such sets Ki. 

> d:im-prop

Definition 8.2 (Portals and proper critical sets) . A set Ci is a portal 

if it contains a critical leaf with a periodic endpoint; the set CH( Ci) is then called a portal (continuum) . Otherwise, both Ci and CH( Ci) are said to be proper . More generally, a portal is an all-critical set with a periodic vertex. On the first step of our two step construction we use the pullbacks of the proper critical sets.  

> d:pubaweb

Definition 8.3. Let CP be a full critical collection. Denote the collec-tion of all iterated CP +-pullbacks of chords from proper sets of CP by 

YCP . Say that chords ℓ ∈ Y CP and ℓ′ ∈ Y CP are YCP -equivalent if there is a finite chain of chords of YCP that are consecutively non-disjoint and connect ℓ and ℓ′. Classes of YCP -equivalence are called YCP -piles .Observe that even though we use the subscript CP in the notation above, and will continue doing so in what follows, we always use the family CP + of pairwise disjoint all-critical sets, and proceed with the family CP + as the basis of our constructions. 22 A. BLOKH, L. OVERSTEEGEN, AND V. TIMORIN  

> l:yweb

Lemma 8.4. The family YCP is an invariant web. Proof. By Lemma 7.1, YCP is a web. It is easy to see that it also satisfies the requirements in Definition 5.4 and, hence, it is invariant. □

8.2. Properties of YCP -piles. The non-periodicity implies nice prop-erties of YCP . Recall that by chords we normally mean non-degenerate 

chords.  

> l:finpil

Lemma 8.5. There is an integer M > 0 such that the convex hull of any YCP -pile set is a polygon with at most M vertices. The number of chords in any YCP -pile is at most M (M −1) 2 .Proof. One can think of pulling back proper chordial continua from 

CP + as a whole rather than doing it chord by chord. By definition, such a pullback into one complementary component is convex. Moreover, if a proper critical set Ci maps to a vertex of a convex chordial continuum 

X, then the entire pullback of X includes Ci and slightly modified copies of X attached to Ci along each edge of Ci. This can happen at several proper critical sets Ci; it follows that a pullback of X can be thought of as a convex set with some chords inside. If X is a convex polygon, the number of vertices of its pullbacks can thus increase. However, since there are only finitely many proper sets Ci that we pull back, the above described growth of the number of vertices of pullback chordial continua takes place only finitely many times for each of the continua and stops after a large number of pullbacks have been taken. The last claim is left to the reader. □

Images, preimages and complete pullbacks of piles and pile sets are defined in a natural fashion.  

> l:basic1

Lemma 8.6. The following claims are true. 

(1) All YCP -piles consist of at most M (M −1) 2 chords all of which are proper. 

(2) YCP -pile sets are connected 

(3) YCP -piles include no chords from portals. 

(4) Edges of the convex hulls of YCP -pile sets belong to the corre-sponding piles. 

(5) The convex hulls of YCP -piles are disjoint. 

(6) The image of a YCP -pile is a YCP -pile. 

(7) The full preimage of a YCP -pile A consists of at most d YCP -piles each of which is a pullback of A.

(8) The convex hull of every YCP -pile eventually maps onto a proper critical set from CP +.ROOT LAMINATIONS OF ARBITRARY DEGREE 23 

Proof. Left to the reader. □

Recall that given two points a, b ∈ S we denote by (a, b ) the arc such that the movement from a to b within this arc is in the positive direc-tion. Recall also that a hole of a closed subset A ⊂ S is a component of S \ A. 

> d:pos-ori1

Definition 8.7. Given a closed set A ⊂ S, we say that the restriction 

σd|A is a positively oriented map if for every hole (x, y ) of A either 

σd(x) = σd(y) or the interval (σd(x), σ d(y)) is also a hole of σd(A).If σd|A is positively oriented then it can be extended over the bound-ary of CH( A) to a map that sends the boundary of CH( A) to the bound-ary of CH( σd(A)) as a positively oriented composition of a monotone map and a covering map.  

> l:convex1

Lemma 8.8. If A is a YCP -pile and V is the set of vertices of S A,then the map σd|V is positively oriented. In particular, σd maps edges of CH( S A) to edges of CH( S σd(A)) . Moreover, if CH( S A) is not all-critical then its edges are non-critical and their union maps k-to-1

to edges of CH( S σd(A)) for some k ⩾ 1.Proof. The claim is easy if CH( S A) ⊂ U where U is a complementary component to CP +. Otherwise there are sets Ci ⊂ A . Indeed, since A

is not contained in the closure of a complementary component then A

is non-disjoint from some proper sets CH( Ci); hence, by definition of a 

YCP -pile all chords from Ci are in A.Denote by D1, . . . , D k all complementary components intersecting S A. Then each Dj has an edge of at least one such set CH( Ci) in its boundary. It follows that for each chord ℓ′ in σd(A) there is at least one chord ℓj in each Dj that maps to ℓ′ (depending on whether the endpoints of ℓ′ are images of critical sets there may be more pullbacks of ℓ′ in Dj ). Moreover, since the order is preserved under σd on Bd( Dj )

(except for the collapse of the critical edges) then CH(( S A)∩Dj ) maps order preservingly onto CH( S σd(A)) .To prove that this implies the desired statement, first assume that there is only one critical set C ∈ CP + contained in A. Then behind each edge ℓ of C there is a well-defined component Di of D\C bordering on ℓ that intersects S A, and by the previous paragraph the map on 

V ∩ Di, and hence on V, is positively oriented. By induction, suppose now that the claim is proven in the case when 

s critical sets Ci are contained in A, and prove it in the case when s + 1 

critical sets Ci are contained in A. This we will also prove by induction, now over the number of edges of a specially chosen set C ⊂ A .24 A. BLOKH, L. OVERSTEEGEN, AND V. TIMORIN 

Namely, find a critical set C that has an edge ℓ = ab such that the circle arc I = ( a, b ) is disjoint from other critical sets C ⊂ A (ℓ is an edge “on the edge”). The induction is over the number m of edges of S C.Indeed, suppose that C = {ℓ}. Then collapsing CH( ℓ ∪ I) and applying the induction over s we see that the resulting (after collapse) set A′

intersected with S maps onto its image positively oriented. Adding to this the chords of A with endpoints in I, we see that the resulting map on V is positively oriented, too. This as the basis of induction over m, and the arguments in the inductive step repeat (verbatim) the arguments in the base of induction case. This completes the proof of all the claims of the lemma except for the last one. To prove the last claim observe that if CH( S A) is not all-critical but there is a critical edge ℓ of CH( S A) then ℓ must be an edge of a proper set C ∈ CP + and, hence, cannot be an edge of CH( S A)

(sibling sets of CH( S A) must be attached to all edges of C and those sibling sets are non-degenerate because CH( S A) is not all-critical). The contradiction shows that in the case at hand edges of CH( S A)

are not critical; hence, since σd|V is positively oriented, then the edges of CH( S A) map k-to-1 to edges of CH( S σd(A)) for some k ⩾ 1. □

The next lemma is based on simple geometric considerations.  

> l:prelam

Lemma 8.9. The family of all edges of convex hulls of YCP -pile sets is a proper invariant prelamination. Moreover, all such edges belong to the corresponding piles. Proof. Let Z be a YCP -pile. By Lemmas 8.4 and 8.8 the family of all its pullbacks consists of pairwise disjoint piles with pairwise disjoint convex hulls, and each pullback pile maps onto Z positively oriented. For each edge ℓ of the convex hull of a pullback pile of S Z we can choose its sibling edges in this pullback pile and among other pullback piles of Z. By the last claim of Lemma 8.8 we can do this so that all these chords are pairwise disjoint, and by Lemma 8.4 there are d of them (including ℓ). Thus, the family of all edges of convex hulls of YCP -piles has the sibling property. By Lemma 8.8 this family is invariant. By Lemma 8.6(4) this family is a prelamination, and by definition it is proper. The last claim of the lemma follows from Lemma 8.6(4). □

Observe that by Lemma 8.9 all edges of convex hulls of YCP -pile sets are eventually mapped to edges of proper sets from CP + and never have images crossing edges of any sets from CP +. 

> t:side-lam

Theorem 8.10. Let CP be a full critical collection. Then the closure of the family of all edges of convex hulls of YCP -piles is a proper invariant lamination. ROOT LAMINATIONS OF ARBITRARY DEGREE 25 

Proof. Follows from Lemma 8.9 and Lemma 5.16. □

We can now give the next definition. 

d:root-side Definition 8.11. The proper invariant lamination from Theorem 8.10 will be denoted by EY CP .A useful claim about EY CP is proven next. 

l:ey-nocross Lemma 8.12. No eventual image of a chord of EY CP can cross an edge of any set from CP + (thus, EY CP is compatible with CP +). Proof. The lemma is proven in Lemma 8.9 in the case when we consider an edge of the convex hull of a pile set. On the other hand, if a chord of EY CP is the limit of convex hulls of YCP -pile sets then, since their edges belong to the corresponding YCP -piles, the claim easily follows by continuity. □

Since EY CP is proper, then it defines a q-lamination. 

Definition 8.13. The q-lamination Lpr  

> CP

defined by EY CP is called the 

preroot (q-lamination) of CP . The associated laminational equivalence is denoted by ∼pr  

> CP

.It turns out that Lpr  

> CP

may have leaves that do not belong to EY CP .Moreover, it turns out that these leaves may even be incompatible with CP +. Thus, similar to Lemma 8.12, we are interested in learning whether all leaves of Lpr  

> CP

are compatible with all sets from CP + or not. 

l:prer-cross Lemma 8.14. Suppose that ℓ is a leaf of Lpr  

> CP

is incompatible with 

CP +. Then ℓ is a common edge of a finite gap A of Lpr  

> CP

and an infinite (pre)hyperbolic gap U of Lpr  

> CP

which eventually maps to a periodic non-degenerate edge of a periodic hyperbolic gap. In particular, of CP + is a Side full critical collection, then Lpr  

> CP

= EY CP .Proof. By Lemma 8.12 it follows that ℓ / ∈ EY CP . Hence ℓ is an edge of the convex hull of a ∼pr  

> CP

-class which was added as we constructed Lpr 

> CP

by taking convex hulls of ≈EY CP sets. Hence the ∼pr  

> CP

-class of ℓ must consist of at least three points, the corresponding convex hull A is a finite gap, ℓ is an edge of A, and ℓ is not approached from the outside of A by leaves of EY CP . We conclude that A is a finite gap attached to an infinite gap U of EY CP .Observe that by Theorem 9.9 U is (pre)periodic. Hence by Lemma A.2 edges of U are (pre)periodic or (pre0critical. We claim that if we map A forward then it must be eventually mapped to a finite periodic gap. Indeed, otherwise by the above the only thing that can happen 26 A. BLOKH, L. OVERSTEEGEN, AND V. TIMORIN 

is that A will be eventually mapped to a critical leaf which by con-struction implies that A in fact is a gap from EY CP and, hence, ℓ must be compatible with CP +, a contradiction with the assumption. Fur-thermore, the same argument implies that in the absence of hyperbolic gaps the above described phenomenon (when a finite gap A of Lpr  

> CP

has an edge that does not belong to EY CP ) is impossible. This completes the proof. □

The next lemma studies pullbacks of leaves for laminations compati-ble with CP +. Since elements of CP + are convex polygons (see Defini-tion 8.1), we can simply talk about complementary components of CP +

which are the same as previously used partially critical complementary 

components.  

> l:pull

Lemma 8.15. Suppose that CP is a full critical collection and a σd-invariant lamination L is compatible with CP +. Let ℓ ∈ L , and let U

be a component of D \ S CP +. Then there exists a leaf ℓ′ ∈ L with 

σd(ℓ′) = ℓ and ℓ′ ⊂ U .Proof. By definition there exists a sibling collection of leaves ℓ1, . . . , ℓ d

in L each of which maps to ℓ = ab . Each preimage of a and b shows once among the endpoints of leaves {ℓi}. Hence if a is not the image of any critical edge of U , then there exists a leaf ℓj contained in U .Now, suppose that bℓ = xy is a critical edge of U with σd(bℓ) = a. The leaf bℓ cuts D in two open components A and B with, say, U ⊂ B. In both A and B the number of point-preimages of b is by one greater that the number of preimages of a. Hence we may assume that a leaf 

ℓs = xu ∈ L is contained in A and a leaf ℓt = yv ∈ L is contained in B

which implies that ℓt ⊂ U as desired. □

Let U1, . . . , U d be complementary domains of CP +. Then the bound-ary of each Ui is an alternating concatenation of circle arcs and critical leaves. For y ∈ S, either exactly one point of Bd( Ui) maps to y under 

σd, or there are two such points (which are the endpoints of one criti-cal edge in the boundary of Ui). Finally, the endpoints of each critical chord from CP + that does not come from a portal belong to the same 

∼pr  

> CP

-class. Let πi : ∂U i → S be the restriction of σd to ∂U i ∩ S and call it the induced map .We now need the results from the Appendix describing properties of periodic gaps with first return map of degree one (e.g., we need Definition A.5 where (pre-)caterpillar and (pre-)Siegel (periodic) gaps are defined). Thus, the reader is advised to read the Appendix before continuing to read here. ROOT LAMINATIONS OF ARBITRARY DEGREE 27 

l:noc-nod Lemma 8.16. If CP is a Side full critical collection then the only infinite gaps that the q-lamination Lpr  

> CP

may have are (pre-)Siegel gaps. Proof. If Lpr  

> CP

has a (periodic) caterpillar gap then by Lemma A.4 it must have a critical leaf with a periodic endpoint, a contradiction (in fact since Lpr  

> CP

is compatible with CP then Lpr  

> CP

cannot be compatible with a critical chord with a periodic endpoint as the latter must have both endpoints coming from the set of the endpoints of chords from 

CP which has no periodic points). Hence Lpr  

> CP

has no (pre-)caterpillar gaps. Now, if Lpr  

> CP

has a periodic gap U with first return map of degree greater than one then we may assume that U is critical which implies that at least one set from CP is contained in U , a contradiction to the definition of Lpr  

> CP

. Hence the only possibility for an infinite gap of Lpr 

> CP

is to be (pre-)Siegel as claimed. □

We are ready to prove the last theorem of this section. 

t:1class Theorem 8.17. Suppose that CP is a Side full critical collection and 

ℓ = ab is a chord so that no two images of ℓ cross and no image of 

ℓ crosses an edge of CP +. Then the endpoints of ℓ are in the same 

∼pr  

> CP

-class. Proof. Put σnd (ℓ) = ℓn = anbn; choose for each n a complementary domain Un of CP + with ℓn ⊂ Un. By way of contradiction suppose that a and b are in distinct ∼pr  

> CP

-classes. We claim that then an and bn

belong to distinct ∼pr  

> CP

-classes for each n. Indeed, suppose that an+1 

and bn+1 belong to the same class. Observe that an+1 and bn+1 belong to Un, and denote by A the intersection of the convex hull of the class containing an+1 and bn+1 with Un+1 . By Lemma 6.4, by Lemma 8.14, and by definitions the pullback of A into Un is a convex set whose intersection with S is contained in one class. Hence an and bn belong to one class, and the argument can be repeated. Thus, under our assumption we have that an and bn belong to distinct ∼pr  

> CP

-classes for each n. Consider cases. (1) Suppose that ℓ is contained in a gap W of Lpr  

> CP

. Then W is infinite. By Lemma 8.16 W must be pre-Siegel. Hence two forward images of ℓ will cross each other, a contradiction. (2) The remaining case is when for each n there exists a chord dn

which crosses ℓn and maps in, say, kn steps to an edge of CP +. Since no image of ℓn crosses an edge of CP +, there exists mn < k n so that endpoints of σmn 

> d

(dn) and σmn 

> d

(ℓn) are connected by a critical leaf from 

CP +. However, since CP + is Side (i.e., finite without periodic vertices), there exists an N such that for all n ⩾ N , ℓn ∩ CP + = ∅. Hence an and 28 A. BLOKH, L. OVERSTEEGEN, AND V. TIMORIN 

bn cannot be contained in distinct ∼pr classes for all n, a contradiction. 

□

Observe that in the situation of Theorem 8.17 the assumption that 

CP is Side is essential. If there are some portals, then it may well hap-pen that several (more than one) portal are inside infinite hyperbolic gaps of Lpr  

> CP

and there are (periodic) leaves inside those gaps that sat-isfy all the conditions of Theorem 8.17 but, evidently, are not leaves of 

Lpr  

> CP

.9. Introduction to Side laminations 

> s:sidelami

In this section we relate the just introduced concepts and lamina-tions. Let us recall several definitions.  

> d:den

Definition 9.1 (Dendritic laminations) . A q-lamination L is dendritic 

if it has no infinite gaps. A laminational equivalence relation ∼ is den-dritic if L∼ is dendritic. If ∼ is invariant then a topological polynomial 

f∼ is dendritic if L∼ is dendritic. The next lemma follows. 

Lemma 9.2. [7, Lemma 2.8] Leaves of dendritic q-laminations are not l:2.18 

isolated. 

By Theorem 9.9 any infinite gap is (pre)periodic. In this section, in addition to dendritic laminations, we consider invariant q-laminations that are non-dendritic by virtue of having periodic Siegel gaps. Thus, we consider only q-laminations (and other related objects such as topo-logical polynomials etc) that have no hyperbolic infinite gaps (equiva-lently, all infinite periodic gaps are Siegel).  

> d:side

Definition 9.3 (Siegel-dendritic laminations) . A q-lamination is said to be Siegel if it has a periodic Siegel gap. A q-lamination all of whose infinite periodic gaps are Siegel is said to be a Si egel-de ndritic lam-ination, or just a Side lamination. The same terminology applies to laminational equivalence relations, topological polynomials, etc. The situation is a bit more involved if we consider all laminations, not only q-laminations. We need the following definition.  

> d:sidepo

Definition 9.4 (Side critical collections) . Side critical collections (crit-ical portraits) are those whose critical chords have no periodic end-points. The next lemma is easy. ROOT LAMINATIONS OF ARBITRARY DEGREE 29  

> l:onlys

Lemma 9.5. A Side q-lamination L can only be compatible with Side critical portraits. Proof. The claim follows from the fact that critical sets of L have no periodic vertices. □

The next definition applies to all laminations, not only q-laminations.  

> d:uni-side

Definition 9.6. An invariant lamination is Side if it is only compatible with Side critical portraits (equivalently, if any critical chord with a periodic endpoint is incompatible with L). 9.1. Capture dynamics. We need Definition 9.7.  

> d:capture

Definition 9.7 (Capture dynamics) . A lamination L is a capture lam-ination if it has a non-periodic infinite gap U such that the restriction 

σd|U is of degree greater than one. Capture dynamics needs at least two critical sets to be implemented. Indeed, the gap U from Definition 9.7 is critical; in addition, the cycle of infinite gaps into which U eventually maps contains at least one gap with some criticality, either on its boundary (in the caterpillar or Siegel cases) or inside (in the hyperbolic case). In the cubic case capture dynamics is to some extent well-defined. Indeed, let L be a cubic lamination and let V be a periodic eventual image of U . Then there are the following three cases. (1) If V is hyperbolic, then L is called a hyperbolic capture lamina-tion. (2) If V is a Siegel gap, then L is called a Siegel capture lamination. (3) If V is a caterpillar gap, then L is called a caterpillar capture 

lamination. Laminations that do not exhibit capture dynamics are said to be 

non-capture . The same terminology applies to topological polynomials and all other related objects. 9.2. Side critical portraits. We need a few known results. 

Lemma 9.8. [5, Lemma 2.5] Let L = lim Li where Li are σd-invariant l:limgap1 

q-laminations. Let G be an n-periodic gap of L. Then, for i sufficiently large, Li have n-periodic gaps Gi that converge to G.

Recall the following fundamental theorem of Jan Kiwi (the second part of the theorem easily follows from the first one). 

Theorem 9.9. [13] A wandering non-precritical gap of a σd-invariant t:kiwan 

lamination cannot have more than d vertices. In particular, infinite gaps of laminations are (pre)periodic. 30 A. BLOKH, L. OVERSTEEGEN, AND V. TIMORIN 

One can now describe properties of Side critical portraits.  

> l:sicripo

Lemma 9.10. The following claims hold. 

(1) If CP is a Side full critical collection, then all critical sets of 

Lpr  

> CP

are finite. 

(2) A q-lamination has only finite critical sets iff it is a non-capture Side q-lamination. 

(3) A full critical collection CP is Side iff it is compatible with a Side q-lamination. Proof. (1) By Theorem 8.10 Lpr  

> CP

is a q-lamination. Its critical sets contain elements of CP +, hence they are classes under the equivalence relation associated with Lpr  

> CP

. It follows that critical sets of Lpr  

> CP

are finite. (2) Let L be a non-capture Side q-lamination. By Theorem 9.9, an infinite critical set of a q-lamination is either a preperiodic infinite gap, or a periodic hyperbolic gap, and both possibilities are ruled out for L

by the assumptions. Hence L has only finite critical sets. The converse claim is immediate. In particular, if CP is a Side full critical collection, then Lpr  

> CP

is a non-capture Side q-lamination. (3) Let CP be a Side full critical collection. It is compatible with 

Lpr  

> CP

, by (1) all critical sets of Lpr  

> CP

are finite, and by (2) Lpr  

> CP

is a non-capture Side q-lamination. On the other hand, let L be a Side q-lamination compatible with some full critical collection CP . Then by definition critical sets of L have no periodic vertices, hence CP contains no critical chords with a periodic endpoint, i.e. is Side. □

It turns out that there is a connection between Side critical por-traits and proper laminations. The next definition is very useful when studying laminations.  

> d:cone

Definition 9.11. A family X of chords ab sharing the same endpoint 

a is said to be a cone . The point a is called the vertex of the cone; the set S ∩ S X is called the basis of the cone and is denoted by X ′. Acone is said to be infinite if it consists of infinitely many chords. It turns out that cones of invariant laminations have specific prop-erties. The next claim is based [5, Lemma 2.4]. 

Lemma 9.12. (cf. [5, Lemma 2.4]) Let X be an infinite cone of an l:inficon1 

invariant lamination L. Then the following holds. (1) X has a (pre)periodic vertex and all leaves in X are either (pre)critical or (pre)periodic. ROOT LAMINATIONS OF ARBITRARY DEGREE 31 

(2) L has a set Y which is a leaf or a concatenation of two leaves, the points a and b are the endpoints of Y , σd(a) = σd(b), and 

b = σkd (b) for some integer k > 0.(3) L is not compatible with any Side critical portrait. 

Proof. (1) By Theorem 9.9 X is eventually mapped to an infinite cone with a periodic vertex. Then the claim follows from Lemma 2.4 of [5]. (2) Without loss of generality assume that the vertex v of X is fixed. Evidently, if there is a critical leaf coming out of v then we are done. Otherwise notice that in an invariant lamination periodic points can only be connected with a leaf if they are of the same period. It follows from the above then that there are points a and b such that va ∈ X ,

vb ∈ X and σd(a) = σd(b) = b.(3) By way of contradiction assume that L is compatible with a Side critical portrait P. Then the entire set Y must be contained in the closure of a partially critical complementary domain to S P. The properties of Y now imply that the periodic point b must be an endpoint of a critical chord from P, a contradiction. □

Lemma 9.13 relies on Lemma 9.12.  

> l:propeside

Lemma 9.13. An invariant lamination L is proper if and only if it is compatible with a Side critical portrait. Proof. Suppose that L is compatible with a Side critical portrait. By Lemma 9.12 L cannot have an infinite cone. We claim that then L

is proper. Indeed, suppose that L is not proper. Then by definition there is a leaf xv connecting a periodic point v and a non-periodic point 

x. Pulling it back we can find a leaf yv such that σkd (y) = x; clearly, 

y̸ = x. Repeating it infinitely many times we will discover an infinite cone with periodic vertex v, a contradiction. Suppose that L is proper. Consider critical sets of L. If none of them has periodic vertices then any critical portrait that consists of chords inserted into critical sets of L will be a desired Side critical portrait compatible with L. Suppose now that L has a critical set C with a periodic vertex. Since L is proper, then C is an infinite gap; for the same reason no image of G is a caterpillar gap (recall that by Lemma A.4 a caterpillar gap has a critical edge with a periodic endpoint). Hence C is (pre-)Siegel or (pre-)hyperbolic. Evidently, in these cases one can insert in C the corresponding number of critical chords with non-periodic endpoints. This completes the proof. □

We need the following definition. 32 A. BLOKH, L. OVERSTEEGEN, AND V. TIMORIN  

> d:sqsubset

Definition 9.14. Let A be a gap/leaf and B be a gap. If A ⊂ B

and some edges of A intersect the interior of B, then we denote it by 

A ⊏ B. Observe that if ℓ is an edge of B then ℓ̸ ⊏ B. If A ⊏ B then we say that A ⊏-contained in B. The symbol ⊐ is used analogously. We can now describe Side laminations in a more dynamical fashion.  

> l:side2

Lemma 9.15. A lamination L is Side if and only if it is proper and has no periodic hyperbolic gaps. Proof. If L is Side then by Lemma 9.13 it is proper. On the other hand, it cannot have a periodic hyperbolic gap because otherwise one can find a critical portrait compatible with L which includes a critical chord with a periodic endpoint. On other hand, let bL be a proper lamination with no periodic hyper-bolic gaps. By way of contradiction suppose that bL is compatible with a critical portrait P which includes a critical chord ℓ with a periodic endpoint. Since bL is proper, ℓ / ∈ bL. Thus ℓ ⊏ U where U is a gap. Since 

ℓ has a periodic endpoint and L has no critical leaves with a periodic endpoint, then U is a hyperbolic periodic gap, a contradiction. □

> ss:perfect

9.3. Perfect laminations. Every lamination L has a maximal perfect subset Lp called the perfect part of L.

Lemma 9.16. [8, Lemma 3.12] Lp is an invariant perfect lamination. l:3.12 

For every ℓ ∈ L p and every planar neighborhood U of ℓ, there exist uncountably many leaves of Lp in U .

By Lemma A.4 a perfect lamination cannot have infinite periodic gaps of degree one (in particular, there are no periodic Siegel gaps). Moreover, if two infinite gaps are non-disjoint, there will have to be isolated leaves, so this is ruled out too. However, periodic hyperbolic gaps in general are possible. For example, if a quadratic polynomial has a cycle of hyperbolic domains of primitive type (see Definition 10.1), then the associated lamination is perfect. The structure of a non-empty perfect q-lamination L can be de-scribed as follows. Consider a monotone quotient map of the closed unit disk that collapses not only leaves and finite gaps but also infinite gaps of L. This map gives rise to a dendritic quotient space which formally speaking is not a topological Julia set (it has points of infi-nite order) but has very similar properties. We shall call such spaces 

generalized dendritic topological Julia sets and the induced maps gen-eralized topological polynomials . Such maps were studied in [2] where the following lemma was proved. ROOT LAMINATIONS OF ARBITRARY DEGREE 33 

Lemma 9.17. [2, Theorem C] If f : J → J is a generalized topological l:nowanco 

polynomial on a generalized dendritic topological Julia set then for every continuum T ⊂ J there are two numbers m < n such that f m(T ) ∩

f n(T )̸ = ∅ (one can say that f has no wandering continua). 

Lemma 9.17 is used in the proof of Lemma 9.18. 

Lemma 9.18. [8, Lemma 3.25] Suppose that J is a generalized topologi-l:condense 

cal Julia set generated by a perfect q-lamination L∼. Then the following holds. 

(1) Each subcontinuum of J contains a (pre )periodic non-(pre )cri-tical point. 

(2) Each subcontinuum of J contains a (pre )critical point. 

(3) Each leaf of L∼ can be approximated by (pre )periodic leaves that never map to a critical set of L∼.

9.4. Perfect-Siegel laminations. Siegel laminations form another class of laminations. To define it, we need a technical concept which we now introduce. Let U be an infinite gap of a lamination L. Moreover, suppose that either U is a (pre)periodic gap eventually mapped to a pe-riodic Siegel gap, or that L is a q-lamination and U is a (pre)periodic infinite gap. There may exist finite gaps attached to U along some edges of U . Moreover, there may be other finite gaps attached to these finite gaps along their edges, etc. Yet, there are only finitely many such planar concatenations of finite gaps. Indeed, if L is a q-lamination it follows from the fact that finite gaps of q-laminations are disjoint. On the other hand, if U is (pre)Siegel then the planar concatenation of finite gaps described above is necessarily wandering and, hence, by Theorem 9.9 finite.  

> d:siegel-part

Definition 9.19. Let L be an invariant lamination. The union of the grand orbits of all its periodic Siegel gaps and collections of its finite gaps attached to those periodic Siegel gaps is called the non-closed Siegel part of a lamination L. Its closure is denoted by LSie and is called the Siegel part of L. If L = LSie then L is called a Siegel lamination .Combining the perfect and Siegel parts of a lamination we obtain the perfect-Siegel part of a given lamination.  

> d:pspart

Definition 9.20 (Perfect-Siegel part) . The union LpS of the perfect and the Siegel parts of an invariant lamination L is called the perfect-Siegel part of L. If a lamination coincides with its perfect-Siegel part, it is called a perfect-Siegel .We are ready to prove the next theorem. 34 A. BLOKH, L. OVERSTEEGEN, AND V. TIMORIN  

> l:side-ps

Lemma 9.21. The following claims hold. 

(1) Every Side q-lamination L is perfect-Siegel. 

(2) Let CP be a full Side critical collection. Then Lpr  

> CP

is perfect-Siegel with finite critical sets. Proof. (1) Assume that LpS ̸ = L. Then, L has a leaf ℓ with a small neighborhood and countably many leaves in it. Moreover, all these leaves never map to edges of periodic Siegel gaps. Choose an isolated leaf bℓ among them. Then bℓ is an edge of an infinite gap W of L; by Theorem 9.9 W has eventual forward image U that is periodic and must be Siegel (because L is Side), a contradiction. (2) By Lemma 9.10(1) and the assumption that CP is Side, all critical sets of Lpr  

> CP

are finite. By Lemma 9.10(2) Lpr  

> CP

is a Side non-capture lamination as claimed. □

The following is a particular case of Theorem 3.57 of [8].  

> t:noesli

Theorem 9.22. If L1 and L2 are invariant laminations that both con-tain the same critical portrait P, then LpS  

> 1

= LpS  

> 2

.

> ss:root1

9.5. Root laminations: the Side case. Let us now give an impor-tant definition.  

> d:root1

Definition 9.23. Suppose that CP is a Side full critical collection. A q-lamination L is said to be a root q-lamination (with the associated 

root laminational equivalence ∼) of CP if given a (proper) critical set 

A from CP + all vertices of A belong to the same ∼-class. We claim that a q-lamination L is a root lamination of a Side full critical collection CP if and only if it is a non-capture q-lamination compatible with CP +. Indeed, if L is a root lamination of CP then it is non-capture compatible with CP +. On the other hand, if L is a non-capture Side q-lamination then no critical chord of CP can be contained in an infinite gap of L unless it is an edge of such a gap. Hence all vertices of a critical set from CP + belong to the same ∼-class.  

> t:side-full

Theorem 9.24. If CP is a Side full critical collection and L is a Side non-capture q-lamination compatible with CP + then L = Lpr  

> CP

.

Thus, Side non-capture q-laminations are completely defined by any full critical collection compatible with them: if two such laminations share a full critical collection (for instance, if they share a critical por-trait) then they coincide. 

Proof. Critical sets of CP + are all-critical. Suppose that C ∈ CP +

and show that C is contained in a gap-leaf of L. Observe that since LROOT LAMINATIONS OF ARBITRARY DEGREE 35 

is non-capture, edges of C cannot be contained in infinite gaps of L.Hence all edges of C are contained in finite gap-leaves. Since distinct gap-leaves of L are pairwise disjoint (they are, after all, convex hulls of finite classes of equivalence), it follows that C is contained in a gap-leaf of L as claimed. Hence pullbacks of all critical sets from CP + are contained in the pullbacks of the corresponding gap-leaves of L. In particular, these laminations are compatible. It follows that all chords that are limits of pullbacks of sets from CP + are leaves of both L and Lpr  

> CP

. Now, take a gap-leaf B of Lpr  

> CP

and its edge ℓ which is not the limit of pullbacks of sets from CP +. Then ℓ is an edge of an infinite gap S of Lpr  

> CP

.By Lemma 9.21, S is either itself a periodic Siegel gap, or maps onto such a gap after some steps in the one-to-one fashion. Hence a chord 

ℓ ⊏ S maps so that two of its images cross, and so it cannot be a leaf of any lamination. Thus, B is a gap-leaf of L and so Lpr  

> CP

⊂ L . Moreover, the same argument shows that if ℓ ∈ L \ L pr  

> CP

then there exists a finite gap G of Lpr  

> CP

with ℓ ⊏ G. However this is impossible because by the above all edges of G are leaves of L. Thus, L = Lpr  

> CP

as desired. □

10. Cycles of hyperbolic gaps 

> s:hypegaps

Let us study periodic hyperbolic gaps of EY CP and Lpr  

> CP

.10.1. Periodic hyperbolic gaps of preroot q-laminations. In the construction of Lpr  

> CP

we pull back only proper sets of CP +; yet, we use 

all sets of CP + when we define the pullbacks. Hence portals of CP + are compatible with EY CP . However, the same claim does not hold of the q-lamination Lpr  

> CP

. Consider an invariant quadratic gap U of Lpr  

> CP

with an invariant finite gap G attached to U along an invariant edge ℓ of U .Then there exists a pullback chord ℓ′ of ℓ which is also an edge of U ,and a finite gap G′ attached to U along ℓ′ and such that σd(G′) = G.The chord ℓ′ is a sibling of ℓ, and G′ can be called a sibling of G. It may well happen that there is a portal {xx ′} where x ∈ G\ℓ is a vertex of G and x′ is the associated sibling vertex of G′. In that case xx ′ is not compatible with U because it crosses ℓ. However if we erase ℓ and its entire grand orbit, we will get a slightly extended version eU of U

which may be a gap of EY CP , and eU is compatible with xx ′.On the positive side, periodic hyperbolic gaps of Lpr  

> CP

have nice prop-erties.  

> d:satellite

Definition 10.1. Let U be a periodic hyperbolic gap of a lamination 

L. If there exists a finite gap G such that U is attached to G along an 36 A. BLOKH, L. OVERSTEEGEN, AND V. TIMORIN 

edge and the period of U is greater than that of G, then U is said to be of satellite type . Otherwise U is said to be of primitive type. 

A periodic hyperbolic Fatou gap U with an attached to it finite periodic gap of the same period as U is of primitive type. Recall that in Definition 8.1 we defined a number of objects describ-ing critical collections. Given a full critical collection CP , we denote by 

{K i(CP ) = Ki} the collections of critical chords forming components of S CP and call them critical chordial continua (of CP ). For each i

we then denote by Ci(CP ) = Ci the family of edges of the convex hull 

CH( S Ki) of the set S Ki. 

> l:primiti

Lemma 10.2. Distinct periodic hyperbolic gaps of Lpr  

> CP

cannot share edges with one finite gap or with each other. Thus, all periodic hyper-bolic gaps of Lpr  

> CP

are of primitive type. Proof. The construction implies that all Fatou gaps of EY CP have their edges as either edges of pullbacks of proper sets Ci, or limits of such pullbacks. Thus, if U and bU are periodic hyperbolic gaps of Lpr  

> CP

sharing an edge ℓ, or sharing edges ℓ and bℓ with a periodic finite gap G then ℓ, 

bℓ and all chords from their grand orbits do not belong to EY CP because they are isolated and are not pullbacks of proper critical set. □

Let U be a hyperbolic gap of Lpr  

> CP

. It can have finitely many periodic edges. At some of them a finite gap may be attached to U . Denote the family of all such edges of U and their pullbacks by T . If ℓ ∈ T 

then by construction ℓ / ∈ EY CP ; it is added to EY CP because Lpr  

> CP

is a q-lamination. As was explained in the beginning of this section, it may happen that periodic edges from T cross edges of portals. If we remove all edges of T at which finite gaps are attached to U we will obtain a gap U ′ ⊃ U of EY CP compatible with CP + (otherwise U will not be a gap of Lpr  

> CP

). Thus, U ′ can be obtained by removing all periodic edges of U at which finite periodic gaps are attached to U as well as chords from their grand orbits. The gap U ′ is called the extension gap of U or just the extension of U . The advantage of the description of U ′ given above is that it can be constructed and studied without invoking EY CP . 

> d:tune-portal

Definition 10.3. Let HCP be the collection of all gaps of EY CP that eventually map to periodic hyperbolic gaps of EY CP .Notice that while some critical chords from CP + may be edges of gaps of HCP this is impossible for edges of portals.  

> l:no-po-ed

Lemma 10.4. No edge of a portal is a leaf of Lpr  

> CP

.ROOT LAMINATIONS OF ARBITRARY DEGREE 37 

Proof. If pullbacks of edges of proper sets from CP + approach an edge 

ℓ of a portal C with an n-periodic vertex x then their σnd -images will cross the edges of C that have an endpoint x, a contradiction. □

10.2. Refining hyperbolic gaps. We now refine Lpr  

> CP

relying on por-tals; using familiar language, one can say that we tune Lpr  

> CP

inside periodic hyperbolic gaps of Lpr  

> CP

and spread this tuning over the entire lamination Lpr  

> CP

. This results into definition of the root q-lamination 

Lroot  

> CP

generated by CP . Basically, Lroot  

> CP

tunes Lpr  

> CP

inside its hyperbolic cycles and their pullbacks so that around each cycle of portals its own cycle of hyperbolic gaps is constructed. This is done by tuning Lpr 

> CP

inside grand orbits of its hyperbolic cycles as much as possible . We rely upon the results of the previous sections applying them to the first return maps on the periodic hyperbolic gaps of Lpr  

> CP

. 

> l:portaloc

Lemma 10.5 (Portal location) . Each portal of CP + is contained in a periodic gap from HCP . Periodic gaps from HCP can ⊐-contain only portals and not other sets of CP +. If L′ ⊃ L pr  

> CP

is compatible with CP 

then edges of portals cannot be approached by leaves of L′.Proof. A portal C must be contained in a gap U of EY CP , and this can only happen if U is a periodic gap from HCP . On the other hand, all proper critical sets are used in the construction of Lpr  

> CP

and cannot be contained in gaps of HCP . The last claim follows from the fact that leaves that approach edges of a portal A with n-periodic vertex have images (under iterations of σnd ) that cross edges of A. □

Portals form cycles in the following sense.  

> d:cyc-port

Definition 10.6. Let x be the vertex of a portal C of period n. Then the orbit of x may well have other points that are vertices of portals. Say that all these portals with vertices in the orbit of x form a cycle of portals .We define cycles of portals as explained above despite the fact that the portals in that cycle do not map onto other portals, rather they map to vertices of other portals.  

> d:tune

Definition 10.7 (Tuning) . Let L1 and L2 be q-laminations associated with laminational equivalences ∼1 and ∼2. The lamination L2 tunes 

the lamination L1 (denoted L1 ≺ L 2) if and only if for any x, y ∈ S

with x ∼1 y we have x ∼2 y. Equivalently, classes of ∼2-equivalence are unions of finitely many classes of ∼1-equivalence. Suppose that L is a q-lamination with a cycle U of hyperbolic gaps, and that L ≺ bL so that leaves from bL \ L appear inside gaps of U,38 A. BLOKH, L. OVERSTEEGEN, AND V. TIMORIN 

their pullbacks appear in gaps of the grand orbit of U, and outside the grand orbit of U the leaves of bL and L are the same. Then say that bL

tunes L inside U.By definition a lamination tunes itself. If L1̸ = L2 and L2 tunes L1

then we say that L2 non-trivially tunes L1. Similarly, if L2 tunes L1

inside a cycle of hyperbolic gaps U but L2̸ = L1 then we say that L2

non-trivially tunes L1 inside U. 

> l:tuning1

Lemma 10.8. If L1 ≺ L 2 then a leaf from L2 \L 1 belongs to an infinite gap U of L1. Moreover, U cannot be a Siegel gap. Proof. Let E2 ⫌ E1 be classes of L2 and L1 with convex hulls G2 ⊃ G1,resp. Then G2 \ G1 has finitely many components, each of which is a polygon without one edge. Let ℓ be one of such edges; clearly, the component of G2 \ G1 whose convex hull contains ℓ, is unique. Denote this convex hull by H. Since ℓ cannot be an edge of any finite gap of L1

(by definition of a q-lamination) and cannot be approached from the outside of G1 by leaves of L1 (since leaves of L1 cannot cross the edges 

ℓ′̸ = ℓ, ℓ ′′ ̸ = ℓ of H non-disjoint from ℓ), then there is an infinite gap U

adjacent to G1 along ℓ and containing all edges of H. Finally, observe that eventual forward images of any chord that connects vertices of a periodic Siegel gap will cross. This implies the last claim of the lemma. □

Suppose that L2 tunes L1, but the containment L2 ⊃ L 1 fails. Then there is a leaf ℓ of L1 which is not a leaf of L2. If ℓ is the limit of other leaves of L1 then by the definition of tuning ℓ ∈ L 2. Hence we may assume that ℓ is a common edge of gaps G and H of L1. Assume that 

H is infinite (one of these gaps must be infinite). Since ℓ / ∈ L 2 then there must exist a finite gap T of L2 such that ℓ is its diagonal. Thus, 

L2 has a concatenation leaves inside H that starts at one endpoint of 

ℓ and terminates at the other. A similar picture takes place on the other side of ℓ. This kind of dynamics is necessary and sufficient for 

ℓ ∈ L 1 \ L 2.As an example take invariant cubic gaps G and H of L1 with a common fixed edge ℓ. Then both G and H contain other fixed (possibly degenerate) edges ℓG and ℓH . Tune L1 by adding to it the invariant set 

CH( ℓG, ℓ, ℓ H ) and all its pullbacks. Clearly, ℓ ∈ L 1 \ L 2. 

> d:non-por

Definition 10.9. If L is a q-lamination with an n-periodic hyperbolic gap U that has a critical edge ℓ and an n-periodic vertex x such that 

σd(ℓ) = σd(x) then we call L a portal lamination .ROOT LAMINATIONS OF ARBITRARY DEGREE 39 

If in the situation of Definition 10.9 we take the convex hull of x

and all edges or vertices of U that map to σd(x) under σd then we will get a portal (an all-critical set with a periodic vertex). This is why we call the lamination portal even though no portal can be a part of a q-lamination (recall that any q-lamination is proper).  

> e:portal

Example 10.10 . Consider an invariant cubic q-lamination with a qua-dratic invariant gap located between the chord 1323 and the point 0. It defines a unique q-lamination L, and L is portal. By Lemma 10.4 Lpr  

> CP

is not portal. We are interested in q-laminations that stay not portal and tune Lpr  

> CP

. We may talk about σmd -portals (i.e., portals of σmd ) with various m, yet “portals” always means σd-portals. Given a portal C we will call the continuum S C a portal continuum .Though in our case (i.e., for Lpr  

> CP

) the only σd-critical sets from CP + in critical hyperbolic gaps U are portals, we state a few results in a more general setting of a q-lamination with a cycle U of hyperbolic gaps of period n. Recall that by definition a gap is a closed set. Finally, recall that we always assume the presence of a full critical collection CP and its version CP +.

Periodic Setup. Let L be a q-lamination compatible with the full crit-ical collection CP +. Suppose that L has a cycle U of hyperbolic gaps 

U0, . . . , U n−1; let the degree of σnd |Bd( U0) be m. Evidently, CP +-sets 

⊏-contained in the gaps of U exhaust the criticality of σd|S U . More-over, the first pullbacks of these CP +-sets to U0 are all-critical sets of σnd |U0 forming a full critical collection for σnd |U0 which is said to be 

CP +-induced .

Our aim is to construct the root lamination of CP . To this end we tune the pre-root lamination Lpr  

> CP

inside the grand orbits of its cycles of hyperbolic gaps (i.e., under the Periodic Setup). We do it by proving a sequence of lemmas. In them we consider various cases and show that in those cases we can tune a lamination in question inside grand orbits of some of its hyperbolic cycles. This leads to the desired root lamination as all other cases are ruled out.  

> d:canon

Definition 10.11. Given a periodic hyperbolic gap W , define a mono-tone map ψ collapsing all edges of W and semiconjugating the first return map on Bd( W ) with σr with appropriate r. Call this the canon-ical model of the first return map on Bd( W ); ψ-images of chords or gaps contained in U are said to be canonical , too. Often one obtains results for σm and “lifts” those results to the cycle of hyperbolic gaps that includes W . We will use this approach in what 40 A. BLOKH, L. OVERSTEEGEN, AND V. TIMORIN 

follows. Recall that an invariant lamination is said to be unicritical if it has a unique critical set. 

Lemma 10.12. [1, Lemma 3.15] Let A be an all-critical set of σm such l:unic 

that A ∩ S maps to its image point m-to-1 and has no vertices that are fixed points. Then there exists a non-empty unicritical q-lamination 

L which is not portal and is compatible with A. Thus, if under the Periodic Setup the canonical model of the first return map on U0 has only one all-critical set and this set has no fixed vertices then there exists a lamination compatible with CP + that non-trivially tunes Lpr 

> CP

inside U.Proof. The existence of L is established in Lemma 3.15 of [1]. Now, L

is not portal as otherwise the fact that L is unicritical and has an edge of CH( A) as its leaf would imply that all edges of CH( A) are leaves of L, including edges that are critical leaves with periodic endpoints. However by Lemma 5.14 this implies that L is not proper while q-laminations (and, hence, L) are proper by Lemma 5.13. The last claim follows. □

In the next lemma we consider another case when Lpr  

> CP

can be non-trivially tuned inside its cycle of hyperbolic gaps.  

> l:2pulls

Lemma 10.13. Given a q-lamination L under the Periodic Setup, suppose that there exists a CP +-set A ⊏ Ui with a pullback to U0 which is a proper set (for instance, this is the case when there are at least two pullbacks of A to U0). Then there is a lamination bL that tunes L

inside U and is not portal. Proof. Clearly, there are proper critical sets in the CP +-induced full critical collection of σnd |U0 . By the results of the previous section, this implies that by pulling them back and then closing these pullbacks we can construct a non-degenerate q-lamination invariant under σnd inside 

U0. We can then spread it over U by mapping it forward, and then pull the resulting collection of leaves back along the backward orbits of gaps of U. A standard verification shows that if the thus constructed family of leaves is united with L then one will get a desired q-lamination bL

that tunes L inside U. Observe that by Lemma 10.4 bL is not portal which completes the proof. □

Consider another case in which non-trivial tuning of Lpr  

> CP

is possible.  

> l:portal1

Lemma 10.14. Given a q-lamination L under the Periodic Setup, assume that the canonical images of CP +-induced (all-)critical sets of 

σnd |U0 form one portal of σm of order m with a σm-fixed vertex, say, ROOT LAMINATIONS OF ARBITRARY DEGREE 41 

0, but there are at least two all-critical gaps in the CP +-induced full critical collection for σnd |U0 . Then there exists a q-lamination that tunes 

L within U.Proof. Let us introduce the following notation: (1) ∼ is the lamina-tional equivalence associated with L, (2) ℓ = xy is the edge of U0 with canonical image 0, (3) G is the convex hull of a periodic ∼-class with edge ℓ, (4) U ′ 

> 0

is the extension of U0 (obtained by removing all leaves that separate U0 and attached to U0 finite gaps). There are m − 1

sibling sets of G that share edges with U0. If G is a gap, the edges that separate G and its sibling gaps attached to U0, from U0 itself, are removed as we extend U0 to obtain U ′

> 0

; if G = ℓ is a leaf, then all its sibling edges of U0 are kept in U ′

> 0

, too. Note that even though critical leaves of CP + are compatible with the proper invariant lamination from Theorem 8.10 denoted by EY CP (see Definition 8.11), after we include all edges of the convex hull of the class containing G which we need to do by definition of a q-lamination, the edge ℓ = xy may be added. Hence the edge ℓ may be crossed by critical leaves in CP +.Take a σnd -portal A ⊂ U ′ 

> 0

with vertex a ∈ G and a σnd -portal B ⊂ U ′

> 0

with vertex b ∈ G such that A̸ = B and there are no critical sets separating A from B in L. Choose edges a of A and b of B that are not separated in D by other edges of A and B. We claim that the other (not equal to a or b) vertices a′ and b′ of these edges cannot be vertices of the same sibling set G′ of G. Indeed, the circular orientation within 

G and G′ is the same. Thus, if moving from a to b within G \ ℓ is in the positive direction then moving from a′ to b′ within G′ \ ℓ′ (where ℓ′

separates G′ from U0 in D) is in the positive direction implying that a

and b cross, a contradiction. This implies that in the canonical model we have ψ(a′)̸ = ψ(b′) are two distinct points mapped by σm to the same σm-fixed point ψ(a).Therefore there is a σnd -fixed (possibly degenerate) edge of U0 located in the circular arc positively oriented from b′ and a′. Connecting the endpoints of this edge with a and b creates a σnd -invariant gap T which, by construction, does not cross any edges of critical sets from the full critical collection of σnd |U0 induced by CP +. That is, the first pullbacks of CP +-sets to U0 partition U0 in components, and T is contained in one of them. Hence by mapping T forward within U and then pulling it back within the grand orbit of U we will construct a lamination that tunes L within U as claimed. □

The only remaining case when non-trivial tuning of Lpr  

> CP

is possible can be found in Lemma 10.15. 42 A. BLOKH, L. OVERSTEEGEN, AND V. TIMORIN  

> l:under-set

Lemma 10.15. If CP + is a set of r > 1 portals, then there is a non-empty q-lamination compatible with CP +. If a q-lamination L under the Periodic Setup is such that all CP +-sets in U are contained in Ui

for some i and there are r > 1 of them, then there is a q-lamination bL

that tunes L inside U.Proof. Since the case of d = 2 is well-known we assume that d ⩾ 3.First, let a̸ = b be σd-fixed points such that a is a vertex of a portal 

Ca ∈ CP +, while b̸ = a is a vertex of a portal Cb̸ = Ca. We claim that then there exists an invariant chord with fixed endpoints compatible with CP +.We use a counting argument. We need to show that at least one com-plementary component contains at least two fixed points in its closure. There are exactly d complementary components W1, . . . , W d to the union of polygons from CP +. Let us associate with each complemen-tary component Wi the set Fi of fixed points that belong to Bd( Wi).By way of contradiction assume that all sets Fi consist of at most one point. Then by the assumptions it follows that {a} coincides with two sets Fi (say, F1 and F2), and b coincides with two other sets Fi (say, F3

and F4). After that there remain d − 4 sets F5, . . . , F d and d − 3 fixed points (overall there are d − 1 fixed points of σd). It follows that there exists at least one set Fj consisting of at least two points. Suppose that there exists a portal C with periodic non-fixed vertex. Consider the power σkd of σd that fixes its vertex. Then by the as-sumption there are at least two σkd -fixed vertices of distinct portals of 

σkd (e.g., they can come from the orbit of the periodic non0fixed ver-tex of C). By the above this implies the existence of a σkd -fixed chord that is compatible with all pullbacks of sets from CP +. It follows that the entire orbit of this chord is compatible with the original CP +. By repeatedly pulling back the chords in its orbit consistently with CP +

and taking the closure of the entire family of such pullbacks we will construct the desired lamination. The second claim of the lemma now follows from above if one uses the canonical model for σnd |U0 and assumes that in that model there are more than one portal. Otherwise (if the model has only one portal) the second claim follows from the already proven lemmas. Indeed, suppose that the model has only one critical set which is a portal of some period 

m. If m > 1 then the desired claim for the model follows from Lemma 10.12 and can be lifted from the model to σnd |U0 . If m = 1 then the desired claim follows from Lemma 10.14. It is easy to verify that in all the cases the just found lamination is non-portal. □ROOT LAMINATIONS OF ARBITRARY DEGREE 43 

Assume now that CP +-sets in U are contained in more than one gap from U. Then the desired dynamics is described in Definition 10.16.  

> d:prime

Definition 10.16. Suppose that there is a cycle B of portals from CP +

that are ⊏-contained in U and have the same period as that of U such that, for every degree k > 1 gap U ∈ U , the polygon of B contained in 

U is a k-gon. Then we say that pairs (U, CP ) and (U, B) are prime .We now summarize Lemmas 10.12, 10.14, 10.13, 10.15 in Theorem 10.17.  

> t:sum

Theorem 10.17. A q-lamination L under the Periodic Setup can be tuned inside U with non-portal lamination unless (U, CP ) is prime. 

11. Root laminations: the general case 

> s:root1

We continue by defining a root lamination generated by an arbitrary 

full critical collection.  

> l:root

Definition 11.1. If CP is a full critical collection, a q-lamination L

with a laminational equivalence ∼L=∼ is said to be a root q-lamination (and ∼ is called the root laminational equivalence) of CP if the following holds: (1) given a proper critical set A from CP +, all vertices of A

belong to the same ∼-class, and (2) any cycle B of portals is contained in a cycle of hyperbolic gaps U so that (U, B) is prime. Observe: it follows from (2) that the cycles U and B have the same period . In Subsection 11.2 we show that there is only one root lamina-tion; from then on we will talk about the root lamination. Instead of full critical collections we consider critical portraits and still get all root laminations. Thus, from now on we deal with critical portraits P. Also, not all laminations are root laminations (of some critical portrait).  

> l:nonper

Lemma 11.2. Suppose that L is a root lamination of CP . In every critical gap U of L, there is a finite gap containing a polygon CU from 

CP +. Moreover, if U is not periodic, then CU is not portal. Proof. Every complementary component of S CP + in D has degree 1 with respect to σd. Hence, if U is a critical gap of L, then there is a polygon CU ∈ CP + contained in U . If a vertex of CU is periodic, then, clearly, U is also periodic. □

Let us look into this in more detail and describe all pairs (L, CP )

such that CP is compatible with L but L is not a root lamination of 

CP . Firstly, if L is a capture lamination, then it not a root lamination of CP , by Lemma 11.2. Secondly, if L has a cycle of hyperbolic gaps that contains more than one cycle of portals of CP , then L is not a root 44 A. BLOKH, L. OVERSTEEGEN, AND V. TIMORIN 

lamination of CP . Finally, even if a cycle of hyperbolic gaps contains a unique cycle of portals, and no other critical sets from CP +, then L

may have a smaller than required degree on one of the hyperbolic gaps from the cycle (one can easily show that this is equivalent to L being portal, see Example 10.10). It is easy to see that these cases exhaust the list of pairs (L, CP ) such that L is not a root lamination of CP .In the Side case, preroot laminations are the same as root lamina-tions. In general, our aim is to prove the existence and uniqueness of a root lamination of CP .11.1. Root laminations exist. First we state Lemma 11.3 (the proof is left to the reader).  

> l:order1

Lemma 11.3. Suppose that a q-lamination bL tunes an invariant lam-ination L inside a cycle U of hyperbolic gaps of L. If V is a cycle of hyperbolic gaps of bL contained in U, then the period of U divides the period of U.

We are ready to establish the existence of a root lamination generated by a full critical collection CP . 

> t:rootla

Theorem 11.4. Given a full critical collection CP , the root lamination of CP exists. Proof. Consider a cycle U of hyperbolic gaps of Lpr  

> CP

. Suppose that U

with all the critical sets from CP + that are ⊏-contained in gaps of U

is non-prime. By Theorem 10.17 there is a non-portal q-lamination L

that tunes Lpr  

> CP

inside U. By Lemma 11.3 there are two cases. In the first case there are at least two cycles of portals contained in S U, and the cycles of hyperbolic gaps of L containing these cycles of portals are different. In the second case the period of the cycle of hyperbolic gaps containing the same portals as U grows (compared to the period of U). Now, the number of cycles of portals is finite, and their periods are finite. It follows that after finitely many consecutive steps each of which repeats the one described in the previous paragraph we will not be able to continue because we will arrive at a root q-lamination generated by 

CP . □

> ss:uniroot

11.2. Uniqueness of root laminations. Now we will prove the uni-queness of a root lamination. Consider an example.  

> e:sim

Example 11.5 . Consider σm and the convex hull Σm of 0 and all its σm-preimages. Clearly, Σm is an m-gon and a portal. Pull Σm back to each partially critical component of D \ Σm, i.e. to the parts of the unit disk enclosed by the edges of Σm and m circular arcs [ im , i+1  

> m

], 0 ⩽ i < m ROOT LAMINATIONS OF ARBITRARY DEGREE 45 

called arcs of the first generation . Each such pullback into one of these arcs is an m+1 -gon with an edge of Σm serving as one of its edges; these form a “ring” of circularly ordered m + 1 -gons, consecutively sharing vertices of the form jm . We say that these pullbacks of Σm are of the first generation .The unit circle S is partitioned by the vertices of the pullbacks of Σm

of the first generation into the circle arcs of the form [ im2 , i+1  

> m2

] called 

arcs of the second generation . Each such arc I maps onto an arc of the first generation and, hence, covers the vertices of a pullback of the first generation of Σm, say, B. Hence B can be pulled back to the convex hull of I forming a new m + 1 -gon. This can be done with every arc of the second generation. Then this process is repeated. The unions of pullbacks of Σm of generations up to i, i → ∞ , form a growing sequence of gaps that fill up from within the open unit disk 

D. These gaps “touch” S at their vertices that are points of the form  

> imk

in lowest terms where k is the generation of the pullback of Σm

containing the point. Evidently, in the limit these gaps fill up the open unit disk D while also touching S at points imk . □

Let us generalize the approach discussed in Example 11.5 onto the general case.  

> d:circ-poly

Definition 11.6. A closed convex set A ⊂ D whose boundary Bd( A)

is the union of alternating arcs of S and chords is called a circular poly-gon . Consider the image of Bd( A) under the map that coincides with 

σd on the arcs and sends a chord ab to the chord σd(a)σd(b) affinely; abusing the notation we will denote this map by σd. If σd(Bd( A)) is a Jordan curve and σd|Bd( A) is one-to-one except for (possibly) some critical chords in Bd( A) we call A a monotone circular polygon. Abus-ing the notation we set CH( σd(Bd( A))) = σd(A); clearly, σd(A) is a circular polygon. The next definition develops the above further and makes it more dynamic.  

> d:dynam1

Definition 11.7. The non-degenerate convex hull CH( X) of a closed (finite) set X ⊂ S is a (finite) gap-leaf . If a finite gap-leaf B is contained in σd(A) where A is a monotone circular polygon, then the unique maximal by inclusion gap-leaf B′ ⊂ A that maps onto B by σd is called the pullback of B into A. Abusing the notation, denote B′ by σ−1 

> d

(B).Observe that these pullbacks are convex. In Definition 11.7, if no vertex of B is the image of a critical edge of A then σ−1 

> d

(B) and B have the same number of vertices. Otherwise 46 A. BLOKH, L. OVERSTEEGEN, AND V. TIMORIN 

each vertex x of B which is the image of a critical edge x of A is pulled back to x or to a concatenation of x and other critical edges; in this case the number of vertices of σ−1 

> d

(B) is greater. Now, given a full critical collection CP , construct CP +. Components of D \ S CP + are monotone circular polygons, and for each such com-ponent A we have σd(A) = D. Consider pullbacks of sets of CP + into the partially critical components of D \ S CP +. Since sets of CP + are pairwise disjoint, their pullbacks are pairwise disjoint, too. Clearly, this construction is of combinatorial nature. To make the next step, observe that complementary components to the union of sets of CP + and their pullbacks are circular polygons. Their boundaries map to the boundaries of complementary components of S CP + under σd extended according to Definition 11.7. This allows us to define pullbacks of sets of CP + of the next generation. We continue this process inductively. By induction on the step n we will have constructed all pullbacks of sets of CP + through σnd -pullbacks. This creates complementary components to their union that will be called complementary components of generation n. Each such com-ponent A is a circular polygon with the boundary that maps to the boundary of a complementary component X of generation n − 1. The set X may contain some pullbacks of sets of CP + of generation n. Then their pullbacks into A form pullbacks of sets of CP + of generation n+1 .Once this is done for all complementary components of generation n,the step of induction is made, and we can continue.  

> d:tile

Definition 11.8. The iterated pullbacks of sets of CP + are called the 

tiles (generated by CP ). The family of tiles generated by CP is called the partial tiling (generated by CP ). An iterated pullback of a proper set from CP + will be called a proper tile .We are ready to prove the main theorem of this section.  

> t:rootuni

Theorem 11.9. Given a full critical collection CP the root lamination of CP is unique. Proof. Let U be an n-periodic gap of a root lamination for σd. Then 

σnd |U is canonically semiconjugate to σm with the appropriately chosen 

m. Take tiles contained in gaps from the orbit of U and pulled back to 

U under the smallest power of σd that brings them to U . Their union is a convex polygon, say, X, collapsing to its unique periodic vertex under σnd . Its image under the canonical semiconjugacy is the set Σm

(see Example 11.5). By Example 11.5, in the case of Σm the union of tiles is the entire open unit disk D plus all the points of S of the form imk in lowest ROOT LAMINATIONS OF ARBITRARY DEGREE 47 

terms. Other points of S do not belong to this union. Lifting it under the canonical semiconjugacy we see that the union YX of all pullbacks of 

X inside U covers the interior of U and the points/leaves of Bd( U ) that canonically map to points imk in lowest terms (we choose a canonical semiconjugacy for σnd |U so that the periodic vertex of X maps to 0). The above arguments are implemented in the framework of a root lamination. However, YX (which equals U with some points and edges of its boundary) can be defined independently. Indeed, let A ∈ CP +

(for example, A may be a portal). Consider the set S CP + \ A (i.e., remove A from CP +). Let ZA be the component of D \ (S CP + \ A)

containing A. Then YX is the maximal convex connected union of tiles contained in ZX . It follows that the periodic hyperbolic gap of any root lamination containing X is the closure of the set YX . Thus, cycles of periodic hyperbolic gaps containing portals coincide for all root laminations generated by CP . The iterated pullbacks of such hyperbolic gaps depend only on CP +, and are, therefore, well defined and independent of the choice of a root lamination. Next we argue as follows. Let L1 and L2 be two root laminations of a full critical collection CP . By the above their periodic hyperbolic gaps coincide, together with their grand orbits. Insert in those periodic gaps proper critical leaves and do it the same way for both L1 and L2.Replace portals with these newly inserted leaves to create a new full critical collection CP ′. It is a Side critical collection, hence by Theorem 9.24 the corresponding root lamination Lpr  

> CP ′

is the same for both L1

and L2. Since the grand orbits of periodic hyperbolic gaps coincide for both L1 and L2 then in fact L1 = L2. □

12. Concluding remarks 

In this paper, we are addressing the issue of relating critical por-traits on the one hand and q-laminations/topological polynomials on the other. In the process, we establish equivalence between some criti-cal portraits. Indeed, if L is a Side non-capture q-lamination then we associate with it any critical portrait compatible with L. As a result, all critical portraits compatible with L are identified. The association between critical portraits and laminations in the case when some critical leaves have periodic endpoints is more complicated. Indeed, consider the quadratic case. In that case it is well-known that if a hyperbolic lamination L has a unique periodic hyperbolic gap U

of period N then U has a unique (non-degenerate) edge, say, ab of period N . In that case one associates to L a pair of critical leaves with endpoints a and b. In other words, in the hyperbolic case the 48 A. BLOKH, L. OVERSTEEGEN, AND V. TIMORIN 

association between laminations and critical leaves is made on the basis of critical leaves contained in the critical hyperbolic gap of L and having an endpoint of the same period as this gap. This motivates the next definition which repeats Definition 3.1 and is placed here for the sake of convenience.  

> d:legal

Definition 12.1. Given a q-lamination L a critical portrait P is legal 

for L (and vice versa) if: (1) no chord in P crosses any leaf of L inside the unit disk, (2) for every critical leaf with a periodic endpoint x = x0 of period 

n, there exist a cycle of hyperbolic gaps U0, . . . , U n−1, also of period n so that if σd|Bd( Ui) has degree di, then there exist di − 1

critical chords of P contained in Ui with σd-images equal to 

σi+1  

> d

(x) = xi+1 .We also say that (P, L) is a legal pair . If two legal pairs share either a critical portrait or a lamination, we declare them equivalent and, as usual, spread this equivalence by transitivity. Evidently, the pair (P, Lroot  

> P

) is legal. There may exist other legal pairs equivalent to it. By definition, switching from one legal pair to another may either (1) involve the same lamination but distinct critical portrait, or (2) the same critical portrait but distinct lamination (the latter possibility relies upon the fact that in Definition 12.1 we consider both non-portal laminations and laminations that are not non-portal). We refer to these transitions as type (1) and type (2) equivalences ,respectively. Say that a critical portrait P is non-capture if it is com-patible with no capture q-lamination.  

> l:noncap-equiv

Lemma 12.2. Suppose that P is non-capture, and that ( eL, eP) is equiv-alent to (Lpr  

> P

, P). Then eL ⊃ L pr  

> P

= Lpr  

> eP

.Proof. We use induction. The base of induction is immediate. Suppose that ( eL, eP) is equivalent to (Lpr  

> P

, P) and has the properties claimed in the lemma: eL ⊃ L pr  

> P

and Lpr  

> eP

= Lpr  

> P

. Consider the next legal pair 

( eL′, eP′) equivalent to ( eL, eP).(1) We have eL = eL′ (i.e., it is the critical portrait that varies). Then the new critical portrait eP still has the same number of critical leaves in the same finite critical gaps/leaves of Lpr  

> P

as eL did. It follows that if we construct the preroot lamination based upon eP′ we will obtain the same preroot lamination as before, i.e., by induction, Lpr  

> eP′

= Lpr  

> P

. Since by induction eL′ = eL ⊃ L pr  

> P

, we are done in this case. ROOT LAMINATIONS OF ARBITRARY DEGREE 49 

(2) We have that eP′ = eP (i.e., it is the lamination that varies). Then by construction it follows that the only changes in lamination that are possible may take place within hyperbolic gaps of Lpr  

> P

and their pullbacks. This implies that the preroot lamination does not change and, therefore, eL′ ⊃ L pr  

> P

= Lpr  

> eP′

as desired. □

Moreover, the definition of legal implies that the periods of critical leaves with periodic endpoints do not change when we move from one legal pair to an equivalent one (even though the actual critical leaves may change). Since the only other critical leaves our laminations are allowed to have inside hyperbolic gaps of bL are contained in the cor-responding portals, we conclude that there are finitely many possible parts of critical portraits that consist of critical leaves not contained in finite gaps/leaves of bL. This finiteness implies the conclusion of the following theorem.  

> t:conclu

Theorem 12.3. Consider the family of all legal pairs (L, P) such that 

P is incompatible with capture laminations, with the equivalence defined in Definition 12.1. Then each class of equivalence is finite. 

In the forthcoming papers we plan to use root lamination, legal pairs laminations and critical portrait, in order to construct a model space of topological polynomials of degree d ⩾ 3.

Appendix A. Periodic gaps of degree one 

> ss:deg1

We start with the following definition.  

> d:stand

Definition A.1 (Stand alone gaps) . Let U ′ ⊂ S be a closed set. Sup-pose that U ′, σ d(U ′), . . . , σ n−1 

> d

(U ′), σnd (U ′) = U ′ have convex hulls denoted by Ui with disjoint interiors and, for each i, the map from 

Bd( Ui) to Bd( Ui+1 ) is the composition of a positively oriented mono-tone map and a positively oriented covering map. Then U0 is called a 

stand alone n-periodic gap. By a stand alone invariant gap , we mean a stand alone 1-periodic gap. Note that a stand alone σnd -invariant gap is not the same as a stand alone n-periodic gap under σd.Let U ′ ⊂ S be closed, let U = CH( U ′) be a stand alone gap of period n. If x ∈ Bd( U ) is such that σkn d (x) = x then either x ∈ U ′, or, otherwise, x belongs to an edge ℓ = ab of U such that σnk d (a) = a and 

σnk d (b) = b. Hence, without loss of generality, from now on we always mean that periodic points z ∈ Bd( U ) belong to S.The following simple result is Lemma 2.16 of [4]. 50 A. BLOKH, L. OVERSTEEGEN, AND V. TIMORIN  

> l:edges-of-gaps

Lemma A.2. Suppose that U is a periodic stand alone gap. Then all its edges are either (pre)periodic or (pre)critical. 

A typical example of a stand alone k-periodic gap is described in the next folklore lemma; we only sketch the proof leaving details to the reader.  

> l:example1

Lemma A.3. Suppose that ℓ1, . . . , ℓ m are pairwise unlinked critical chords that are all contained in the boundary of one component U of 

D\S ℓi where Bd( U ) is the union of S ℓi and a few circle arcs. Suppose that for some k > 0 the σkd -image of the union of all the circle arcs from 

Bd( U ) covers S in a t-to-1 fashion (except for images of ℓi’s that will have more preimages). Consider the set A ⊂ S consisting of points whose forward σkd -orbits are contained in U . Then the following holds. 

(1) CH( A) is a stand alone σkd -invariant gap of degree m unless A

consists of at most 2 points. 

(2) Suppose that t = 1 . Then all periodic points (if any) that belong to A have the same period. Proof. (1) Since the chords on the boundary of U are critical, the σkd -images of circle arcs on Bd( U ) are concatenated, and locally the map 

σkd preserves orientation on Bd(CH( A)) . Since edges of CH( A) map onto edges of CH( A), we are done. (2) Since t = 1 , the orientation on A is preserved by σd. Hence periodic points in A are all of the same period. □

We will need the following lemma. 

Lemma A.4. [9, Lemma 3.10] Suppose that G is a degree one k-l:crit-must 

periodic infinite gap of a σd-invariant lamination L for some d ⩾ 2.Then some gaps from the orbit of G have critical edges. Moreover, there are two possibilities. 

(1) There is a monotone semi-conjugacy between σkd |Bd( G) and an irrational rotation of S that collapses all edges of G to points; moreover, if there are concatenations of edges of G, then each concatenation consists of at most d − 1 leaves. 

(2) There are periodic edges of G; for some minimal q all peri-odic edges of G are σkq d -fixed. Moreover, each arc I ⊂ Bd( G)

located between two adjacent σkq d -fixed edges of G has the fol-lowing properties: 

(a) I is σkq d -invariant; 

(b) at exactly one endpoint, say x, of I, a σkq d -critical edge ℓ ⊂

I is located (so that there are critical leaves with periodic endpoints); ROOT LAMINATIONS OF ARBITRARY DEGREE 51 

(c) all points of I map towards x by σkq d .Also, L has isolated leaves with both endpoints non-preperiodic, or with one periodic and one non-periodic endpoints. In particular, (a)

the lamination L is not perfect, and (b) it cannot have a dense subset of (pre)periodic leaves whose endpoints have equal preperiods. 

The following definition is based upon Lemma A.4. 

d:deg1 Definition A.5. Periodic gaps of degree one that have no periodic vertices are said to be Siegel gaps . Infinite periodic gaps of degree one that have periodic vertices are said to be caterpillar gaps. Their non-periodic pullbacks are called pre-Siegel and pre-caterpillar gaps, respectively. Evidently, Siegel gaps are uncountable. 

References 

bbs22 [1] S. Bhattacharya, A. Blokh, D. Schleicher, Unicritical Laminations , Funda-menta Mathematicae, 258 (2022), 25–63 

bl02 [2] A. Blokh, G. Levin, Growing trees, laminations and the dynamics on the Julia set , Erg. Th. and Dyn. Syst. 22 (2002), 63–97 

bmov13 [3] A. Blokh, D. Mimbs, L. Oversteegen, K. Valkenburg, Laminations in the language of leaves , TAMS, 365 (2013), 5367–5391 

bopt10 [4] A. Blokh, L. Oversteegen, R. Ptacek, V. Timorin, Dynamical cores of topo-logical polynomials , in: Proceedings for the Conference “Frontiers in Complex Dynamics (Celebrating John Milnor’s 80th birthday)”, Princeton University Press (2014), 27–47. 

bopt16 [5] A. Blokh, L. Oversteegen, R. Ptacek, V. Timorin, The combinatorial Man-delbrot set as the quotient of the space of geolaminations , Contemporary Mathematics, 669 (2016), 37–62 

bopt17 [6] A. Blokh, L. Oversteegen, R. Ptacek, V. Timorin, Combinatorial models for spaces of cubic polynomials, C. R. Math. (Acad. Sci., Paris), 355 (2017), issue 5, 590–595. 

bopt19 [7] A. Blokh, L. Oversteegen, R. Ptacek, V. Timorin, Models for spaces of den-dritic polynomials , Trans. Amer. Math. Soc., 372 (2019), 4829–4849 

bopt20 [8] A. Blokh, L. Oversteegen, R. Ptacek, V. Timorin, Laminational models for spaces of polynomials of any degree, Memoirs of the AMS 265 (2020), no. 1288 

botw23 [9] A. Blokh, L. Oversteegen, V. Timorin, Y. Wang, A model of the cubic con-nectedness locus , arXiv:2304.11516 (2023) 

chi07 [10] D. Childers, Wandering polygons and recurrent critical leaves , Erg. Th. and Dyn. Syst., 27 (2007), No. 1, 87–107. 

Dav86 [11] R. J. Daverman, Decompositions of manifolds. Pure and Applied Math., Vol. 124. Academic Press, 1986. 

hubbdoua85 [12] A. Douady, J. H. Hubbard, Étude dynamique des polynômes complexes I, II, 

Publ. Math. d’Orsay 84 -02 (1984), 85 -04 (1985) 

kiw02 [13] J. Kiwi, Wandering orbit portraits , TAMS, 354 (2002), 1473–1485 52 A. BLOKH, L. OVERSTEEGEN, AND V. TIMORIN 

kiw04 [14] J.Kiwi, Real laminations and the topological dynamics of complex polynomi-als, Adv. Math. 184 (2004), no. 2, 207–267 

tby20 [15] W. Thurston, H. Baik, G. Yan, J. Hubbard, L. Tan, K. Lindsey, D. Thurston, Degree d invariant laminations, in: “What’s Next?: The Mathematical Legacy of William P. Thurston”, ed. by D. Thurston, AMS – 205, Princeton U. Press (2020). 

thu85 [16] W. Thurston, The combinatorics of iterated rational maps (1985) , in: Com-plex dynamics: Families and Friends, ed. by D. Schleicher, A K Peters, Wellesley MA (2009), 1–108