Title: NORACL: Neurogenesis for Oracle-free Resource-Adaptive Continual Learning

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.27031v1

Published Time: Fri, 01 May 2026 00:03:09 GMT

Number of Pages: 23

Markdown Content:
Preprint. 

# NORACL: N EUROGENESIS FOR ORACLE -FREE 

# RESOURCE -A DAPTIVE CONTINUAL LEARNING 

Karthik Charan Raghunathan, Christian Metzner, Laura Kriener ∗, Melika Payvand ∗

Institute of Neuroinformatics University of Zurich & ETH Zurich Zurich, Switzerland  

> ∗

Shared senior authorship 

{karthik,melika }@ini.uzh.ch 

## ABSTRACT 

In a continual learning (CL) setting, we require a model to be plastic enough to learn a new task, but at the same time stable enough to not disturb previously learned capabilities. We argue that this dilemma has an architectural root. A finite network has limited representational and plastic resources, yet the required capacity depends on two properties of the future task stream that are unknown in advance: how many tasks will be encountered (task count), and how much they overlap in feature space (task geometry). Regularization-based CL methods preserve past knowledge within fixed-capacity architectures and therefore implicitly rely on an oracle architecture sized for this unknown future. When tasks are only weakly related, fixed architectures progressively run out of plastic resources; when tasks are few or strongly overlapping, models are often over-provisioned. Inspired by neurogenesis in biology, we propose NORACL , a CL framework that addresses the stability-plasticity dilemma by tackling the oracle architecture problem through on-demand neuronal growth. Starting from a compact network, NORACL grows only when needed by monitoring two complementary signals for representational and plasticity saturation. These signals determine when, where, and how much to grow, while preserving previously-learnt behavior. We evaluate NORACL against oracle-sized static baselines across varying task counts and task ge-ometries. Across all settings, NORACL achieves final average accuracies that are better than or on par with oracle-provisioned static baselines while using 10-20% fewer parameters. Additionally, NORACL yields architectures with interpretable growth, i.e. dissimilar tasks predominantly expand earlier feature-extraction layers, whereas tasks which rely on common features shift growth toward later feature-combination layers. Our analysis further explains why fixed-capacity networks lose plasticity as tasks accumulate, even with regularization, whereas NORACL preserves prior knowl-edge and creates fresh capacity for new tasks through growth. Together, these results show that adaptive neurogenesis pushes the stability-plasticity Pareto frontier of continual learning. 

## 1 INTRODUCTION 

Continual Learning (CL) aims to learn new tasks sequentially without forgetting previously learned ones. Its central challenge is the stability–plasticity dilemma: the network must remain stable enough to preserve past knowledge, yet plastic enough to incorporate new information (Fig. 1a). This trade-off is constrained by the architecture itself, because a finite network has limited representational and plastic resources to allocate across tasks (Dohare et al., 2024; Lyle et al., 2023). In CL, the required capacity depends on two properties of the future task stream that are unknown in advance: the number of tasks the learner will encounter (task count), and how much structure those tasks will share (task geometry). A compact network may suffice for a short sequence of related tasks, whereas more capacity may be needed when tasks are numerous or largely orthogonal. Determining the network capacity a priori requires extensive tuning even for a single task in a non-CL setting. In CL, this difficulty is compounded by the unknown nature of the future task stream. Regularization-based solutions for CL such as Elastic Weight Consolidation (EWC) (Kirkpatrick et al., 2017), Synaptic Intelligence (SI) Zenke et al. (2017), and Memory Aware Synapses (MAS) (Aljundi et al., 2018) improve stability and mitigate forgetting by protecting parameters that are important for previous tasks, which in turn also reduces the plasticity available for future learning. This is effective when future tasks can reuse those parameters, but these methods still operate on fixed-capacity architectures. As a result, their success depends implicitly on the architecture 1

> arXiv:2604.27031v1 [cs.LG] 29 Apr 2026

Preprint. a b c    

> Task 1 Task 2 Accuracy
> too plastic too stable
> plastic stable Accuracy Task 1 Task 2 Task 2 Task 1 Task n Task n+1 Task n+2
> Regularization-based method Neurogenesis-based method
> Task 1 Task 2 Avg. Acc. # of Tasks
> Oracle:
> Avg. Acc. # of Tasks
> Neurogenesis

Figure 1: The oracle architecture problem. a) The stability-plasticity dilemma: a network that is too stable (top) preserves Task 1 but cannot learn Task 2; a network that is too plastic (bottom) learns Task 2 but overwrites Task 1. 

b) Regularization-based methods (top) protect important parameters but progressively exhaust the available plastic capacity of a fixed-size network; neurogenesis-based methods (bottom) add fresh, plastic neurons to absorb new tasks. 

c) Oracle-provisioned static architectures (top) require advance knowledge of the task stream length to set the network size; NORACL (bottom) grows on demand and adapts its capacity to the task stream without such knowledge. having been provisioned for the unknown future task stream, both in the task count and task geometry. When tasks are weakly related, there is little opportunity for reuse, regularization progressively freezes the network, and learning stalls because the architecture lacks free resources and plasticity (Fig. 1b). We refer to this hidden dependence of the network architecture on future task count and task overlap as the oracle architecture problem .Biological neural systems face an analogous challenge and address it, in part, through adult neurogenesis. For example, in the Hippocampal dentate gyrus, new granule cells are continuously incorporated into existing circuitry throughout life (Aimone et al., 2009; Deng et al., 2010). Computational studies suggest that these newborn neurons support the encoding of novel information while mature neurons preserve established representations (Aimone et al., 2009; Deng et al., 2010; Gozel & Gerstner, 2021). This biological strategy suggests that open-ended learning may benefit from adding fresh, highly plastic resources rather than forcing all future learning into a fixed parameter budget (Fig. 1c). Inspired by this biological mechanism, we propose Neurogenesis for Oracle-free Resource-Adaptive Continual Learn-ing (NORACL): a framework that addresses the stability-plasticity dilemma with no a priori knowledge about the count and geometry of the future task streams. NORACL starts from a compact initial network and grows when needed by monitoring two complementary signals for the network capacity and plasticity: (i) Effective Dimension (ED) of layer activations (Maile et al., 2022) to detect when the network’s representational capacity is saturated, and (ii) the cumulative diagonal of the Fisher Information matrix (Kirkpatrick et al., 2017; Schwarz et al., 2018) to detect when the network’s plasticity is exhausted. When both signals cross their respective thresholds, NORACL expands the relevant layer by adding fresh neurons in a function-preserving manner, so that new capacity is introduced with-out disrupting previously acquired knowledge. In this way, representational saturation determines when additional capacity is needed, while plasticity saturation confirms that the existing parameters are too constrained to absorb new information. Thus, NORACL only grows when the current architecture is indeed insufficient. This directly targets the stability–plasticity dilemma: previously learned representations can remain stable, while newly added neurons provide fresh plasticity for future tasks. By allowing capacity to expand when needed, especially when future tasks are orthogonal and reuse is limited, NORACL takes an important step towards CL systems that adapt their resources to the uncertainty of the real world. As such, NORACL shifts the accuracy-capacity Pareto frontier of continual learning. In summary, our contributions are as follows: 

(1) We propose NORACL, a continual learning method that resolves the oracle architecture problem through on-demand neuronal growth, combining spectral capacity monitoring with plasticity-aware growth triggers to drive effi-cient neurogenesis. 

(2) We theoretically show on an analytically tractable task stream that, while in the current de-facto State-of-the-Art (SoTA) method, EWC (Kirkpatrick et al., 2017), the effective plasticity of the network decays monotonically as tasks accumulate, NORACL shows no such decline due to it’s on-demand neuronal growth. 

(3) We show empirically that a single NORACL configuration, using identical hyperparameters and no prior knowl-edge of the future task stream, achieves final accuracies on par with oracle-provisioned static baselines, while using 10-20% fewer parameters across varying task counts and varying task geometries. 2Preprint. 

(4) We show that NORACL yields interpretable growth patterns with respect to task geometry: weakly similar tasks predominantly expand earlier feature-extraction layers, whereas more similar tasks shift growth toward later feature-combination layers. 

## 2 BACKGROUND & R ELATED WORK 

Regularization-based methods Regularization-based methods promote stability and avoid catastrophic forgetting (McCloskey & Cohen, 1989; French, 1999) by constraining updates on parameters important for previous tasks. No-tably, EWC augments the loss with a quadratic penalty on deviations from previously learned parameters, weighted by the diagonal of the Fisher information matrix as an estimate of parameter importance (Kirkpatrick et al., 2017). Subsequent methods, such as Synaptic Intelligence (Zenke et al., 2017) and Memory-Aware Synapses (Aljundi et al., 2018), use online or perturbation-based estimates of importance, but share the mechanism of protecting previously important parameters from being overwritten. While effective at maintaining stability, these regularization-based ap-proaches operate on fixed-capacity architectures and therefore inherently limit plasticity. As new tasks stream in, an increasing fraction of parameters becomes important for some task and hence constrained, reducing plasticity even in the absence of direct interference between task information. Consequently, these methods require sufficient capacity to be allocated in advance based on a priori knowledge about the task count and task geometry that will be encountered. 

Expansion-based methods A separate line of continual learning work addresses the fixed-capacity limitation by al-lowing the network architecture to grow over time. Progressive Neural Networks (Rusu et al., 2016) add task-specific sub-networks for each new task, maintaining plasticity by construction. However, this requires knowledge of the task identity at inference time such that inputs are correctly routed through the appropriate task networks as well as ignor-ing the potential advantage of exploiting shared features between tasks. Dynamically Expandable Networks (Yoon et al., 2017) instead grow the network at the level of individual neurons, using group-sparse regularization to identify parameters for selectively retraining at each new task. Growth is triggered when encountering loss plateaus during this selective retraining phase. Similar to Progressive Neural Networks, this approach relies on task identity to ensure that neurons added later in the task stream are not used for older tasks during inference. Other expansion-based methods include Reinforced Continual Learning (Xu & Zhu, 2018), which uses a computationally expensive reinforcement learning agent to add or remove neurons, and Compacting, Picking, and Growing (Hung et al., 2019), which frees unused capacity through pruning before resorting to expansion. A common limitation across these expansion-based methods is that growth decisions are based on heuristic criteria, such as loss plateaus or sparsity levels, which can conflate optimization difficulty with genuine capacity limitations. Moreover, both Progressive Neural Networks and Dynamically Expandable Networks require knowledge about the task identity during inference, making them un-suitable for domain-incremental learning. In addition, because they grow by allocating independent, task-specific capacity, their feature sharing is strictly unidirectional. While new tasks can leverage previous representations, they cannot refine the shared feature space to benefit earlier tasks. 

Principled Growth Signals Recent work has explored more principled signals for network expansion in the single-task setting. The NORTH* framework (Maile et al., 2022) monitors the ED of layer activations to determine when a layer reaches its representational capacity limit, trigger layer expansion when this measure exceeds a threshold defined at network initialization. ED is computed via singular value decomposition over the activations, providing a data-driven and task-identity agnostic signal for growth that does not rely on arbitrary loss or sparsity thresholds nor explicit task information. However, the application of the ED signal to continual learning remains unexplored. In particular, it is unclear whether using it as a growth trigger would sufficiently sustain plasticity or efficiently exploit shared task geometry across long task streams. In addition, it fails to fully address the stability-plasticity trade-off, as it lacks mechanisms to protect previously learnt parameters from future interference. In continual learning, such signals may also reveal how architectural growth adapts to task geometry, an aspect we analyze empirically in this work. 

## 3 METHODS 

We consider a domain-incremental continual learning setting (Van de Ven & Tolias, 2019). A model receives a se-quence of tasks D1, D2, . . . , DT with Dt = {(x(t) 

> j

, y (t) 

> j

)}Nt 

> j=1

drawn from task-specific input distributions, but a shared label space Y. At each stage t, only the current task’s data Dt is available, no prior data can be revisited, and no task identity is provided at inference. Crucially, the total number of tasks T is not known in advance. In this work, we use 

L-layer ReLU Multi-layer Perceptrons (MLPs) with parameters θ. Hidden layer widths Ml are initialized as M (0)  

> l

and may grow during training, while the output dimension is fixed at |Y| (the number of classes). We use plain Stochastic 3Preprint. Gradient Descent (SGD) for optimization as it is well motivated for continual learning (Mirzadeh et al., 2020). Final performance is evaluated using average accuracy after training on all T tasks. NORACL’s growth mechanism must answer three questions: when to grow (is the current architecture insufficient?), 

where to grow (which layer is the bottleneck?), and how to grow (how should new neurons be initialized?). While growth injects fresh plasticity, we still need a mechanism to protect existing representations from interference. We therefore pair the growth mechanism with an online EWC (Schwarz et al., 2018) consolidation backbone. After each task t, the diagonal of the Fisher information matrix, which estimates how important each parameter is for the tasks seen so far, is computed and accumulated across tasks via exponential moving average: 

˜F (t) = α ˜F (t−1) + (1 − α) F (t), (1) where α ∈ (0 , 1) is a blending factor, F (t) denotes the Fisher computed on task t alone, while ˜F (t) denotes the accumulated running average after task t. The training loss for task t (t ≥ 2) combines the cross-entropy on the current task with a quadratic penalty anchored at the parameters θ∗ from the end of the previous task: 

Lt = LCE (θ; Dt) + λ

2

X

> i

˜F (t−1)  

> i

(θi − θ∗ 

> i

)2. (2) where θ∗ 

> i

are the parameters after task t − 1. Task 1 is unregularized (since there is no prior knowledge to protect). NORACL’s growth mechanism is agnostic to the specific regularization used; we use EWC for its simplicity and because it provides the Fisher diagonal needed by the growth trigger below. 3.1 GROWTH TRIGGER : W HEN AND WHERE TO ADD NEURONS 

NORACL monitors the network’s state at each training epoch and only triggers growth when two signals jointly indicate insufficient reusable capacity: the layer’s representational capacity is saturated, and the layer’s parameters are too important for previous tasks to be overwritten (plasticity saturation). 

(1) Representational saturation: Given layer l activations Hl ∈ RMl×n over a mini-batch of n samples, the normal-ized Effective Dimension (ED) (Maile et al., 2022) is defined by the set cardinality of Hl’s singular values: 

φl = 1

Ml



σi ∈ SVD 

 1

√n Hl



σi > ε 



, (3) where ε > 0 is a small threshold and SVD stands for singular value decomposition. ED measures what fraction of the layer’s neurons produce linearly independent activation patterns across the current batch. A value of φl ≈ 1 indicates that all neurons are producing near-orthogonal features and the layer is operating at full representational capacity. Growth triggers when φl > γ · φ(0)  

> l

, where φ(0)  

> l

is the ED measured at the end of the previous task (after training) and γ ∈ (0 , 1) is a sensitivity discount. The discount γ is necessary because ED fluctuates during training due to batch variability and comparing against the full reference φ(0)  

> l

would trigger growth only when the layer is already saturated, leaving no margin to act proactively. Discounting by γ allows growth to begin slightly before full saturation is reached. After each task completes, φ(0)  

> l

is reset to the current post-consolidation ED value, ensuring the reference tracks the network’s evolving capacity rather than comparing against a stale initialization-time snapshot. When the trigger fires, the number of added neurons is: 

kl =

j

Ml ·



φl − γ · φ(0) 

> l

k 

, (4) with kl rounded up to 1 if 0 < k l < 1. Layers under greater representational pressure thus receive more new neurons. 

(2) Plasticity saturation: The ED signal alone could fire spuriously due to transient batch effects. To confirm a layer actually should grow, we want to ensure that the layer’s plasticity has actually saturated. In other words, all the parameters are too important to be overwritten for our current task t without damaging performance on previous tasks. At each epoch during training on task t, we compute the diagonal Fisher of the current task’s data F (curr)  

> l

over the first few mini-batches of Dt (this is a fresh, within-epoch computation, distinct from the accumulated ˜F (t) which is updated only at the end of each task via Eq. 1). Growth requires: 

Percentile 



F (curr)  

> l

, p 



> τ (t) 

> l

, (5) Here p is a fixed percentile and τ (t) 

> l

is an exponential moving average of past accumulated Fisher magnitudes, updated at the end of each task: τ (t) 

> l

= α τ (t−1)  

> l

+ (1 − α) mean( ˜F (t) 

> l

). This condition ensures that at least (100 −p)% of 4Preprint. the layer’s parameters have Fisher values exceeding the historical baseline, indicating that most of the layer’s existing parameters are genuinely important for past learnt behavior and that new parameters are really necessary. 

Combined trigger: Growth at layer l occurs when both conditions are met: 

grow l = ( φl > γ · φ(0)  

> l

)

| {z }

> ED saturated

∧ (Percentile( F (curr)  

> l

, p ) > τ l)

| {z }

> Fisher saturated

. (6) This joint gating ensures that capacity is added only when the layer is both representationally saturated (all neurons producing independent features) and plasticity-wise saturated (parameters are all important for past and current tasks). A cool-down period of C epochs follows each growth event, giving the network time to integrate the newly added neurons before growing again. 3.2 NEUROGENESIS : H OW TO ADD NEURONS 

When NORACL adds kl neurons to layer l, their fan-in weight vectors are initialized from a random orthogonal basis via QR decomposition (Saxe et al., 2013) and scaled by a fixed factor sinit , which is set to 0.2 in all our experiments. The corresponding fan-out weights into layer l + 1 are initialized to zero so that newly added neurons do not affect downstream computation at the moment of insertion. The accumulated Fisher diagonal and the EWC anchor param-eters are padded with zeros for the new dimensions to ensure that new parameters remain fully unconstrained. After growth, we re-initialize the optimizer state so that it matches the expanded parameter tree. 3.3 ALGORITHMIC PROPERTIES 

Because the fan-out weights of newly added neurons are initialized to zero, the network function is unchanged at the moment of growth, i.e. f (x; θ′) = f (x; θ) for all inputs x, aiding the functional stability of the network on previously learned tasks. Newly added parameters are assigned ˜F = 0 , so their effective learning rate is not attenuated (ηeff = η), leaving them fully plastic after initialization , providing fresh capacity for learning new tasks. Orthogonal fan-in initialization encourages new neurons to begin from diverse input directions, ensuring minimal redundancy in new features . Finally, all hyperparameters are properties of the learning dynamics and not dependent on the task stream properties , whether that is the number of tasks T , how similar they are to each other, or the task id itself. 

## 4 THEORETICAL ANALYSIS 

In fixed-capacity networks, continual learning is fundamentally constrained by the stability-plasticity dilemma: pre-serving prior knowledge (stability) inevitably limits the ability to acquire new tasks (plasticity), while unconstrained updates lead to catastrophic forgetting. Methods like EWC work within this trade-off by protecting important param-eters, but in doing so restrict the capacity available for learning future tasks. Consequently, even with such regulariza-tion, only a finite number of tasks can be learned without eventual plasticity decay. Unlike EWC or typical gradient descent, NORACL can circumvent the stability-plasticity trade-off through growth. To theoretically illustrate this point, we consider an analytically tractable continual learning challenge originally used by Kirkpatrick et al. (2017): random pattern association. To enable growth (which requires a hidden layer), we extend this problem to a network with a single non-linear hidden layer initialized with width M (0) . Random pattern association presents a sequence of tasks indexed by t, where each task consists of associating a random binary input pattern, u(t), and its corresponding hidden representation, x(t), with a binary outcome, y(t). Given that the catastrophic forgetting problem under typical gradient descent has been well-explored, we limit our analysis to comparing how old and new task information is retained in EWC and NORACL. 4.1 EWC MAINTAINS STABILITY AT THE COST OF FUTURE PLASTICITY 

Under a Mean Squared Error (MSE) loss with EWC regularization (full derivation in Section A.2), the optimal output weights at task t can be decomposed in terms of the knowledge about prior tasks stored in the old weights W (t−1) ,and the new information required to solve the current task expressed in the product of x(t), and y(t).We then show that in a fixed capacity network, the proportion of new information being added decays with t−1, i.e. inversely proportional to the number of tasks presented up to that point. Effectively, EWC trades off plasticity on new tasks for stability over old tasks, slowing down the rate of forgetting relative to unregularized gradient descent but not completely removing it with respect to newer tasks. If we wanted our static network to be able to retain the entire 5Preprint. Table 1: Comparison of NORACL and static baselines across multiple benchmarks. Boldface indicates the highest average accuracy within each benchmark and depth setting.                                                                                                                     

> Model Permuted MNIST Rotated MNIST Binary Split MNIST Params Acc (%) Params Acc (%) Params Acc (%)
> 1L baseline small 12.7k 44 .0±0.912.7k 56 .3±1.712.7k 71 .6±1.9
> 1L baseline medium 25.4k 60 .3±1.925.4k 63 .7±2.325.4k 72 .8±0.9
> 1L baseline large 50.8k 76 .0±0.850.8k 73 .6±1.250.8k 70 .0±2.7
> 1L NORACL 47.6k ±1.6 79 .9±0.542.2k ±2.1 72 .6±2.423.8k ±2.2 72 .1±1.8
> 2L baseline small 12.9k 41 .9±1.312.9k 56 .1±1.412.9k 72 .1±1.8
> 2L baseline medium 26.4k 56 .5±1.126.4k 63 .3±1.726.4k 71 .2±2.6
> 2L baseline large 54.9k 73 .3±1.854.9k 75 .2±0.854.9k 72 .5±1.8
> 2L NORACL 49.2k ±3.2 79 .4±0.742.9k ±2.7 74 .9±1.723.3k ±3.1 73 .9±2.5

sequence of random pattern-outcome pairs, we would need to allocate sufficient capacity a priori (around t ≤ M (0) ), introducing the need for a task oracle. 4.2 NORACL CIRCUMVENTS STABILITY -PLASTICITY TRADE -OFF 

NORACL removes the need for a task oracle by dynamically increasing the network capacity as new tasks arrive, sidestepping the power-law plasticity decay of EWC as well as the catastrophic forgetting of unregularized gradient descent on fixed-capacity networks. Crucially, this enables it to handle new tasks (without any specific prior on the number of expected tasks) through continued growth while not overwriting existing task information. We formalize these claims in the following theorem and its corollary. 

Theorem 1 (Stability of Parameters relevant to Previous Tasks) Consider a linear network with a single hidden layer trained sequentially on random pattern association using NO-RACL. Then, the parameters corresponding to previous learned tasks are strictly preserved at the same time as new parameters are added during growth. That is, letting W (t) 

> old

= W (t)0: M (t−1) denote the subset of output parameters optimized for task t, but excluding the k = M (t) − M (t−1) newly instantiated hidden dimensions, W (t) 

> old

= W (t−1) .

Corollary 1 (Plastic Learning of new Tasks through new Parameters) Under the same setting, the minimization of the loss for a new task t is achieved exclusively through newly instantiated hidden units. We provide the full proof in Appendix Section A.2. At a high level, the argument proceeds by demonstrating that both NORACL growth triggers are activated by new random input patterns, triggering an expansion of the hidden layer with each new task t. This yields asymptotic linear growth of the hidden layer’s size, M (t) ≈ M (0) + (1 − γ) · t where 

γ is the ED discount factor. Note that this linear growth of capacity offsets the inverse scaling of plasticity in EWC on fixed-capacity networks. Given the linear increase in hidden layer size, we can decompose the gradient updates into contributions over old parameters (trained to solve all previous tasks j < t ) and newly added parameters. This decomposition then yields Theorem 1 and Corollary 1’s central claims: previously learnt parameters are preserved completely, demonstrating the stability of old task information, while new parameters entirely absorb the information required to solve the new task, demonstrating continued plasticity. In conclusion, this analysis on random pattern association highlights how NORACL resolves the stability-plasticity trade-off (at least when training an analytically tractable linear output layer) that plagues fixed-capacity networks without needing to resort to a task oracle. By expanding its own capacity in proportion to the task demands and the number of tasks, and then routing new information into highly plastic, unconstrained parameters, it avoids both catastrophic forgetting and power-law plasticity decay. 

## 5 EMPIRICAL EVALUATION 

We evaluate NORACL on three MNIST (LeCun et al., 2002) variants spanning a spectrum of task geometry: Per-muted MNIST (10 tasks; random pixel permutations, weakly-similar tasks (Goodfellow et al., 2015)), Rotated 

6Preprint. 2 4 6 8 10               

> Task Progression
> 70
> 80
> 90
> 100
> Avg. Accuracy (%)
> aPermuted MNIST
> 12345
> Task Progression
> 70
> 80
> 90
> 100
> Avg. Accuracy (%)
> bRotated MNIST
> 12345
> Task Progression
> 70
> 80
> 90
> 100
> Avg. Accuracy (%)
> cBinary Split MNIST
> 0k
> 20k
> 40k
> 60k
> Total Parameters
> 64x64
> 0k
> 20k
> 40k
> 60k
> Total Parameters
> 64x64
> 0k
> 10k
> 20k
> 30k
> Total Parameters
> 32x32
> Accuracy (NORACL) Accuracy (Static EWC) Params (NORACL) Params (Static)

Figure 2: Accuracy & parameter count vs. task progression on short-horizon benchmarks (2-layer models). 

Each panel shows average accuracy (left axis, curves) and total parameter count (right axis, bars) as a function of task progression for NORACL and the best-matching static EWC baseline. The dashed green line indicates the static baseline’s fixed parameter budget. Error bars and shaded regions denote ±1σ standard deviation over 5 seeds. 

MNIST (5 tasks; (Lopez-Paz & Ranzato, 2017) fixed angular rotations of 20 ◦ starting from 0◦, moderately-similar), and Binary Split MNIST (5 tasks; binary classification over disjoint digit pairs similar to Zenke et al. (2017), highly similar). All are framed as domain-incremental problems with a single shared output head and no task identity at inference (Section 3). We compare NORACL against static baselines with EWC at hidden widths of 16, 32, and 64 neurons per layer, for both one- and two-layer MLPs. NORACL uses identical growth hyperparameters ( γ, ε, p, C, sinit , α) across all benchmarks and depths; Appendix Table 2 lists the exact values. Only the EWC coefficient λ is benchmark-specific. All runs use 5 seeds. Following Mirzadeh et al. (2022), we report average test accuracy across all tasks seen so far. 5.1 SHORT -H ORIZON BENCHMARKS : M ATCHING ORACLE CAPACITY 

Table 1 reports parameter counts and average accuracy after all the tasks are presented. Two observations dominate. 

NORACL performs similarly or better than the best static baseline while using fewer parameters. Across all three benchmarks and both depths, NORACL achieves accuracy on-par with (i.e. within error-bounds) or greater than the largest static baseline while using 10-22% fewer parameters. The gains are most pronounced on Permuted MNIST, where 2L NORACL outperforms the 2L-large baseline by ∼6% at ∼10% fewer parameters. On Binary Split MNIST, where task structure is strongly shared, all methods fall within ∼1.5% of each other. Importantly, NORACL does not overgrow on this task stream, matching the medium baseline at a comparable parameter budget. 

NORACL’s parameter budget autonomously adapts to task geometry. Despite using identical growth hyperpa-rameters across all benchmarks, NORACL’s final parameter count varies by more than 2× across task families: ∼49k on Permuted MNIST, ∼43k on Rotated MNIST, and only ∼23k on Binary Split MNIST. The growth trigger expands the network only when the current capacity appears insufficient, as indicated by the joint saturation of the spectral and Fisher-based signals. When tasks share structure, these signals rarely fire together and NORACL stays compact. When tasks are weakly related, they fire repeatedly and the network grows (see ablations in Appendix A.6). Figure 2 visualizes average accuracy together with parameter usage over task progression for the 2-layer models. Across all benchmarks, NORACL either outperforms the matched static baseline at a comparable parameter budget, or achieves similar accuracy with fewer parameters throughout the task stream. This is consistent with the theoretical prediction (Section 4) that growth escapes fixed-capacity ceilings on weakly-similar streams. 5.2 EMERGENT ARCHITECTURES REFLECT TASK GEOMETRY 

Figure 3 shows the number of neurons in each hidden layer as a function of task progression for a 2-layer NORACL model. The growth patterns differ strikingly across benchmarks, and each is interpretable in terms of the underlying task structure. On Permuted MNIST, layer 1 grows steadily (from ∼32 to ∼60 neurons over 10 tasks) while layer 2 remains flat. This is consistent with the nature of the task stream. Random permutations destroy low-level spatial structure, such that each new task demands different first-layer filters, while the second layer’s feature space remains largely reusable as long as the first layer continues to produce useful intermediate representations. NORACL’s growth trigger discovers this division of labor autonomously. Strikingly, on Binary Split MNIST, the pattern inverts: Layer 2 grows faster than 7Preprint. abIndependent Features: Permuted MNIST Shared Features: Binary Split MNIST              

> Task Progression 12345678910 Task Progression
> 40
> 50
> 60 # of Neurons  Hidden Layer 1 Hidden Layer 2 12345Task Progression
> 20
> 30 # of Neurons  Hidden Layer 1 Hidden Layer 2

Figure 3: Emergent architectures reflect task geometry. Left: Schematic illustration of layer-wise growth for independent-feature tasks (Permuted MNIST, a) ) and shared-feature tasks (Binary Split MNIST, b) ). Right: Number of neurons per hidden layer as a function of task progression for the 2-layer NORACL model. layer 1 ( ∼36 vs. ∼23). Here, all tasks share the same raw digit distribution, so low-level features are reusable and growth shifts to the decision boundary in Layer 2. On Rotated MNIST (Appendix Fig. 5), both layers grow, but layer 1 more than layer 2 ( ∼44 vs. ∼37), reflecting that rotations alter pose while preserving some local statistics. Note that the same growth rule produces bottom-heavy growth on Permuted, balanced growth on Rotated, and top-heavy growth on Binary Split MNIST. We read this as evidence that NORACL is tracking a meaningful notion of 

where capacity is actually required , rather than a surrogate that correlates with good accuracy. Consistent with this, the appendix shows that heuristic growth schemes such as fixed and scheduled expansion perform substantially worse, even though they also increase capacity (Section A.6). 5.3 LONG -H ORIZON STRESS TEST : 50-T ASK PERMUTED MNIST To expose the oracle architecture problem over a long task horizon, we simulate an extreme deployment scenario: We predict a short stream of 5 tasks and provision a small 32 × 32 network accordingly. Unexpectedly however, the stream extends to 50 tasks. We compare three conditions (5 seeds each): Static EWC baseline 32 × 32 (the provisioned network), Static EWC 75 × 32 (an architecture-matched control whose widths match NORACL’s max final size provisioned from the start), and NORACL initialized at 32 × 32 and allowed to grow. EWC. A fully unconstrained parameter contributes 1, a fully frozen parameter contributes 0, and partially constrained parameters contribute fractionally (for details see Appendix Section A.4). 1 5 10 25 50       

> Task Progression
> 20
> 40
> 60
> 80
> 100
> Average Accuracy (%)  a
> 48.1%
> 43.4%
> 30.8%
> 1510 25 50
> Task Progression
> 1k
> 10k
> Neff plastic
> b
> 4.3k
> 4.1k
> 1.0k
> NORACL (init. 32×32) Static EWC 75×32 Static EWC 32×32

Figure 4: 50-task Permuted MNIST stress test. a) Av-erage accuracy across all seen tasks. b) Effective plastic parameter count N eff plastic (Eq. 29, log scale) Figure 4a reports the average accuracy over task pro-gression across 50 tasks. For all three models, accuracy drops with increasing task number, but in qualitatively different ways. The static 32 × 32 network deteriorates fastest, consistent with rapid exhaustion of its under-provisioned fixed capacity. The architecture-matched static 75 × 32 baseline initially benefits from starting with the full pre-provisioned capacity, but even so is overtaken by NORACL after less than 10 tasks. Over-all, NORACL finishes strongest, remaining the most sta-ble in terms of average accuracy across all 50 tasks de-spite reaching a comparable final size to the architecture-matched baseline. Figure 4b shows that the effective number of plastic pa-rameters ( N eff plastic ) decays slowest for NORACL when compared to the static networks. The static 32 × 32 net-work deteriorates fastest, consistent with rapid exhaus-tion of its fixed capacity. The architecture-matched static 

75 × 32 baseline starts with far more total parameters than either NORACL or the static 32 × 32 network, explaining its initial advantage in effective plastic parameters. However, as with the accuracy, NORACL overtakes it after only 10 tasks (even before reaching its final size), maintaining a small plasticity advantage as more tasks accumulate. 8Preprint. These results directly illustrate how NORACL improves upon the stability-plasticity dilemma through growth. In this sense, the long-horizon stress test is not only a comparison of accuracies, but a mechanistic demonstration of how adaptive neurogenesis can move the stability-plasticity Pareto frontier by allocating new resources only when the current architecture becomes genuinely insufficient. The fact that NORACL even outperforms a static architecture pre-provisioned with the same final capacity demonstrates that how and when growth occurs is at least as important as 

that it occurs. One limitation is that NORACL’s final accuracy of ∼48% on 50-task Permuted MNIST is not a high absolute number, the comparison is only meaningful relative to the static 32 × 32 baseline that starts from the same capacity and the capacity matched 75 × 32 baseline. We are aware that a large static oracle baseline would likely outperform both given the knowledge about the task count. 5.4 ABLATION STUDIES 

In Appendix A.6, we ablate both components of NORACL’s growth mechanism: the joint ED ∧ Fsat trigger (Sec-tion A.6.1) and the QR-based orthogonal initialization (Section A.6.2). We find that (i) ED alone causes severe over-growth, (ii) Fsat alone grows insufficiently and misallocates capacity across layers, and (iii) our ED ∧ Fsat trigger outperforms other heuristic triggers. (iv) Our QR initialization consistently produces the most compact architectures at the highest accuracy and outperforms other common initializations. 

## 6 DISCUSSION & C ONCLUSION 

In this work, we argue that the stability-plasticity trade-off in CL has an architectural root. Fixed-capacity methods implicitly rely on an oracle architecture sized for an unknown future task stream, as the required network capacity depends on both task count and task geometry. NORACL addresses this oracle architecture problem through smart neurogenesis: it starts from a compact network and grows only when and where needed, guided by internal signals of representational- and plasticity-saturation. Our theoretical results clarify how this is possible: Theorems 1 and 2 show, in an analytically tractable setting, that NORACL preserves parameters relevant to previous tasks while routing new learning into newly added parameters, thereby avoiding the power-law plasticity decay of fixed-capacity regularized networks. This mechanism is also reflected empirically in our 50-task stress test, where NORACL maintains a substan-tially larger pool of effective plastic parameters than EWC networks and degrades more gracefully as tasks accumulate (Fig. 4). In this way, NORACL moves the stability-plasticity Pareto frontier by allocating additional resources only when the current architecture is genuinely insufficient. This, and the growth’s independence of task information, also distinguishes it from earlier expansion-based methods such as Progressive Neural Networks (Rusu et al., 2016) and Dynamically Expandable Networks (Yoon et al., 2017), which rely on task identity at inference time and use heuristic growth criteria, making them less suitable for the domain-incremental setting considered here. A particularly interesting outcome is that the architectures learned by NORACL are both minimal on demand and grow in an interpretable fashion. Across benchmarks, NORACL reaches final accuracies on par with oracle-provisioned static baselines while using 10-20% fewer parameters, showing that it can discover architectures whose size is close to what is actually needed rather than what must be pessimistically provisioned in advance (Fig. 2). Moreover, the layer-wise growth patterns reflect task geometry in an intuitive way: when tasks are weakly related or largely orthogonal, growth is concentrated in earlier feature-extraction layers, consistent with the need to allocate new low-level features that cannot be shared. When tasks share more structure, growth shifts toward later feature-combination layers, suggest-ing that early features can be reused and only downstream recombination must expand (Fig. 3). This makes NORACL interesting not only as a continual learning method, but also as a potential form of online architecture search. In future work, such adaptive growth could be especially valuable in resource-constrained settings, including adaptive hardware systems, where one may need to decide on the fly how much memory, compute, or circuitry to allocate. In summary, we identify the oracle architecture problem as a central cause of the stability-plasticity dilemma and show that smart, on-demand neurogenesis offers a principled way to address it. More broadly, our results suggest that continual learning systems should adapt not only their parameters, but also their capacity. In this sense, NORACL provides a concrete step toward pushing the stability-plasticity Pareto frontier of continual learning. 

Limitations and future work: NORACL is currently formulated for fully-connected MLP architectures. Extending it to convolutional or attention-based models, where growth means adding filters or attention heads rather than neurons, is conceptually straightforward (the ED and Fisher signals generalize naturally to feature maps) but requires extensive engineering and validation on benchmarks beyond MNIST. We view the present work as establishing the principle 

that joint spectral-and-plasticity gating resolves the oracle architecture problem and that scaling to richer architectures 9Preprint. is the natural next step. Additionally, our evaluation deliberately uses small networks ( 32 –64 neurons), because the oracle architecture problem and the associated loss of plasticity are most acute in the capacity-constrained regime. In larger networks, plasticity exhaustion still occurs but over longer task horizons (Mirzadeh et al., 2022), making it harder to expose at MNIST scale. 

## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

This work was supported by the Swiss National Science Foundation (Starting Grant Project UNITE, grant number TMSGI2-211461), the Horizon Europe program (EIC Pathfinder METASPIN, grant number 101098651) and Volk-swagenStiftung (project CLAM, grant number 9C854). The authors appreciate the support provided by the project funding and institutional resources that made this research possible. We thank all members of the Emerging Intelligent Substrates Lab (EIS-Lab) for their valuable feedback and support at multiple stages of this project. We also thank Damien Querlioz, Djohan Bonnet, Kellian Cottart, and Emre Neftci for insightful discussions and feedback. Finally, we thank Mathis Reymond for his contributions to the preliminary version of this project. 10 Preprint. 

## REFERENCES 

James B Aimone, Janet Wiles, and Fred H Gage. Computational influence of adult neurogenesis on memory encoding. 

Neuron , 61(2):187–202, 2009. Rahaf Aljundi, Francesca Babiloni, Mohamed Elhoseiny, Marcus Rohrbach, and Tinne Tuytelaars. Memory aware synapses: Learning what (not) to forget. In Proceedings of the European conference on computer vision (ECCV) ,pp. 139–154, 2018. Wei Deng, James B Aimone, and Fred H Gage. New neurons and new memories: how does adult hippocampal neurogenesis affect learning and memory? Nature reviews neuroscience , 11(5):339–350, 2010. Shibhansh Dohare, J Fernando Hernandez-Garcia, Qingfeng Lan, Parash Rahman, A Rupam Mahmood, and Richard S Sutton. Loss of plasticity in deep continual learning. Nature , 632(8026):768–774, 2024. Robert M French. Catastrophic forgetting in connectionist networks. Trends in cognitive sciences , 3(4):128–135, 1999. Xavier Glorot and Yoshua Bengio. Understanding the difficulty of training deep feedforward neural networks. In 

Proceedings of the thirteenth international conference on artificial intelligence and statistics , pp. 249–256. JMLR Workshop and Conference Proceedings, 2010. Ian J Goodfellow, Mehdi Mirza, D Xiao, A Courville, Y Bengio, et al. An empirical investigation of catastrophic forgetting in gradient-based neural networks (2013). arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6211 , 465, 2015. Olivia Gozel and Wulfram Gerstner. A functional model of adult dentate gyrus neurogenesis. Elife , 10:e66463, 2021. Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Delving deep into rectifiers: Surpassing human-level performance on imagenet classification. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision ,pp. 1026–1034, 2015. Ching-Yi Hung, Cheng-Hao Tu, Cheng-En Wu, Chien-Hung Chen, Yi-Ming Chan, and Chu-Song Chen. Compacting, picking and growing for unforgetting continual learning. Advances in neural information processing systems , 32, 2019. James Kirkpatrick, Razvan Pascanu, Neil Rabinowitz, Joel Veness, Guillaume Desjardins, Andrei A. Rusu, Kieran Milan, John Quan, Tiago Ramalho, Agnieszka Grabska-Barwinska, Demis Hassabis, Claudia Clopath, Dharshan Kumaran, and Raia Hadsell. Overcoming catastrophic forgetting in neural networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 114(13):3521–3526, 2017. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1611835114. URL https://www.pnas. org/doi/abs/10.1073/pnas.1611835114 .Yann LeCun, L´ eon Bottou, Yoshua Bengio, and Patrick Haffner. Gradient-based learning applied to document recog-nition. Proceedings of the IEEE , 86(11):2278–2324, 2002. David Lopez-Paz and Marc’Aurelio Ranzato. Gradient episodic memory for continual learning. Advances in neural information processing systems , 30, 2017. Clare Lyle, Zeyu Zheng, Evgenii Nikishin, Bernardo Avila Pires, Razvan Pascanu, and Will Dabney. Understanding plasticity in neural networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 23190–23211. PMLR, 2023. Kaitlin Maile, Emmanuel Rachelson, Herv´ e Luga, and Dennis George Wilson. When, where, and how to add new neurons to anns. In International Conference on Automated Machine Learning , pp. 18–1. PMLR, 2022. Michael McCloskey and Neal J Cohen. Catastrophic interference in connectionist networks: The sequential learning problem. In Psychology of learning and motivation , volume 24, pp. 109–165. Elsevier, 1989. Seyed Iman Mirzadeh, Mehrdad Farajtabar, Razvan Pascanu, and Hassan Ghasemzadeh. Understanding the role of training regimes in continual learning. Advances in neural information processing systems , 33:7308–7320, 2020. Seyed Iman Mirzadeh, Arslan Chaudhry, Dong Yin, Huiyi Hu, Razvan Pascanu, Dilan Gorur, and Mehrdad Farajtabar. Wide neural networks forget less catastrophically. In International conference on machine learning , pp. 15699– 15717. PMLR, 2022. Andrei A Rusu, Neil C Rabinowitz, Guillaume Desjardins, Hubert Soyer, James Kirkpatrick, Koray Kavukcuoglu, Razvan Pascanu, and Raia Hadsell. Progressive neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.04671 , 2016. 11 Preprint. Andrew M Saxe, James L McClelland, and Surya Ganguli. Exact solutions to the nonlinear dynamics of learning in deep linear neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6120 , 2013. Jonathan Schwarz, Wojciech Czarnecki, Jelena Luketina, Agnieszka Grabska-Barwinska, Yee Whye Teh, Razvan Pascanu, and Raia Hadsell. Progress & compress: A scalable framework for continual learning. In International conference on machine learning , pp. 4528–4537. PMLR, 2018. Gido M Van de Ven and Andreas S Tolias. Three scenarios for continual learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.07734 ,2019. Ju Xu and Zhanxing Zhu. Reinforced continual learning. Advances in neural information processing systems , 31, 2018. Jaehong Yoon, Eunho Yang, Jeongtae Lee, and Sung Ju Hwang. Lifelong learning with dynamically expandable networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.01547 , 2017. Friedemann Zenke, Ben Poole, and Surya Ganguli. Continual learning through synaptic intelligence. In International conference on machine learning , pp. 3987–3995. Pmlr, 2017. 12 Preprint. 

## A APPENDIX 

A.1 IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS OF NORACL A.1.1 ADDITIONAL DETAILS ON HOW NORACL ADDS NEURONS .When NORACL adds kl neurons to layer l, we draw a random matrix A ∈ RMl−1×Ml−1 , compute its QR decom-position A = QR (Saxe et al., 2013), and take the first kl columns of Q as the new fan-in weights. In the baseline implementation, these columns are scaled by a fixed factor sinit :

W (new)  

> l

= sinit Q:, 1: kl . (7) This yields orthogonal incoming weight vectors with controlled magnitude. In our experiments, sinit is treated as a hyperparameter (set to 0.2). The corresponding fan-out weights into layer l + 1 are initialized to zero, 

W (new)  

> l+1

= 0, (8) 

W (new)  

> l+1

= 0 ∈ Rkl×Ml+1 . (9) so that the newly added neurons do not affect downstream computation at the moment of insertion. This makes growth function-preserving, i.e. f (x; θ′) = f (x; θ) for all inputs x immediately after expansion. The accumulated Fisher diagonal and the EWC anchor parameters are padded with zeros for the new dimensions to ensure that new parameters remain fully unconstrained. 

˜Fl ← [ ˜Fl | 0], ˜Fl+1 ←

 ˜Fl+1 

0



, θ∗ 

> l

← [θ∗ 

> l

| 0], θ∗ 

> l+1

←

θ∗

> l+1

0



. (10) Setting the Fisher information to zero for new parameters means they receive no EWC penalty (see Eq. (2)), making them fully plastic. A.1.2 PSEUDOCODE 

13 Preprint. 

Algorithm 1 NORACL: Neurogenesis for Oracle-free Resource-Adaptive Continual Learning 

Require: Initial network θ0 with hidden widths M (0) 1 , . . . , M (0)  

> L

; task stream {D t}t=1 ,...,T 

Require: Hyperparameters: λ, α, γ, ε, p, C, s init (no dependence on T )

1: Initialize ˜F ← 0, θ∗ ← θ0, cooldown ← 0, and φ(0)  

> l

← ∅ 

2: for each arriving task Dt do 

3: for epoch = 1 to E do 

4: for each mini-batch (x, y ) ∈ D t do 

5: L ← L CE (θ; x, y ) + λ

> 2

P 

> i

˜Fi(θi − θ∗ 

> i

)2 (Eq. 2) 

6: θ ← θ − η ∇θ L (SGD with gradient clipping) 

7: end for 

8: if cooldown > 0 then 

9: cooldown ← cooldown −1

10: else 

11: Compute φl for each hidden layer l (Eq. 3) 

12: Estimate current-task Fisher F (curr)  

> l

for each layer using the first few mini-batches of Dt

13: growth happened ← false 

14: for each hidden layer l do 

15: if φl > γ · φ(0)  

> l

and Percentile( F (curr)  

> l

, p ) > τ l then 

16: kl ← max(1 , ⌊Ml(φl − γφ (0)  

> l

)⌋)

17: θ, ˜F , θ ∗, growth happened ← GROW (θ, ˜F , θ ∗, l, k l, s init ) (Section 3.2) 

18: end if 

19: end for 

20: if growth happened then 

21: cooldown ← C

22: Reinitialize optimizer state on the expanded parameter tree 

23: end if 

24: end if 

25: end for 

26: // Post-task consolidation 

27: Ft ← compute fisher( θ, D(≤5 mini-batches ) 

> t

)

28: ˜F ← α ˜F + (1 − α)Ft (Eq. 1) 

29: θ∗ ← θ

30: τl ← α τ l + (1 − α) mean( ˜Fl) for each layer l

31: φ(0)  

> l

← orth score l/M l for each hidden layer l (set next task’s reference ED) 

32: end for 

A.1.3 HYPERPARAMETER SETTINGS 

14 Preprint. Table 2: Hyperparameter settings used in all experiments. 

Component Hyperparameter Value NORACL growth 

ED discount γ = 0 .9

SVD threshold ε = 0 .05 

Fisher percentile p = 25 

Cooldown epochs C = 3 

Init scale sinit = 0 .2

Fisher EMA decay α = 0 .9

EWC 

Permuted MNIST λ = 500 

Rotated MNIST λ = 2000 

Binary Split MNIST λ = 5000 

Optimization 

Optimizer SGD Learning rate (task 1) η1 = 1 × 10 −1

Learning rate (later tasks) η = 5 × 10 −3

Gradient clipping = 5 .0

Training 

Seeds 5 (0-4) Batch size = 256 

Epochs (task 1) = 10 

Epochs (later tasks) = 30   

> NORACL uses the same growth-related hyperparameters across all three benchmarks and both depths. The benchmark-specific λvalues belong to the online EWC backbone and are not treated as NORACL-specific growth hyperparameters.

A.2 TASK INFORMATION RETENTION FOR BINARY ASSOCIATION TASK 

To analytically understand the representational capacity of networks trained with the NORACL algorithm, we analyze the dynamics of task information retention over time on the simple (but analytically tractable) task of associating an arbitrary number of random binary strings to random binary outputs as done by Kirkpatrick et al. (2017). From a continual learning perspective, we consider the problem of memorizing each new (x(t), y (t)) pair as a new task indexed by t.To solve this task, we train networks with a single hidden layer of size M . The network must associate a d-dimensional input string u(t) to a binary output y(t) at every timestep t. To evaluate the effects of growing the network via NORACL while avoiding the representational bottlenecks of strictly linear networks, we ground our analysis in a Random Feature framework. We define the M -dimensional hidden activations as a deterministic, non-linear projection of the input: 

x(t) = σ(Qu (t)). Here, Q ∈ RM ×d is a random projection matrix with entries drawn from Qj,k ∼ N (0 , 1) , and 

W ∈ R1×M represents the output weights. Because of the non-linearity σ, expanding the hidden layer size M

increases the representational capacity of the network. Assuming inputs are normalized such that || u(t)|| 2 = 1 , pre-activations are distributed as standard normal variables. We restrict our choice of the non-linearity σ such that it has zero mean and unit variance over the standard Gaussian measure: Ez∼N (0 ,1) [σ(z)] = 0 and Ez∼N (0 ,1) [σ(z)2] = 1 . Accordingly, we can also model the post-activations x(t)

as independent, zero-mean features. We learn W using least-squares between the high-dimensional features x(t) and targets y(t) in addition to an EWC regularization penalty, yielding the following loss for timestep t (following the initial derivation by Kirkpatrick et al. (2017)): 

L(t) = 12 (|| W (t)x(t) − y(t)|| 22 + |W (t) − W (t−1) |M) (11) Here, W (t) refers to the output weights at timestep t, while |W (t) − W (t−1) |M refers to a distance penalty (under metric M) between the weights learned at the time of the previous task t − 1 and the current weights at time t. For 15 Preprint. EWC, the metric M is defined by the cumulative sum of the diagonal of the Fisher information matrix up to timestep 

t − 1.CASE 1: E LASTIC WEIGHT CONSOLIDATION ON A STATIC -S IZED NETWORK 

We first consider the case of training a neural network with a static size M (0) using EWC without growth triggers. The following derivation simply reproduces the steps outlined in the supplementary information of Kirkpatrick et al. (2017). In this static case, the diagonal of the Fisher information matrix for all tasks up to t, denoted denote F (t), is simply the sum of Fisher diagonals Fj for each individual task j ∈ 0, ..., t (what the Fisher would be if the network was only trained to solve task j). To appropriately control the variance of the forward pass in this derivation, we adopt the standard scaling assumption from Kirkpatrick et al. (2017) and scale the pre-activations by 1√M (0) , such that x(t) = σ( 1√M (0) Qu (t)). Under this scaling, the expected Fisher matrix for a single task is Fj = E[x(j)x(j)T ] = 1  

> M(0)

I. Consequently, the accumulated metric applied at timestep t is F (t) = tM (0) I. Letting F (t) = λ(t) = tM (0) , we can simplify Eq. (11) to the following: 

L(t) = 12 (|| W (t)x(t) − y(t)|| 22 + λ(t)|| W (t) − W (t−1) || 22) (12) Minimizing the loss at timestep t with respect to W (t) and setting the derivative to zero yields the following weight dynamics: 

W (t) = W (t−1) − 1

λ(t) (W (t)x(t) − y(t))x(t)T (13) We now solve for W (t) by applying the Sherman-Morrison formula for the resulting matrix inverse (recovering the dynamics shown in Kirkpatrick et al. (2017)): 

W (t) = W (t−1) 



I − x(t) y(t)T x(t)T

λ(t) + 1 



+ y(t)T x(t)T

λ(t) + 1 (14) 

= W (t−1) I − x(t) y(t)T x(t)TiM (0) + 1 

!

+ y(t)T x(t)TiM (0) + 1 (15) We can interpret the first term of this equation as the proportion of knowledge of past tasks stored in W (t−1) that is retained, while the second term describes the new information about task t being added to the weight matrix over time. We see that for static networks with EWC regularization, the proportion of new task information that can be stored inevitably decays as a power law with respect to the number of encountered tasks t as long as the network capacity 

M (0) is fixed. CASE 2: D YNAMIC GROWTH VIA THE NORACL A LGORITHM 

We now turn to the second case, a network that is dynamically grown using the NORACL algorithm. We start by showing how a new task t in this simplified framework guarantees that NORACL will expand the size of the hidden vector x(t). In this dynamically growing case, the size of x(t), denoted M (t), is a function of how many tasks have been seen. Specifically, we will outline a line of reasoning that serves as proof to Theorem 1 and Corollary 1 in Section 4, restated here for convenience. 

Theorem 1 (Stability of Parameters relevant to Previous Tasks) Consider a linear network with a single hidden layer trained sequentially on random pattern association using NO-RACL. Then, the parameters corresponding to previous learned tasks are strictly preserved at the same time as new parameters are added during growth. That is, letting W (t) 

> old

= W (t)0: M (t−1) denote the subset of output parameters optimized for task t, but excluding the k = M (t) − M (t−1) newly instantiated hidden dimensions, W (t) 

> old

= W (t−1) .16 Preprint. 

Corollary 1 (Plastic Learning of new Tasks through new Parameters) Under the same setting, the minimization of the loss for a new task t is achieved exclusively through newly instantiated hidden units. Our proof proceeds by showing that the conditions for growth are met asymptotically by every random pattern pre-sented to the network, then deriving the optimal weights for associating a new random feature, x(t), to its label y(t),and finally showing how these optimal weights change (in the presence of EWC regularization) as new tasks are presented and growth occurs. There are two conditions for NORACL to add new neurons: first, the Fisher saturation indicator must be true, and second, the effective dimensionality must exceed the discounted previous effective dimensionality. Because F (t) = F (t−1) + Ft and the MSE is a convex loss function ( Ft ≥ 0), it is trivially true that F (t) ≥ F (t−1) .Given uniformly distributed random samples of u(t) without repetition (such that the network cannot already be at a global minimum at timestep t and such that in expectation, F (i) = F (j) for any i, j ≤ T ), F (t) will be strictly larger than F(t−1) , and given an appropriate Fisher percentile setting, F (t) > τ (t). Therefore, given the correct setting for the , the Fisher saturation indicator will be true for any new task t.Given any task t defined by input u(t) and output y(t), the effective dimensionality of x(t) will be ϕED (t) = 1 

> M(t−1)

(given a small enough ϵ threshold) since we perform singular value decomposition over the hidden values generated by a single input vector u(i) before growing the network. Since the discount factor γ < 1, it holds that ϕED (t) >γϕ ED (t − 1) for any new task t. Consequently, NORACL will add on average M (t) − M (t−1) = M (t−1) · (ϕED (t) −

γϕ ED (t−1)) ≈ (1 −γ) new neurons for every newly introduced task, assuming that for large M , 1  

> M(t)

≈ 1  

> M(t−1)

. We can thus approximate the size of the hidden layer M (t) as a linear function of the task number i and the initialization size M (0) :

M (t) ≈ M (0) + (1 − γ) · t (16) To understand Eq. (11) for networks trained using NORACL, the Fisher diagonal F0: t deserves careful attention. Unlike the static network case, the penalty |W (t) − W (t−1) |M is now ill-defined because the dimensions of W (t)

and W (t−1) no longer match. We address this by padding W (t−1) with future units to match the new dimension of 

W (t). Specifically, we concatenate k = M (i) − M (i−1) zero-entries: ˜W (t−1) = W (t−1) 0k

.We then define the growth-augmented Fisher diagonal to mask out the distance penalty for these newly added dimen-sions. We can express the growth-augmented Fisher diagonal ¯F (t) in terms of the Fisher Fj for each individual task 

j ≤ t as follows: 

¯F (t) =

> t

X

> j=0

[Fj 0M (i)−M (j) ] = 

> i

X

> j=0

[IM (j) 0M (i)−M (j) ] (17) Let Λ(t) = bar F (t) denote the accumulated penalty metric used at timestep t. Λ(t) is a diagonal matrix where the entry for the m-th parameter, λ(t) 

> m

, represents its accumulated Fisher information. Λ(t) partitions all parameters into two sets: 1. For ”old” parameters introduced in some past task j, λ(t) 

> m

= t − j. 2. For the k ”new” parameters added by NORACL specifically for task t, λ(t) 

> m

= 0 .To make Λ(t) invertible for our weight dynamics derivation, we assume a negligibly small isotropic prior ϵI on all weights (where ϵ → 0), such that new weights have λ(t) 

> m

= ϵ. Our modified loss function for NORACL at task t

becomes: 

Lt = 12



|| W (t)x(t) − y(t)|| 22 + ( W (t) − ˜W (t−1) )T Λt(W (t) − ˜W (t−1) )



(18) Minimizing Eq. (18) with respect to W (t) and setting the derivative to zero yields: 

0 = ( W (t)x(t) − y(t))x(t),T + ( W (t) − ˜W (t−1) )Λ(t) (19) 17 Preprint. Isolating W (t) and applying the Sherman-Morrison formula for the matrix inverse results in the exact weight dynamics for the growing network: 

W (t) = ˜W (t−1) 



I − x(t) x(t),T Λ(t),−1

1 + x(t),T Λ(t),−1x(t)



+ yt

x(t),T Λ(t),−1

1 + x(t),T Λ(t),−1x(t) (20) 

= ˜W (t−1) 

I − x(t)p(t),T 

+ yip(t),T (21) Note that we define p(t) such that it is a column vector with one entry for each of the M (i) parameters. Analyzing the denominator of p(t) shared across M (i) entries, we see: 

1 + x(t),T Λ(t),−1x(t) = 1 +  

> M(i)

X

> m=1

(x(t) 

> m

)2

λ(t)

> m

(22) Because the k newly added dimensions have λ(t) 

> m

= ϵ → 0, their corresponding terms in the sum approach infinity. Consequently, the entire denominator approaches infinity. We can now observe the distinct, decoupled effect this has on the entries of p(t) (indexed by m < M (i)) associated with the ”old” versus ”new” hidden units. For ”old” hidden units (where λ(t) 

> m

is a finite, non-zero value accumulating over past tasks and m ≤ M (t−1) ), each 

p(t) 

> m

evaluates to: 

p(t) 

> m

= lim 

> ϵ→0

x(t) 

> m

/λ (t)

> m

1 + PM (t−1)  

> l=1 (x(t)
> l)2
> λ(t)
> l

+ PM (t)  

> l=M(t−1)
> (x(t)
> l)2
> ϵ

= 0 (23) Letting W (t) 

> old

= W (t):,0: M (i−1) and noting that ˜W (t−1)  

> old

= W (t−1) , we substitute p(t)0: M (i−1) = [0 0 ... 0] T into Eq. (26) and see that the contribution of the new task i to the old weights vanishes. 

W (t) 

> old

= ˜W (t)

> old



I − x(t):,0: M (i−1) [0 0 ... 0] T 

+ yi [0 0 ... 0] T = W (t−1) (24) Thus, the parameters learned for previous tasks are preserved perfectly even as new tasks are added: W (t) 

> old

= W (t−1) .This concludes the proof for Theorem 1. To prove Corollary 1, we continue by analyzing what happens to the recently added neurons. For these ”new” hidden units (where λ(t) 

> m

= ϵ and m > M (t−1) ), we see the following as ϵ → 0:

p(t) 

> m

= x(t)

> m

PM (t)  

> l=M(t−1)

(x(t) 

> l

)2 (25) The fraction evaluates to a non-zero constant. Letting W (t) 

> new

= W (t):,M (i−1) :M (i) and ˜W (t) 

> new

= 0, we substitute 

p(t)   

> M(t−1) :M(t)

= x(t)       

> M(t−1) :M(t)
> PM(t)
> l=M(t−1) (x(t)
> l)2

into Eq. (26) and see that the contribution of the old weights to the weights learned for the new task t vanishes. 

W (t) 

> new

= ˜W (t−1)  

> new

I − x(t):,M (t−1) :M (t)

x(t),T M (t−1) :M (t)

PM (t)  

> l=M(t−1)

(x(t) 

> l

)2

!

+ y(t) x(t),T M (i−1) :M (i)

PM (t)  

> l=M(t−1)

(x(t) 

> l

)2 (26) Note that this simplifies to a simple least-squares estimator of y(t) in terms of the new hidden units of x(t). Thus, the contribution of the old hidden units vanishes for the added dimensions, and the ”new” parameters entirely absorb the new association between x(t) and y(t). This concludes the proof for Corollary 1. 18 Preprint. IMPLICATIONS 

In conclusion, this simplified but analytically tractable continual learning task demonstrates that NORACL strictly uses new hidden units to absorb incoming task information while preserving the representations of old units completely. Since the number of hidden units is fixed for EWC regularization on a purely static network, over time the weights associated with any new task i cannot be added to the old weights without overwriting important old task information. Accordingly, the information about new tasks that can be encoded in the parameters decays proportionally to t−1. NORACL solves this by linearly increasing the hidden layer width as new tasks are introduced (see Eq. (16)). Note that this linear scaling of the hidden layer width perfectly balances the inverse scaling of the weight decay in static networks. Essentially, NORACL is able to avoid catastrophic forgetting as well as power-law forgetting by increasing its own capacity commensurate to the task demands, and then routing new gradients into the highly plastic, unconstrained new parameters. A.3 ADDITIONAL RESULTS ON INTERPRETABLE ARCHITECTURES 1 2 3 4 5

> Task Progression
> 32.5
> 35.0
> 37.5
> 40.0
> 42.5
> 45.0
> # of Neurons
> Hidden Layer 1
> Hidden Layer 2

Figure 5: Layer-wise growth on Rotated MNIST. Number of neurons per hidden layer as a function of task pro-gression for the 2-layer NORACL model on Rotated MNIST. In contrast to the strongly asymmetric growth patterns observed on Permuted and Binary Split MNIST in Figure 3, both layers grow here, but layer 1 expands more than layer 2, consistent with rotations altering pose while preserving some low-level local structure. A.4 PLASTICITY METRICS 

We derive two metrics for quantifying the plasticity state of a network using a per-parameter curvature information (like the diagonal Fisher Information Matrix). Both are derived directly from the per-parameter effective learning rate 

induced by online EWC (Schwarz et al., 2018) and, to our knowledge, have not been formalized as continual learning metrics in prior work. Recall from Section 3 that the EWC penalty contributes a term λ 

> 2

˜Fi(θi − θ∗ 

> i

)2 to the loss for parameter i, so the gradient step on θi is rescaled relative to the base learning rate η by a factor that decreases as the accumulated Fisher ˜Fi grows. We define the effective learning rate of parameter i as 

ηeff  

> i

= η

1 + λ ˜Fi

, (27) which captures, to first order, how much the optimizer can still move that parameter under the current EWC constraint. When λ ˜Fi is small, ηeff  

> i

≈ η (parameter is fully plastic), when λ ˜Fi ≫ 1, ηeff  

> i

→ 0 (i.e. parameter is frozen). Building on this, we define two scalar diagnostics, the locked fraction of a layer ℓ, with |ℓ| parameters, is the fraction of its parameters whose effective learning rate has fallen below 10% of the base rate: 

LockedFrac ℓ = 1

|ℓ|

X

> i∈ℓ

⊮ ηeff  

> i

< 0.1 η  . (28) A high locked fraction indicates that most of the layer has been frozen by accumulated Fisher and is no longer available for new learning. The effective plastic parameter count of the network is the sum of normalized effective learning rates across all parameters: 

N eff plastic = X

> ℓ

X

> i∈ℓ

ηeff 

> i

η = X

> ℓ

X

> i∈ℓ

11 + λ ˜Fi

. (29) 19 Preprint. 1 25 50 75 100                    

> Task Progression
> 20
> 40
> 60
> 80
> 100
> Average Accuracy (%)
> aAvg. Accuracy
> 125 50 75 100
> Task Progression
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> Locked Fraction
> b
> 0.84
> 0.80
> 0.87
> 0.98
> Layer 1 LockedFrac
> 125 50 75 100
> Task Progression
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> Locked Fraction
> c
> 0.72
> 0.81
> 0.54
> 0.76
> Layer 2 LockedFrac
> 125 50 75 100
> Task Progression
> 1k
> 10k
> Neff plastic
> d
> 4.6k
> 4.7k
> 4.1k
> 1.3k
> Neff plastic
> 50 75 100
> 25
> 30
> 35
> 40
> 45 39.5%
> 37.4%
> 36.2%
> 27.4%
> NORACL (init. 32×32) Static EWC 75×32 Static EWC 64×64 Static EWC 32×32

Figure 6: 100-task Permuted MNIST: stress test. (a) Average accuracy across all seen tasks. Inset: zoom into tasks 50–100. (b, c) Per-layer locked fraction ( LockedFrac ℓ, Eq. 28). (d) Effective plastic parameter count N eff plastic (Eq. 29, log scale) Intuitively, N eff plastic is the effective number of fully-plastic parameters the network still has: a fully unconstrained parameter contributes 1, a fully frozen parameter contributes 0, and partially constrained parameters contribute frac-tionally. Unlike the locked fraction, this metric is threshold-free and gives a continuous measure of how much usable plastic capacity the optimizer has access to at any point in training. A.5 EXTENDED LONG -HORIZON STRESS TEST : 100-TASK PERMUTED MNIST Figure 6 reports four metrics over training for the static and NORACL conditions: (a) average accuracy across all seen tasks, (b) hidden layer-1 locked fraction LockedFrac 1, (c) hidden layer-2 locked fraction LockedFrac 2, and (d) effective plastic parameter count N eff plastic . Across all four panels, a consistent picture emerges: static networks of any size undergo monotonic plasticity exhaustion, which larger initial capacity can delay but not remove, whereas NORACL counteracts this trend through incremental growth. In panel (a), all three static baselines degrade over time, with smaller networks collapsing faster. NORACL achieves the highest final average accuracy, including relative to the architecture-matched 75 × 32 control whose final layer widths closely match its own. This comparison is particularly informative: the 75 × 32 model benefits early from having its full capacity available from the start, but is later overtaken as its parameters accumulate Fisher impor-tance. NORACL’s advantage therefore lies not in ending with a larger architecture, but in the temporal distribution of capacity : new neurons enter the network with ˜F = 0 and are fully plastic precisely when additional capacity is needed. Panels (b) and (c) show that all static networks converge toward high locked fractions, with smaller networks saturating earlier and more severely. NORACL maintains the lowest locked fraction in the first hidden layer despite starting from the smallest initial width, and remains competitive or lower in the second layer as well. Because NORACL’s layer widths are themselves increasing over time, a relatively flat locked fraction implies a replenishment dynamic: fresh plastic parameters are being added at roughly the rate existing ones become constrained. No static architecture can exhibit this behavior, since its parameter set is fixed from the start. Panel (d) helps explain why NORACL can outperform static networks even when their final effective plastic counts are similar. By the end of the stream, NORACL and the 75 × 32 baseline retain comparable values of N eff plastic , yet NORACL attains higher accuracy. A natural interpretation is that the composition of this plasticity differs. In the static 75 × 32 network, the surviving plastic parameters are residual survivors of a long consolidation process and therefore carry accumulated Fisher from many tasks. In NORACL, part of the plasticity budget comes from neurons that entered with ˜F = 0 later in the stream and remained fully plastic until subsequent consolidation. Thus, not all plastic parameters are equally plastic: fresh capacity appears more useful than residual capacity, which helps explain the remaining accuracy gap. A minor limitation here is that the locked-fraction diagnostic depends on a cutoff on ηeff /η (we use 0.1). While we have verified that the qualitative gap between NORACL and the static baseline is robust across thresholds, it should be read as a diagnostic trend rather than a precise measure. The effective-plastic-parameter count N eff plastic , on the 20 Preprint. Table 3: Ablation study of initialization strategies and growth triggers across continual learning benchmarks.                                                                                                                                                                                                   

> Ablation Variant Permuted MNIST Rotated MNIST Binary Split MNIST Params Acc. (%) Params Acc. (%) Params Acc. (%) Full model -49.2k 79.4 ±0.7 42.9k 74.9 ±1.7 23.3k 73.9 ±2.5 Initializations
> Random init 47.4k ±2.6 65.9 ±2.5 36.0k ±1.3 67.6 ±3.6 40.9k ±9.2 71.5 ±4.8 He init 64.3k ±2.4 76.1 ±0.8 38.0k ±1.3 71.0 ±1.7 34.0k ±6.6 71.1 ±3.8 Xavier init 64.2k ±5.8 76.5 ±1.2 38.6k ±1.7 70.0 ±2.6 35.7k ±6.3 71.5 ±3.2 Null-space init 58.0k ±2.8 78.1 ±0.9 41.8k ±2.8 72.6 ±3.6 N/A aN/A a
> Zero init 39.3k ±3.3 63.0 ±3.7 35.4k ±0.8 67.7 ±2.4 31.3k ±3.4 70.7 ±3.8
> Growth Triggers
> ED only 356.8k ±7.2 81.2 ±0.4 114k ±6.2 72.8 ±2.4 78.2k ±20.6 70.7 ±2.9
> Fsat only 46.3k ±2.8 74.2 ±1.1 37.2k ±1.3 71.5 ±2.6 30.7k ±4.3 70.0 ±2.8 Fixed growth / task 75.6k 53.8 ±0.6 47.6k 62.3 ±1.2 29.8k 59.0 ±0.3 Scheduled growth {0,5,15 ,25 }93.3k 77.5 ±0.2 54.9k 71.4 ±2.7 36.8k 61.4 ±0.5 Loss-based 42.2k ±1.5 74.4 ±2.1 35.5k ±1.8 70.6 ±2.3 16k ±270.9 ±3.4
> aNull-space initialization was infeasible in 4/5 seeds on Binary Split MNIST because the available null-space dimension was exhausted during growth. Results are therefore not reported as a 5-seed mean ±std.

other hand, is threshold-free by construction and could be read as the primary plasticity diagnostic, with LockedFrac ℓ

serving as an interpretable per-layer breakdown. A.6 ABLATION STUDIES 

NORACL’s growth mechanism must answer three questions at each expansion event: when to grow (is the current architecture insufficient?), where to grow (which layer needs additional capacity?), and how to grow (how should the new neurons be initialized?). The first two questions are addressed jointly by the growth trigger (Section 3.1), which combines the spectral effective dimension (ED) signal with the Fisher saturation ( Fsat ) signal; the third is addressed by the QR-based orthogonal initialization (Section 3.2). We ablate each component in turn, reporting results on all three benchmarks in Table 3. A.6.1 GROWTH TRIGGERS : W HEN AND WHERE TO GROW 

The joint ED ∧ Fsat trigger is designed so that each signal compensates for the other’s failure mode. The ED signal detects representational saturation (all neurons producing linearly independent features), but it can fire spuriously due to transient batch effects or optimization dynamics unrelated to genuine capacity needs. The Fsat signal confirms that the layer’s parameters are genuinely being relied upon by the current task, but on its own it cannot determine which 

layer needs expansion. Table 3 confirms that both signals are necessary and that neither alone is sufficient. 

ED only: Removing the Fisher confirmation causes dramatic over-growth. On Permuted MNIST, the network in-flates to 356 .8k parameters, over 7× the size of the full NORACL model ( 49 .2k), for a marginal accuracy gain of 

1.8% (81 .2% vs. 79 .4% ). On Rotated MNIST the over-growth is similarly severe ( 114 k vs. 42 .9k) with lower accu-racy ( 72 .8% vs. 74 .9% ), and on Binary Split MNIST the ED-only network grows to 78 .2k with high variance ( ±20 .6k) and again underperforms the full model ( 70 .7% vs. 73 .9% ). The pattern is clear, without Fisher confirmation the ED signal fires on transient saturation events that do not reflect genuine capacity needs, producing networks that are waste-fully large and, on benchmarks with shared task structure, actually less accurate because the excess neurons dilute the gradient signal and complicate consolidation. 

Fsat only: Removing the ED signal produces the opposite failure mode: the network grows conservatively but insufficiently. On Permuted MNIST, the Fsat -only model reaches only 74 .2% at 46 .3k parameters, compared to 

79 .4% at 49 .2k for the full model, a 5.2% accuracy deficit for a comparable parameter budget. The reason is that Fsat 

alone cannot determine which layer is the bottleneck: Fisher importance accumulates in all layers simultaneously as tasks progress, so the signal fires indiscriminately rather than targeting the layer whose representational capacity is actually saturated. The result is growth that is poorly allocated across layers. On Rotated and Binary Split MNIST the pattern is consistent: Fsat -only underperforms the full model by 3.5% and 3.9% , respectively. 

Heuristic triggers: We additionally compare against two heuristic growth strategies that do not use either principled signal. Fixed growth per task adds a constant number of neurons to every layer at the start of each task. This produces 21 Preprint. severe accuracy degradation across all benchmarks ( 53 .8% on Permuted MNIST, 62 .3% on Rotated, 59 .0% on Binary Split), confirming that undirected growth is actively harmful. The network wastes capacity on layers that do not need it and disrupts learned representations through poorly timed expansion. Scheduled growth adds neurons only at predetermined task indices {0, 5, 15 , 25 }. This performs better than fixed growth ( 77 .5% on Permuted) because growth events are less frequent and concentrated early, but it still underperforms the full NORACL model on all three benchmarks and, crucially, requires the practitioner to choose a schedule which reintroduces the kind of oracle knowledge that glsnoracl is designed to eliminate. 

Loss-based trigger: We also compare against a loss-based growth trigger that expands the network when validation performance on the current task plateaus over a short epoch window. This type of heuristic has precedent in earlier expansion-based continual learning methods such as Yoon et al. (2017), where growth is triggered after selective retraining encounters a loss plateau. However, as discussed in Section 2, such criteria conflate multiple causes such as genuine representational saturation or temporary optimization slowdown. In contrast, NORACL’s joint ED ∧ Fsat 

trigger is designed to detect a more specific failure mode, namely that a particular layer is simultaneously saturated in its representation and too constrained to be repurposed. A.6.2 INITIALIZATION : H OW TO GROW 

When new neurons are added, their fan-in weights must be initialized in a way that (i) does not disrupt existing representations (zero fan-out ensures this by construction, Section 3.2), and (ii) gives the new neurons diverse, non-redundant input directions so that they can quickly specialize for the arriving task. We compare QR-based orthogonal initialization (Saxe et al., 2013) against five alternatives: standard random normal initialization, He initialization (He et al., 2015), Xavier initialization (Glorot & Bengio, 2010), null-space initialization and zero initialization. 

QR orthogonal initialization achieves the highest accuracy on Rotated MNIST ( 74 .9% ) and Binary Split MNIST (73 .9% ), and is competitive on Permuted MNIST ( 79 .4% ), while consistently producing the most compact architec-tures. The key advantage is that mutually orthogonal fan-in vectors ensure that new neurons begin from maximally diverse input directions, avoiding redundancy and enabling rapid differentiation during training. This is particularly important in continual learning, where the training window per task is short and newly added neurons must specialize quickly before consolidation begins to constrain them. 

He and Xavier initialization both achieve reasonable accuracy on Permuted MNIST ( 76 .1% and 76 .5% , respec-tively) but produce substantially larger networks ( 64 .3k and 64 .2k vs. 49 .2k for QR). The explanation is that these methods draw fan-in vectors independently from a distribution calibrated for variance preservation, but do not enforce orthogonality between them. As a result, some new neurons start from near-redundant directions and fail to differen-tiate within the training window, triggering the growth signal again at the next evaluation and producing unnecessary subsequent expansion. On Rotated and Binary Split MNIST, the accuracy gap widens ( 4-5% below QR) and the variance across seeds increases, indicating less stable learning dynamics. 

Random initialization performs worst among the non-trivial methods ( 65 .9% on Permuted), with both lower ac-curacy and higher cross-seed variance. Without scale calibration, the magnitude of the new fan-in weights is poorly matched to the existing network, leading to gradient-scale mismatches that slow integration of the new neurons. 

Null-space initialization where newly added neurons are initialized in directions orthogonal to the span of the existing incoming weights of the grown layer, performs reasonably well on Permuted MNIST ( 78 .1 ± 0.9% ) and Rotated MNIST ( 72 .6 ± 3.6% ), placing it closer to QR initialization. Conceptually, this is an appealing alternative to QR initialization, however, it is not guaranteed to remain feasible throughout training. Its availability depends on the remaining dimension of the layer’s null space, which can shrink or vanish as the layer grows and approaches full rank. This limitation becomes visible on Binary Split MNIST, where the hidden layers remain relatively small and the available null-space dimension was exhausted in 4/5 seeds, preventing a comparable 5-seed estimate from being reported. We therefore view null-space initialization as an informative ablation that supports the broader importance of novel fan-in directions, but also as evidence that QR is the more robust practical choice. 

Zero initialization is a useful control. Setting both fan-in and fan-out weights to zero makes growth trivially function-preserving, but the new neurons are permanently inert, i.e. they receive no gradient signal (because their activations are identically zero) and therefore contributes less to task learning. This confirms that the accuracy gains of NORACL over static baselines are indeed attributable to the learned contributions of the added neurons, not merely to the act of adding parameters. 22 Preprint. These ablation results confirm that all three components of NORACL’s growth mechanism, the ED signal, the Fisher confirmation, and the QR initialization, contribute meaningfully to its performance. The ED signal provides layer-specific capacity monitoring, the Fisher signal prevents spurious over-growth and orthogonal initialization ensures that newly added neurons integrate efficiently within the short per-task training window. Removing or replacing any one of these components degrades either accuracy, parameter efficiency, or both. 23