Title: Optimal Bounds for the k-Disjoint Paths Problem

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.14902v1

Published Time: Fri, 15 May 2026 01:33:00 GMT

Number of Pages: 166

Markdown Content:
# Optimal Bounds for the k-Disjoint Paths Problem ∗

Dario Cavallaro † Maximilian Gorsky ‡ Stephan Kreutzer †

Dimitrios M. Thilikos § Sebastian Wiederrecht ¶

Abstract 

The Graph Minors Series of Robertson and Seymour forms the foundation of algo-rithmic structural graph theory, yielding fixed-parameter algorithms for problems such as Disjoint Paths , Rooted Minor Checking , and Folio . A key ingredient behind the fixed-parameter tractability of the k-Disjoint Paths problem is the irrelevant-vertex technique, which is a key mechanism in a wide range of algorithms. The strength of this machinery is governed by the Vital Linkage Theorem and the so-called Linkage Function ℓ. However, despite its foundational role, the best known bounds on the Linkage Function have remained enormous and are only implicitly understood. The quantitative bounds behind these results have traditionally been so large that the resulting algorithms are often regarded as “galactic.” We show that this view is overly pessimistic and can be overturned in an essentially optimal way. Our main result is a general irrelevant-vertex theorem for a common generalisation of k-Disjoint Paths and Rooted Minor Checking for graphs of size at most d, commonly called the (k, d )-Folio problem. Specifically, we show that for any graph G in which the k terminals are chosen from some set R, if the treewidth of G exceeds β(k, b, d ) ∈ 2poly (b+d) · poly (k) then we can locate an irrelevant vertex for the (k, d )-Folio problem. Here, the quantity b is the bidimensionality of R, that is, the largest b for which a (b × b)-grid minor in G can be rooted on R. Thus, the exponential component of the irrelevant-vertex threshold is driven by the bound on the bidimensionality, rather than by the number of terminals, and we argue that this dependence is essentially optimal up to polynomial factors. As a consequence, the Linkage Function satisfies ℓ(k) ∈ 2poly (k). Beyond its structural significance, our result yields improved parameter dependencies for algorithms for Disjoint Paths 

and Rooted Minor Checking , and provides a radical quantitative improvement for a broad range of graph-minor-based algorithmic frameworks. 

> ∗Maximilian Gorsky was supported by the Institute for Basic Science (IBS-R029-C1). Dimitrios M. Thilikos was supported by French National Research Agency (ANR) under project GODASse ANR-24-CE48-4377 and under the France 2030 grant reference number ANR-24-RRII-0002 operated by the Inria Quadrant Program. Emails of the authors: d.cavallaro@tu-berlin.de, m.gorsky@pm.me, stephan.kreutzer@tu-berlin.de, sedthilk@thilikos.info, wiederrecht@kaist.ac.kr.
> †Technische Universität Berlin, Germany.
> ‡Discrete Mathematics Group, Institute for Basic Science (IBS), Daejeon, South Korea.
> §LIRMM, Univ Montpellier, CNRS, Montpellier, France.
> ¶School of Computing, KAIST, Daejeon, South Korea.
> arXiv:2605.14902v1 [math.CO] 14 May 2026

# Contents 

1 Introduction 1

1.1 The algorithmics of Graph Minors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11.2 Our results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31.3 Proof overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 81.4 Organisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12 

2 The Graph Minor Algorithm 13 

2.1 A small set of preliminary definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13 2.2 The folio problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15 

3 Preliminaries 17 

3.1 General definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18 3.2 Definitions from Graph Minors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20 3.3 Manipulating vital linkages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25 3.4 Colorful graphs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26 3.5 The Local Structure Theorem for annotated graphs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26 

4 Taming linkages in surfaces 27 

4.1 Preparing the linkage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27 4.2 Linkages in graphs on a surface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30 4.3 Proof of Theorem 4.10 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35 

5 Linking vortices up to some gap 41 

5.1 Linked linear decompositions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42 5.2 Kissing vortices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44 5.3 Linking stacked vortices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48 

6 The apex-free case 54 

6.1 Exhausting the instance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55 6.2 Taming the instance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62 6.3 Controlling vortices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73 6.4 Taming simple loops . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 87 6.5 Controlling homotopic links and non-simple loops . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 90 6.6 Embedding the instance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 91 

7 Eliminating apices and building nests 95 

7.1 Joining close vortices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 96 7.2 Pumping up the representativity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 99 7.3 Building nests in renditions with large distances and high representativity . . . . 103 7.4 Reduction to graphs without apices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104 

8 What to do with a clique? 108 9 The Vital Linkage Theorem 109 10 Tackling the Folio Problem 111 

10.1 Quickly combing an annulus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 111 10.2 Redrawing topological minors models in partially disc-embedded graphs . . . . . 120 10.3 Combing a topological minor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 120 

11 An irrelevant vertex for folio 130 

11.1 Homogeneous walls . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 130 11.2 Avoiding the centre of a homogeneous wall . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 134 11.3 Quickly finding a good flat wall . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 141 11.4 Proof of Theorem 2.5 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 144 

12 Two lower bounds for the irrelevant vertex technique 146 

12.1 Optimality of Theorem 1.2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 148 12.2 Optimality of Theorem 1.3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 149 

13 Conclusion 152 

13.1 Résumé . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 152 13.2 Bidimensionality, annotation irrelevancy, and more . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 153 13.3 Other research directions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 154 

References 157 1 Introduction 

The k-Disjoint Paths and H-Minor Checking problems are among the central algorithmic problems in graph theory. In Graph Minors XIII [RS95], Robertson and Seymour showed that both k-Disjoint Paths , for fixed k, and H-Minor Checking , for a fixed graph H, 

can be solved in cubic time. The fact that these algorithmic results originate from the Graph Minors Series is not a coincidence. Rather, in this series Robertson and Seymour introduced a structural–algorithmic paradigm – built on tree-decompositions, excluded-grid dualities, and the irrelevant-vertex technique that has profoundly influenced modern graph algorithms, particularly in parameterized complexity [FL88, DHK05, Thi12, LSZ20]. In this sense, the significance of the Graph Minors Series extends far beyond a single routing problem. It established a general methodology for designing parameterized and structural algorithms (see [LSZ20]). 

1.1 The algorithmics of Graph Minors 

From the outset, however, there was a striking gap between qualitative solvability and quantitative efficiency. Already in 1987, David Johnson, in “ The NP-Completeness Column: An Ongoing Guide ” [Joh87], emphasised that while Robertson and Seymour’s results were a major theoretical breakthrough, they were far from being practically applicable. He writes: “For any instance 

G = ( V, E ) that one could fit into the known universe, one would easily prefer |V |70 to even constant time, if that constant had to be one of Robertson and Seymour’s” . Moreover, Johnson’s back-of-the-envelope reconstruction of just one structural constant in Graph Minors V [RS86] already illustrates the scale of the problem. Unwinding his estimate leads to a quantity roughly of the form 

2↑2222↑2↑Θ( r)

where 2↑r denotes a tower of r twos. Thus, the difficulty is not merely a matter of implementation or low-order polynomial factors: the hidden constants arise from the structural theorems themselves. In a later retrospective, Lokshtanov, Saurabh, and Zehavi expressed as follows: “While Parameterized Complexity does provide an extremely rich toolkit for designing efficient parameterized algorithms, one of its foundations and still most powerful tools yields algorithms that are wildly impractical. ” [LSZ20]. Indeed, the original Graph Minors dependencies are enormous, and the actual capacity for these theorems to come with reasonable bounds has largely remained opaque until recently [Chu15b, CC16, KTW18, KTW21, CT21, GSW25, GSW26]. In particular, the constants governing the irrelevant-vertex machinery are not merely large, but also only implicitly constructible and deeply intertwined with the more arcane structural results deeper within the theory. Therefore making the Graph Minors paradigm efficient requires more than just faster implementations of existing arguments. Instead it requires precise control and improvement of the structural thresholds that drive the entire framework. This supports Mike Fellows’ 1989 prescient appraisal: “it is likely to be many years before the practical significance of Robertson-Seymour theorems is fully understood ” [Fel89]. 1The Linkage Function. Given a graph G, a linkage in G is a set L of pairwise vertex-disjoint paths, and it is vital if its paths span all vertices of G and there is no other linkage in G joining the same pairs of endpoints (see [RS09]). A central structural threshold in the Graph Minors Series is the Linkage Function . It stems from a theorem of Robertson and Seymour in Graph Minors XXI [RS09], which states that every graph containing a vital linkage has treewidth bounded by a function of the number of endpoints of that linkage. This result lies at the heart of the celebrated irrelevant-vertex technique : Given an instance of the k-Disjoint Paths problem, when the treewidth of the graph is sufficiently large, one can delete a non-terminal vertex without affecting the outcome of the instance. By iterating this reduction, one eventually obtains an equivalent instance of bounded treewidth, that is amenable to dynamic programming. This paradigm lies at the heart of Robertson and Seymour’s algorithm for Disjoint Paths , the more general folio machinery for rooted pattern detection, and Minor Checking as we discuss below, as well as numerous subsequent developments in structural algorithmics, parameterized complexity, and meta-algorithmics [RS95, DHK05, RS09, RS12, Thi12, LSZ20, GST23c, SSS +24, FGS +25, SST25]. The main contribution of this paper is that this core graph minors mechanism can in fact be made quantitatively reasonable. We prove an optimal estimate of the Linkage Function, up to polynomial dependencies in the relevant parameters. As a consequence, we obtain a drastically improved parameter dependence for Disjoint Paths , Rooted Minor Checking , Folio , and a broad range of algorithms based on the irrelevant-vertex technique. In this sense, we turn the algorithmic core of the Graph Minors Algorithm into a controlled tool, by optimally taming its “galactic-scale” behaviour. 

Disjoint Paths problem. An instance of the k-Disjoint Paths problem consists of a graph G

together with a pattern τ = {(si, t i) | i ∈ { 1, . . . , k }} of terminal pairs. The problem is to decide whether G contains a linkage consisting of k paths whose pairs of endpoints agree with τ .In Graph Minors XIII [RS95], Robertson and Seymour gave an algorithm for the k-Disjoint Paths problem running in f (k) · | G|3 time 1 for some function f : N → N. At a high level, the irrelevant-vertex technique is applied as follows. The algorithm proceeds by repeatedly identifying and deleting irrelevant vertices, that is, vertices whose removal preserves equivalence of the instance. More precisely, if the input graph contains a large clique-minor, then one can find an irrelevant vertex inside a model of this clique. Otherwise, assuming that large clique-minors are excluded and that G has sufficiently large treewidth, the graph contains a sufficiently large flat wall. Robertson and Seymour further proved in [RS95] that the central vertices of such a flat wall are irrelevant . Thus removing these vertices again yields an equivalent instance. Iterating this reduction eventually produces an equivalent instance of bounded treewidth, which can then be solved by standard dynamic programming techniques. Although the algorithm of [RS95] outlined above is conceptually simple, its correctness hinges on a highly non-trivial structural claim: the central vertices of a sufficiently large flat wall are indeed irrelevant for the instance. Equivalently, every linkage that passes through such a vertex can be rerouted and replaced by one with the same pattern that avoids it. A proof of this statement only appeared later, in Graph Minors XXI [RS09], where Robertson and Seymour established it         

> 1We write |G|as a shorthand for |V(G)|and || G|| as a shorthand for |E(G)|.

2through a long and intricate sequence of arguments building on many of the structural results developed in the intervening volumes and combining their large parametric dependencies. We say that a linkage L is a T -linkage if T is the set of endpoints of its paths. 

Proposition 1.1 (Robertson and Seymour [RS09]) . There is a function ℓ : N → N such that if a graph G has a vital T -linkage L, then the treewidth of G is bounded by ℓ(|T |).This function ℓ is the aforementioned Linkage Function . In view of the above, the algorithm of [RS95] is correct and runs in O(f (k) · | G|3) time for some function f (k) intrinsically depending on ℓ(k). The polynomial part of this running time was improved to quadratic in [KKR12], and more recently an almost-linear-time algorithm was given in [KPS24a]. As for the parametric dependence f, any improvement in the dependencies of the algorithm of [RS95] relies mainly on upper bounds for the Linkage Function ℓ in Proposition 1.1. 

Improving the Linkage Function As we already mentioned, the estimation of ℓ emerging from an analysis of the Graph Minors Series is colossal. An important improvement appeared in [KW10], where Kawarabayashi and Wollan gave a new proof of Proposition 1.1 with better dependence on k. While they do not state any concrete estimate for their bound on ℓ, it appears to be no better than triple exponential in k [AKK +17], which remains huge, though still much better than colossal. Another line of research has aimed to improve the dependence in Proposition 1.1 for particular graph classes. In the planar case, Adler, Kolliopoulos, Krause, Lokshtanov, Saurabh, and Thilikos proved in [AKK +17] that ℓ(k) ∈ 2O(k). Conversely, they showed in [AKK +11] (see also [AK19]) that exponential growth of ℓ is unavoidable even for planar graphs, by giving a suitable counterexample (see Figure 32). Subsequently, Mazoit proved in [Maz13] that an exponential bound likewise holds for graphs embeddable in any fixed surface. His approach differs from that of [AKK +17] and builds on results of Geelen, Huynh, and Richter in [GHR18], who had earlier obtained bounds on ℓ for graphs embeddable in surfaces. 

1.2 Our results 

In this paper we prove that ℓ(k) ∈ 2poly (k). In fact, we give a much more refined bound on the Linkage Function. To state it, we need the notion of bidimensionality. Given a graph G and a set of vertices R ⊆ V (G), we refer to the pair (G, R ) as an annotated graph .For a given graph H, we say that H is an R-minor of G if there is a collection S = {Sv | v ∈ V (H)}

of pairwise vertex-disjoint connected 2 subsets of V (G), each containing at least one vertex of R, 

and such that, for every edge xy ∈ E(H), the set Sx ∪ Sy is connected in G. We also work with a stronger version of annotated graphs: A k-rooted graph is a pair (G, R) where R is an ordered multiset of k not necessarily distinct vertices in V (G). Rooted graphs come with a respective notion of rooted minors; we defer the details to Section 2.2. The bidimensionality of R in G, denoted by bidim (G, R ), is the maximum k for which G contains a (k × k)-grid as an R-minor. Note that bidim (G, R ) ≤ √|R|. This parameter was introduced in [TW23, SST25] and intuitively captures the limited structure of a vertex set in a plane graph that lies on a bounded number of faces and translates this into a non-topological definition applicable in general annotated graphs. Our main result is the following.            

> 2A set X⊆V(G)is connected in Gif the induced subgraph G[X]is connected.

3Theorem 1.2. There exists a function β : N2 → N such that, for every annotated graph (G, R ),

if there exists a vital T -linkage for some T ⊆ R in G, then G has treewidth at most β(k, b ),

where k := |T | and b := bidim (G, R ). Moreover, β(k, b ) ∈ poly (k) · 2poly (b).The above shows that the source of the exponential behaviour of the Linkage Function is not the number k of terminals, but rather the extent to which they are “bidimensionally” distributed in G, where this measure is itself bounded by √k. As a simple illustration of Theorem 1.2, consider the following consequence: If G is a graph embedded in the sphere and all k terminals lie in b faces of G, then β(k, b ) ∈ poly (k) · 2poly (b). The same conclusion holds for graphs embedded in any fixed surface, even when the terminals are at a bounded distance from b

faces. Since general graphs do not come equipped with faces in which terminals can be placed, Theorem 1.2 suggests that bidimensionality is the right notion for expressing this phenomenon in full generality. 

From linkages to folios. While the discussion above focused on the k-Disjoint Paths problem, our result holds at a more general level. Already in Graph Minors XIII [RS95], Robertson and Seymour worked in the broader framework of folios, of which k-Disjoint Paths is only a special case. For our purposes, the appropriate abstraction is the (k, d )-Folio problem. Given a rooted graph (G, R), the d-folio of (G, R), denoted by d-folio (G, R), is the set of all rooted graphs of detail at most d which are rooted minors of (G, R), where the detail d sets an upper bound on the number of edges and non-root vertices that may be used in the rooted minors. Notice that every rooted graph (G, R) naturally gives rise to an annotated graph 

(G, R R) by simply forgetting the labels of the multiset R and removing duplicates. This allows us to extend the definition of bidimensionality from annotated to rooted graphs by setting 

bidim (G, R) := bidim (G, R R). Given an annotated graph (G, R ), the (k, d )-folio of (G, R ),

denoted by (k, d )-folio (G, R ) is the union of all d-folios taken over the k-rooted graphs (G, R),

created from any ordered multisubset R of R such that |R| = k. Thus, the folio is a “bounded-complexity summary” of all rooted structures visible from the annotated set. The (k, d )-Folio problem asks us to compute the (k, d )-folio of a given annotated graph (G, R )

while the Rooted d-Folio problem asks for the d-folio of a given rooted graph (G, R). We stress that computing the (k, d )-folio of an annotated graph (G, R ) corresponds to computing 

all d-folios of the rooted graphs with k roots generated by selecting roots from the set R.This perspective is natural for the Graph Minor Algorithm. Irrelevant-vertex arguments in fact do not merely preserve the existence of a specific routing pattern, but rather preserve the entire collection of bounded-detail rooted patterns that remain realisable after each reduction step. At a conceptual level, the (k, d )-Folio problem and its rooted sibling interpolate between several basic tasks. For example, Rooted 0-Folio captures the family of feasible linkage patterns on a terminal set and, in particular, encodes the k-Disjoint Paths problem. When the set of annotated vertices is empty, (0 , d )-Folio expresses the computation of all minors of bounded size, therefore it expresses the Minor Checking problem, asking whether some graph 

G contains some fixed graph H as a minor. More generally, it provides a unified language for routing, rooted minor checking, and bounded-pattern detection in graphs. For this reason, an irrelevant-vertex theorem for folios should be viewed as a genuine strengthening of the classical Vital Linkage Theorem, and it is precisely the natural general form already suggested in Graph Minors XIII [RS95]. 4That the irrelevant-vertex argument applies to folios is shown in Graph Minors XXII [RS12]. The parameter dependence in [RS12] remains enormous, since the result relies heavily on Proposition 1.1 (proved in Graph Minors XXI [RS09]) and on the implied Linkage Function. Our main technical theorem shows that folios admit irrelevant vertices once the treewidth is large relative to an exponential function on the detail parameter and the bidimensionality of the annotated vertices and a polynomial on the number of roots that are chosen from the annotated set. Thus it lifts Theorem 1.2 from linkages to the full collection of bounded-detail rooted patterns. Let (G, R ) be an annotated graph. We say that a vertex v ∈ V (G) \ R is strongly irrelevant for (k, d )-folio (G, R ) if for every ordered multiset R with |R| ≤ k and RR ⊆ R it holds that d-folio (G − v, R) = d-folio (G, R).

Theorem 1.3. There exists a function β : N3 → N such that for every annotated graph (G, R )

with bidim (G, R ) ≤ b, if tw (G) > β (k, b, d ), then there exists a vertex v ∈ V (G) \ R such that v

is strongly irrelevant for (k, d )-folio (G, R ). Moreover, β(k, b, d ) ∈ poly (k) · 2poly (b+d).

At this point, we would like to highlight the following feature of both Theorem 1.2 and The-orem 1.3. In both statements, we impose no upper bound on the size of the annotated set 

R; we require only that its bidimensionality b is bounded. The parameter k only bounds the number of the terminals in the linkage or the size of the R’s in the folio under consideration. Thus, R should be viewed as a “repository” from which the k terminals of T or the multisets R

may be selected. Our combinatorial bound depends polynomially on k, whereas its exponential part depends only on the bidimensionality of this repository R, while the size of R itself may be arbitrarily large. Another key point of Theorem 1.3 arises from our definition of strong irrelevancy: a strongly irrelevant vertex is naturally also irrelevant for the d-folio of any rooted graph (G, R) where R consists of k roots taken from R.Theorem 1.3 yields an algorithm for computing folios: If the graph has treewidth upper bounded by β(k, b, d ), one computes (k, d )-folio (G, R ) via dynamic programming, in 2poly (β(k,b,d )) ·| G| time; otherwise, one deletes an irrelevant vertex and recurses. This gives the following algorithmic application of Theorem 1.3. 

Theorem 1.4. There exists an algorithm that, given a rooted graph (G, R) with bidim (G, R) ≤ b

and |R| ≤ k, computes (d, k )-folio (G, R) in 2poly (k)·2poly (b+d)

· | G|2 time. As bidim (G, R ) ≤ √|R|, we readily obtain the following corollary of Theorem 1.4. 

Corollary 1.5. There exists an algorithm that, given a rooted graph (G, R) where |R| ≤ k, 

computes (k, d )-folio (G, R) in 22poly (k+d)

· | G|2 time. A nice feature of the above is that Theorem 1.4 and Corollary 1.5 also give rise to algorithms that compute the (k, d )-folio of (G, R ), when |R| ≤ k, in 2poly (k)·2poly (b+d)

·| G|2 time or in 22poly (k+d)

·| G|2

time (based on the fact that bidim (G, R ) ≤ √|R|), see Lemma 13.1 and Corollary 13.2. For a discussion on possible extensions of this without demanding |R| ≤ k, see Section 13.2. We emphasise an additional feature of how Theorem 1.3 can be applied to prove Theo-rem 1.4. What the irrelevant vertex argument provides, under the light of Theorem 1.3, is a 2poly (k)·2poly (b+d)

· | G|2 time preprocessing algorithm that transforms an annotated graph 

(G, R ), where bidim (G, R ) ≤ b, into an annotated graph (G′, R ) where for every ordered multiset 5R with |R| ≤ k and RR ⊆ R it holds that d-folio (G′, R) = d-folio (G, R). Notice that this is precisely the definition of v being strongly irrelevant for (k, d )-folio (G, R ). Here the annotated set R is preserved and G′ is an induced subgraph of G with treewidth in poly (k) · 2poly (b+d).Interestingly, this data reduction applies to every ordered multiset R that may be specified 

after the preprocessing. Consequently, one can subsequently compute d-folio (G, R), via dynamic programming, in 2poly (k)·2poly (b+d)

· | G′| time. For an application of this feature, see the paragraph on “meta-folios” of the conclusion section, that is Section 13.3. 

Some consequences and applications. Our results have both structural and algorithmic consequences. The key point is that the complexity is governed not merely by the number of terminals, but more precisely by the bidimensionality of the terminal set. Some applications of this follow below. As already mentioned, the case d = 0 of Theorem 1.4 specialises to the k-Disjoint Paths 

problem and yields a 

2poly (k)·2poly (b)

· | G|2

time algorithm for k-Disjoint Paths , where b = bidim (G, T ) ≤ √k for the terminal set T .Even in this special case, no better parametric dependence is known beyond the galactic bounds stemming from the Graph Minors Series and the still enormous – and not explicitly specified – bounds arising from the Linkage Function estimates in [KW10]. For planar graphs, single-exponential bounds were obtained recently in [LMP +20, COO23] and kernelization algorithms have been given in [WZ23]. As we discuss below, our bounds for the Linkage Function in Theorem 1.2 are asymptotically optimal. This implies that, in order to improve the presented running time for the k-Disjoint Paths problem, one would need to expand on the techniques from [LMP +20, COO23] which avoid explicit dynamic programming on tree-decompositions. Another natural specialisation is Rooted Minor Checking . This problem asks, given a rooted graph (G, R) and a rooted graph (H, T ), whether (G, R) contains (H, T ) as a rooted minor. Note that this is just a membership query to the folio of (G, R). Therefore, Theorem 1.4 yields an algorithm for Rooted Minor Checking on general graphs with running time 

2poly (k)·2poly (b+d)

· | G|2,

where b := bidim (G, R) and d is the detail of (H, T ). This yields, for the first time, an algorithm for rooted minor checking with reasonable parametric dependencies. The special case k = 0 

gives a 

22poly (|H|)

· | G|2

time algorithm for deciding whether a graph G contains a graph H as a minor. We again emphasise that, to the best of our knowledge, this marks the first time an explicit running time for this problem can be stated. In our view, this goes a long way toward dispelling the reputation of graph minors algorithms as being “galactic-scale”. We now consider a refinement of the main meta-algorithmic consequence of the Graph Minors Series. A graph parameter is a function p mapping graphs to non-negative integers and it is 

minor-monotone if its value on a graph is no smaller than its value on each of its minors. Given such a parameter p, we define Obs (p, k ) as the set of all minor-minimal graphs G with p(G) > k .6The seminal result of the Graph Minors Series is that graphs are well-quasi-ordered under the minor relation [RS04]. This implies that, for every minor-monotone parameter p, there exists a function fp : N → N such that for every k ∈ N, every graph in Obs (p, k ) has size at most fp(k). Since the proof that graphs are well-quasi-ordered by minors is non-constructive (see [FRS87, KR20]), there is no a priori general mechanism for constructing the function fp

from a description of the parameter p.In [FL88], Fellows and Langston revealed the meta-algorithmic potential of the Graph Minors Series (along with its constructibility limitations). We refine this line of reasoning as follows. Suppose that, for some particular p, we are in position to know some fixed upper bound on 

fp(k) and, moreover, p is exponential-time computable, i.e., there is an algorithm computing 

p(G) in 2poly (|G|) time. We directly have an algorithm to compute Obs (p, k ) in 2poly (fp(k)) ,

since there are 2O

> ((fp(k)) 2)

graphs in Obs (p, k ) each of size at most fp(k). By the definition of 

Obs (p, k ), for every k and every graph G, one can decide whether p(G) ≤ k by checking whether 

G contains some graph in Obs (p, k ) as a minor. Therefore, the check whether G contains some graph in Obs (p, k ) can be done in time 2O

> ((fp(k)) 2)

· 22poly (fp(k)) 

· | G|2, by our results. We obtain the following. 

Theorem 1.6. For every exponential-time computable minor-monotone parameter p, there is an algorithm that, given a graph G, decides whether p(G) ≤ k in time 22poly (fp(k)) 

· | G|2.

We view Theorem 1.6 as a refinement of the main algorithmic consequence of the fact that graphs are well-quasi-ordered by the minor relation, proved in [RS04]. The significance of the above statements extends beyond the two endpoint problems discussed above, i.e., Disjoint Paths and Minor Checking . Folios are reusable summaries of bounded-detail rooted structure. Consequently, any algorithm that repeatedly asks whether one of a bounded number of rooted patterns occurs in a graph can benefit from faster folio computation. This includes rooted routing tasks and algorithms that use bounded rooted minors as certificates or obstructions. More generally, every algorithmic framework whose reduction phase proceeds by finding an irrelevant vertex in a big clique-minor or in a big flat wall inherits its quantitative behaviour from the same threshold. Prominent examples of such results whose (meta-)parametric dependencies can be improved using our bounds include finding embeddings in R3 [KKM12], modification problems [FLP +19, SST22, BST23, SST23, MSST24], as well as combinatorial upper bounds to minor obstructions [SST22, PPTW24b]. 

Optimality of our bounds. We also show that our upper bounds are essentially optimal. The lower bounds of [AKK +11, AK19] already show that the exponential dependence in Theorem 1.2 is unavoidable, even in planar graphs. Moreover, as we show in Section 12, this phenomenon is not merely a consequence of having many terminals. The same construction also yields an exponential lower bound when the parameter is expressed in terms of bidimensionality. More precisely, if Theorem 1.2 holds for some threshold function β, then necessarily β(k, b ) ∈ 2Ω( √b).We prove a similar optimality statement for Theorem 1.3, indicating that the contribution of the detail d is essentially optimal. In this case, the argument relies on enriching the counterexample of [AKK +11, AK19] with many pairwise non-isomorphic bounded-degree gadgets of very small size, obtained via asymptotic enumeration of regular graphs. This implies that any threshold function β as the one in Theorem 1.3 must satisfy β(k, b, d ) ∈ 2Ω( d log log d 

> log d
> )

.71.3 Proof overview 

There are two major steps towards our proof of Theorem 1.4. At its heart lies the general bound on the Linkage Function and thus the proof of Theorem 1.2, which on its own spans several sections. Our ultimate goal for this part can be intuitively understood as follows: if there exists an annotated graph (G, R ) admitting a vital R-linkage L with b := bidim (G, R ), then there exists an annotated graph (G′, R ′) admitting a vital R′-linkage L′, such that bidim (G′, R ′) ∈

poly (|L| ) · 2poly (b) and G′ can be embedded in some surface Σ of genus g(b) admitting h(b) holes with g(b), c (b) ∈ poly (b) such that the terminals T ′ are embedded on the boundary components of Σ. Given such an instance (G′, R ′) together with L′, we show that the treewidth of (G′, R ′)

must be bounded in poly (|R′| + b′), where b′ := bidim (G′, R ′). As a consequence of the above we have b′ ∈ poly (|R|) · 2poly (b), concluding the proof of Theorem 1.2. In a second step we leverage Theorem 1.2 to derive an algorithmic version of Theorem 1.3. This involves another two-step process. First, we make use of Theorem 1.2 directly to prove an analogue of the Annulus Combing Lemma of Golovach, Stamoulis, and Thilikos [GST23a], with better bounds, and respecting the bidimensionality of the terminals. Later, we leverage this lemma to show that minor models of partially disc-embedded graphs may be redrawn inside a large flat wall – given certain homogeneity assumptions. This hues close to a lemma by Baste, Sau, and Thilikos [BST23]. However, their result focussed solely on the detail and does not analyse the role of the terminals, requiring more work from our side again. Finally, our result may then be combined with a recent homogenisation technique by Gorsky, Seweryn, and Wiederrecht [GSW26] in order to complete the proof of Theorem 1.3. We start with a sketch of the proof of Theorem 1.2. Let (G, R ), L, and b be as above. Assume, towards a contradiction, that G has larger treewidth than β1.2(k, b ) where k := |L| .As a first step, we use standard machinery of Robertson and Seymour [RS95] together with recent results of Protopapas, Thilikos, and Wiederrecht [PTW25] on R-minors to prove that G

cannot admit a clique of order poly (b) as a minor, as otherwise L was not vital. 

Hunting down the apex. Applying the main result of [GPW26] (see Proposition 3.8), we use the absence of a clique to derive the existence of a surface Σ of genus at most poly (b), an apex set 

A of size |A| ∈ poly (b) such that the graph (G − A, R \ A) admits a so-called “almost embedding” with ≤ poly (b) regions – called the “vortices” – that exhibit non-planar behaviour – called 

depth – controlled in poly (b) and a “flat” (think of it as having “planar behaviour”) β(k, b )-wall 

W, such that all the vertices in R \ A are part of vortices. Note that since L was vital for G, 

there is a natural vital linkage L′ in G′ := G − A obtained from L by deleting A, where each vertex in A may result in two new terminals in L′. Thus, L′ is a vital R′-linkage in G − A

where |R′| ≤ | R| + 2 |A|. Further b′ := bidim (G − A, R ′) ∈ O(b). However, note that the newly introduced terminals may not be part of vortices and it is a priori unclear where they are located with respect to the wall W .Thus we start by finding a large subwall W ′ of W disjoint from these terminals and declaring each spot in which such a new terminal sits to be a new vortex, introducing at most poly (b)

new vortices. We then need to find disjoint sets of poly (b) concentric cycles around our vortices while maintaining a sizeable subwall of W ′ disjoint from these cycles. Here we build on ideas of Diestel, Kawarabayashi, Müller, and Wollan [DKMW12]. However, their techniques may introduce new apices outside of the existing vortices, further creating even more vortices, and 8thus threatening a loop. We therefore need to significantly alter their approach: we accomplish this by directly manipulating the surface and the almost embedding instead of deleting parts of the graph, while maintaining our bounds and the vitality of the linkage. 

Taming vortices. Given the set of poly (b) vortices we need to “tame” the behaviour of G

in these regions. Here we build on ideas pioneered by Huynh [Huy09] and refined by Diestel et al. [DKMW12], who take a vortex of depth at most d and (d + 1) concentric cycles tightly around it and “push” the cycles into the vortex as deeply as possible, where the bounded depth guarantees that at least one cycle will remain completely outside of that region. One then extends the vortex to the disc bounded by said cycle. Unfortunately, we cannot use these results directly, since they again introduce apices that we cannot afford and require that vortices come with (d + 1) “private” concentric cycles, such that no vortex is part of the disc bounded by a cycle of another vortex. We cannot guarantee this easily without introducing an exponential dependency on our parameters. Fortunately we do not need too. Expanding on the techniques in their proof, we show that if every vortex – call them c1, . . . , c m – comes with a family Ci of poly (d) many concentric cycles such that either all of the cycles Ci lie in the disc bounded by some cycle of Cj or are completely disjoint from it, then an “apex-less” variation of the above procedure still works. The main idea is that, if an untamed vortex c1 together with its concentric cycles C1 is completely contained in the disc of some cycle of C2 say, then when we tame c2 by pushing the (d + 1) closest cycles in C2 into c2, the resulting set of tight cycles will never interfere with most of the cycles in C1, as otherwise we could deflect them resulting in tighter cycles and in particular, the cycles will never penetrate c1. Thus the vortex c1 will be either completely absorbed by the vortex c2

or, after taming c2, it will still be outside of the vortex and have most of the cycles of C1 left in order to tame c1 in the future. That way, we can tame our vortices by guaranteeing only 

poly (d) ∈ poly (b) cycles around each of them, which the previous step of the proof provides. Note that after linking the vortices we are still embedded with up to poly (b) many vortices, although some vortices might have been swallowed by others along the way. 

No apex, no cry. We are left with an instance (G, T ), L embedded on a surface Σ of genus 

g(b) with h(b) holes, at most poly (b) vortices, all of them tame, and a set of β(k, b ) many concentric cycles C coming from the wall W . Building on ideas of [RS09, CKK24] we study the structure of vortices in the presence of vital linkages, proving that the vital linkage interacts with vortices in a very restrictive way. Robertson and Seymour [RS09] essentially prove that either a tamed vortex has a short boundary or most of the vital linkage must be contained in the vortex. However, the main technical lemma of their proof already produces a doubly exponential bound on the required length of the vortex that is involved. Thus we need to avoid this. Denote by S(L) the set of all the maximal subpaths of L with endpoints in vortices that are otherwise disjoint from vortices. We then prove that given a disc ∆( S1, S 2) ⊆ Σ, where S1, S 2

are disjoint regions on the boundary of some vortices (possibly the same), such that ∆( S1, S 2) is otherwise disjoint from all vortices, ∆( S1, S 2) cannot contain more than poly (k) · 2poly (d) paths in S(L) with one endpoint in S1 and the other in S2, where d ∈ poly (b) is the maximal depth of the vortices. Hence the number of homotopic paths of S(L) that are not null-homotopic – they do not bound a disc – is bounded in poly (k) · 2poly (b). Unfortunately, we cannot bound the number 9of null-homotopic paths – it may be more than single-exponential in b – and the respective techniques in [RS09] are of no direct use to us. Fortunately, it turns out that we do not need to bound the number of these paths. It suffices to prove that every null-homotopic path does not interact with most of the cycles in C. We are able to guarantee this by combining cheap linkage techniques in the spirit of [AKK +11, CKK24] in order to gather further structural insight on the interaction of S(L) with C. Assuming one of these paths reaches too deeply into C, we prove the existence of a set of null-homotopic paths in 

S(L) forming a large linkage with one endpoint in S1 and the other in S2 for two disjoint regions on some common vortex. Then we can again apply the result above, proving that ∆( S1, S 2)

cannot contain more than poly (k) · 2poly (b) paths in S(L) with one endpoint in S1 and the other in S2. In particular, at most poly (k) · 2poly (b) many circles of C were intersected. This in turn implies that a large subset C′ of the β(k, b ) cycles – for an appropriate choice as will be discussed in the next paragraph – have not been intersected. We then delete all of the vertices that are part of vortices, all simple loops, and the edges of all cycles outside C′. This produces an instance (G′, T ′) embedded in Σ without vortices, admitting 

C′ concentric cycles and a vital T ′-linkage L′, such that for each homotopy type of paths in L

there exist at most poly (k) · 2poly (b) many paths, none of which are simple loops. Finally, it is an easy combinatorial exercise to prove that a surface Σ with genus g(b) ∈ poly (b)

and h(b) ∈ poly (b) holes admits at most poly (b) paths that are pairwise not homotopic. Thus, L′

admits at most poly (k) · 2poly (b) paths and |T ′| ≤ poly (k) · 2poly (b). Note that this potentially results in 2poly (b) new terminals. However, the bidimensionality of (G′, T ′) is still bounded in 

poly (g(b) + h(b)) and hence in poly (b).

The bounded genus case. We now have an annotated graph (G, R ), with G embedded on a surface Σ of genus at most g = g(b) ∈ poly (b) and there exist at most h = h(b) ∈ poly (b) holes in Σ such that all vertices of R are drawn on the boundary of those holes. We aim to show that, if G contains a family C of λ(g, h, k ) ∈ poly (k) · 2poly (g+h) concentric cycles embedded in a disc ∆ ⊆ Σ and L is an R-linkage of order at most poly (k) · 2poly (b), then 

L avoids the innermost cycle from C. This implies that such a linkage L cannot be vital. Notice that here the total number of terminals, while polynomial in k, depends exponentially on b.In order to handle this situation and to ensure that all remaining exponential dependencies remain polynomial in this already large number of terminals, we revisit an unpublished proof by Mazoit [Maz13] from 2013. In his preprint, Mazoit gave a sketch of a proof establishing single-exponential bounds for the Linkage Function for graphs of Euler-genus at most g. While the core ideas presented in [Maz13] turn out to be correct and crucial for our goal, the paper contains several flaws and has – at the time of writing – only appeared on arxiv.org . For the sake of ensuring correctness and completeness, we include a full, detailed, and reworked proof of Mazoit’s core result. In particular, we extract and highlight a crucial dichotomy in the dependencies on h, g, and k from Mazoit’s ideas as indicated above: 

The exponential dependency of the function λ is entirely confined to h and g while the dependency on the number k of terminals remains polynomial in k.

The main idea of the proof is to make use of conditions on when a linkage that is feasible in the topological sense – meaning that it could be drawn on the surface, ignoring the underlying graph 10 itself – can actually be realised in the embedded graph. The proof reduces to three core pieces: (1) The case when h = g = 1 , that is Σ is a disc, requires only that λ(1 , 1, k ) ∈ O(k). (2) There exists a theorem by Geelen, Huynh, and Richter [GHR18] saying that for every non-separating curve γ with both ends on the boundary of some surface, any path of any linkage drawn in the surface can be redrawn to cross γ only twice. (3) One may interpret the surface Σ as consisting entirely of the disc ∆ together with a number s ∈ O(g + h) many strips attached to ∆. Using (1) as the base case, the claim now follows by induction on the number s of strips, guaranteed by (3), where (2) acts as the tool to replace a single strip with a bounded number of additional terminals by sacrificing a corresponding amount of the concentric cycles. Combining the steps described above concludes the proof sketch for Theorem 1.2; we continue with Theorem 1.3. 

Combing an annulus. We say that a graph G is partially disc-embedded if there exists a disc 

∆ and a triple (G1, G 2, Γ) where G = G1 ∪ G2, G 1 and G2 intersect in vertices only, and Γ is an embedding of G1 in ∆ such that precisely the vertices in V (G1) ∩ V (G2) are drawn on the boundary of ∆. Golovach, Stamoulis, and Thilikos [GST23a] proved a useful technical lemma. Let G be partially disc-embedded as above such that there exists a family C of a′(k) concentric cycles crossed by a′(k) paths R – called the rails – and let ⊚ ⊆ ∆ denote the annulus between the innermost and the outermost cycle of C. Then, if G contains a linkage L of order at most k

such that no terminal of L lies in ⊚, then there also exists a linkage L′ in G of the same pattern as L such that L′ intersects ⊚ only in R. This lemma is known as the Annulus Combing Lemma .The original version of this lemma had no additional assumptions on the terminals of L and had a quadratic dependency on the Linkage Function. We provide an independent proof using Theorem 1.2 while introducing the additional measure of bidimensionality on the terminals and improving the dependencies to being linear in the Linkage Function. Notably, our proof of the Annulus Combing Lemma is the only place where we directly use Theorem 1.2. Once this lemma is proven, all further algorithmic arguments build on it instead of Theorem 1.2. While this might already be of independent interest, we then proceed by proving a further strengthening of a similar combing lemma from the work of Baste, Sau, and Thilikos [BST23]. This lemma allows us, given that the partial disc-embedding is actually an almost embedding and there exists a large wall W drawn in the interior of the disc – given that W satisfies a condition known as homogeneity – to redraw any rooted minor model of bounded detail in a way such that it avoids the centre of W entirely. As before, we obtain much better dependencies than the original result in order to prove a version sensitive to the bidimensionality of the roots to adapt the lemma to our setting. As a side effect, our results in this part show that the highly technical definitions originating from recent controversies about technical details regarding the Flat Wall Theorem (see for example [Arn23, SST24]) may be completely avoided and simplified. 

Who cares about this vertex? At this point, most major pieces towards the proof of Theorem 1.3 are in place. Indeed, we actually prove an algorithmic version of Theorem 1.3 in Section 11 and all of our algorithmic main results are derived from it in Section 2. There are only two remaining pieces to be discussed: Firstly, we require a way to obtain a clique-minor, a small width tree-decomposition, or a large flat wall W in linear time in order to guarantee the quadratic running time of Theorem 1.4. Moreover, we require this flat wall W to satisfy some additional properties. One of them is a small connectivity property, and the other is the previously mentioned “homogeneity”. To find one of the three required outcomes while also ensuring that this connectivity requirement is met by our wall, we employ a recent result due to Sau, Stamoulis, 11 and Thilikos [SST24]. Homogeneity is slightly more tricky. It has been observed in the literature that [SST20, SST22, SST23, MSST24] the original definitions for homogeneity and the original proofs by Robertson and Seymour seem to require an additional exponential blow-up in order to ensure W to be homogeneous. However, within our proofs we are able to utilise the recent homogeneity framework, due to Gorsky, Seweryn, and Wiederrecht [GSW26], which ensures that the price of homogeneity remains polynomial. This last piece of technology allows us to avoid the very last source of possible exponential explosion and, by combining these theorems with our strengthened Annulus Combing Lemma for rooted minors, we are able to show that no rooted minor of small detail in (G, R ) cares about the vertices in the very centre of W .

1.4 Organisation 

After the introduction, we start with a more in-depth explanation of the Graph Minor Algorithm in Section 2, which provides more careful definitions and explanations for the variants of the 

Folio -problem we consider and also illustrates how this allows us to resolve k-Disjoint Paths 

and H-Minor Checking . Once this is taken care of, we provide necessary definitions for the rest of the work (some of which are covered in Section 2) in Section 3. The first proper step into the proofs is taken in Section 4, which starts by introducing tools for a common setting we will encounter throughout our work – namely a set of concentric cycles in a disc with a linkage running through it – and then moves on to providing a fresh presentation and correction of the crucial core of Mazoit’s perspective on vital linkages in graphs embedded on a surface of bounded genus. This is followed by a pair of sections which shows how to reduce the case in which we are almost embedded on a surface without apices by first showing how to tame vortices in Section 5 and then doing the arduous technical core of the proof of Theorem 1.2 in Section 6 by reducing the apex-free case to graphs embedded on surfaces of bounded genus. Section 7 then takes care of getting rid of apices in an almost embedding and building the prerequisites to apply the results of Sections 5 and 6, while Section 8 presents a small toolkit to deal with the presence of large clique-minors in our graph. The proof of our variant of the Vital Linkage Theorem (see Theorem 1.2) is then laid out by combining the results of the previous sections in Section 9. The second half of our paper begins with Section 10, in which we provide all the technical tools we need for the Folio -problem that can be derived from Theorem 1.2, including the Annulus Combing Lemma and its variant for rooted minors. These results are then used to prove the existence of irrelevant vertices for the Folio -problem within graphs of high treewidth in Section 11, which is capped by showing that this existence-result can be used algorithmically to find such a vertex in linear time. We close our work by first giving proofs for several lower bounds to our results in Section 12, which demonstrate that what we prove is essentially optimal in several ways. This is then contrasted by some comments and suggestions for future research directions in Section 13 to explain that there is indeed still a lot of potential for further developments in this area. 12 2 The Graph Minor Algorithm 

In this section we provide proofs for our algorithmic main results, namely Theorem 1.3, Theo-rem 1.4, and – as a direct consequence – Theorem 1.6. To do this, we provide a small amount of formal definitions and references to later points in the paper for those definitions that are too bulky and technical to be explained at this point. The proofs of our main theorems are essentially reductions to more powerful and formal variants, namely Theorem 2.2 and Theorem 2.5 whose proof spans mostly Section 10 and Section 11. The proof of our most central result, that is the single-exponential bound on the Linkage Function conditioned on the bidimensionality of the annotated vertex set as manifested in the form of Theorem 1.2 is confined to the proof of Theorem 9.1 in Section 9 and spans all of Sections 4 to 9. We begin by introducing some general notation and some of our core concepts. 

2.1 A small set of preliminary definitions 

First, we introduce notation for commonly used concepts. By N we denote the set of non-negative integers. Given any two integers a, b ∈ N, we write [a, b ] for the set {z ∈ N : a ≤ z ≤ b}. Notice that the set [a, b ] is empty whenever a > b. For any positive integer c we set [c] := [1 , c ]. In order to avoid ambiguity for this notation, we denote closed intervals over the reals by [x, y ]R.In several contexts, we will have a set G of graphs and want to access the graph their union comprises or want to interact with its edges or vertices. We use ⋃ G as for ⋃ 

> G∈G

G and may thus access the vertices and edges as V (G) := V (⋃ G) and E(G) := E(⋃ G).

Annotated graphs and minors. A minor-model φ of a graph H in a graph G is a function mapping V (H) to a collection of pairwise disjoint connected subsets of V (G), called the branch sets , such that for all uv ∈ E(H) there is an edge in G between φ(u) and φ(v).An annotated graph is a pair (G, R ) where G is a graph and R ⊆ V (G) is the set of annotated vertices , which we often simply refer to as red vertices . If we need easy access to the number of vertices in R, we say that (G, R ) is an |R|-annotated graph . The bidimensionality of an annotated graph (G, R ) is the largest integer k such that there exists a minor-model φ of the 

(k × k)-grid where R ∩ φ(x)̸ = ∅ for all vertices of the grid. In general, we say that an annotated graph (H, R H ) is a red minor of (H, R G) if there exists a minor-model φ of H in G such that 

RG ∩ φ(v)̸ = ∅ for all v ∈ RH .We note that, in an annotated graph (G, R ), declaring a set S ⊆ V (G) to also be red increases the bidimensionality by no more than |S|.

Observation 2.1. Let (G, R ) be an annotated graph and S ⊆ V (G), then 

bidim (G, R ∪ S) ≤ bidim (G, R ) + |S|.

Grids and Walls. Let n, m ≥ 1 be integers. The (n × m)-grid is the graph with vertex set 

[n] × [m] where {(i1, j 1), (i2, j 2)} is an edge if and only if |i1 − i2| + |j1 − j2| = 1 . Given an integer n, the elementary n-wall is the graph obtained from the (n × 2n)-grid by deleting all edges of the form  

> •

{(i, j ), (i + 1 , j )} for i ∈ [n − 1] odd and j ∈ [2 n] even, and 13 Figure 1: A 7-wall.  

> •

{(i, j ), (i + 1 , j )} for i ∈ [n − 1] even and j ∈ [2 n] odd. See Figure 1 for an illustration. An n-wall is any graph that can be obtained from the elementary 

n-wall by subdividing its edges. One can easily see that any graph that contains the (n × 2n)-grid as a minor must contain an 

n-wall as a subgraph. Moreover, every n-wall contains the (n × n)-grid as a minor. 

Treewidth and tree-decompositions. A tree-decomposition for a graph G is a pair (T, β ) such that T is a tree, β : V (T ) → 2V (G) assigns to each node of T a subset of the vertices of G

known as a bag , ⋃   

> t∈V(T)

G[β(t)] = G, and for each v ∈ V (G), the set {t ∈ V (T ) : v ∈ β(t)}

is connected. The adhesion of (T, β ) is 0 if T has only one node and max dt ∈E(T ) |β(d) ∩ β(t)|

otherwise. The width of (T, β ) is defined as max t∈V (T ) |β(t)| − 1. The treewidth of a graph G, 

denoted by tw (G), is the smallest integer k such that G has a tree-decomposition of width at most k.

A rough description of the Flat Wall Theorem. The Flat Wall Theorem of Robertson and Seymour [RS95] may be seen as a fundamental stepping stone towards the full structure theorem for H-minor-free graphs. Indeed, it is sometimes referred to as the “weak structure theorem” as it asserts that every graph of large treewidth must contain a big “area” that roughly behaves like a planar graph. To formally define flat walls requires some amount of machinery that is beyond the scope of this section. Instead, here we provide some intuition behind the meaning of the Flat Wall Theorem and refer the reader to Section 3.2 for the formal definitions. The so-called Two Paths Theorem (see for example [Jun70, Shi80, Sey80, Tho80]) provides a characterisation for all No -instances of the 2-Disjoint Paths problem: Given distinct terminals 

s1, s 2, t 1, t 2 in a graph G, then there do not exist vertex-disjoint paths P1 and P2 such that Pi

connects si and ti in G if and only if G can be “reduced” to a planar graph where the four vertices s1, s 2, t 1, t 2 appear on a common face in the order listed. Here the term “reduced” means that one is allowed to hide non-planar parts of the graph behind separators of size at most 3.The core observation here is that, in case s1, s 2, t 1, t 2 appear on a common face of some planar graph H in the order listed, then any two paths P1 and P2 as above would be forced to cross each other, thereby contradicting the planarity of H.14 The Flat Wall Theorem 3 now asserts that for any graph G with a large enough wall W ⊆ G one of two things hold: i) either G contains a big clique-minor, or ii) there exists a small set A ⊆ V (G) and a big subwall W ′ ⊆ W − A such that, in the subgraph H of G − A consisting of everything that attaches to the “interior” of W ′, there are no two vertex-disjoint paths joining the pairs of opposing corners of W ′.In other words, the Two Paths Theorem says that in the second outcome above, the part of H

that contains “most” of W ′ can be seen as being planar up to separations of order at most 3.We refer to the graph H has the compass of the flat wall W ′ in G − A.It is an intriguing feature of Robertson and Seymour’s Graph Minor Algorithm that most of the effort goes into the proof of its correctness. That is, in order to show that in any instance 

(G, R) of large treewidth there exists some vertex v ∈ V (G) such that (G, R) and (G − v, R) are equivalent instances they employ almost the entire breadth of structure theorems that appeared in their Graph Minors Series. However, once the correctness is proven, it suffices to find either a clique-minor or a flat wall of large enough order to detect such an irrelevant vertex v as above. 

2.2 The folio problem 

At the heart of the Graph Minor Algorithm sits the so-called Rooted d-Folio problem. In this problem one is given as input a graph G together with a set of k special vertices r1, . . . , r k

with labels and an integer d. The question is, what are the minors of G “rooted” on the ri and with “detail” at most d, that is, with at most d additional vertices and at most d edges. This means, instead of finding a single minor of bounded size, or a single pattern of disjoint paths with ends on the roots, the algorithm finds all possible such rooted minors and patterns up to the bound d + k on the number of vertices. 

Rooted graphs. Let k ≥ 0 be an integer. A k-rooted graph is a pair (G, R) where R =

{r1, r 2, . . . , r k} ⊆ V (G) is a multiset of k not necessarily distinct vertices. We sometimes write 

(G, r 1, . . . , r k) instead of (G, R). The ri are called the roots of (G, R). A pair (G, R) is a rooted graph if it is a k-rooted graph for some k.Notice that we make a distinction between a rooted graph (G, R) and an annotated graph 

(G, R ). One core difference between the two concepts is that for a rooted graph the labels of the roots matter, while for an annotated graph, annotated vertices are interchangeable. The other key difference is the fact that R is an ordered multiset . That is, we allow for vertices to appear more than once in R and all vertices in R carry distinct labels. In fact, as mentioned in the introduction, every rooted graph (G, R) gives rise to a uniquely determined annotated graph (G, R R) where RR is obtained from R by forgetting the labels and removing duplicates. We also extend the notion of bidimensionality of annotated graphs to rooted graphs in this way. That is, bidim (G, R) := bidim (G, R R).We say that two rooted graphs (G1, r 11, . . . , r 1

> k

) and (G2, r 21, . . . , r 2

> k

) are isomorphic if there exists an isomorphism φ from G1 to G2 such that φ(r1 

> i

) = r2 

> i

for all i ∈ [k].The detail of a rooted graph (G, R) is defined as detail (G, R) := max {| V (G) \ R| , |E(G)|} .

> 3Recall that the formal definitions may be found in Section 3.2 and the variant of the Flat Wall Theorem we are using may be found in Proposition 11.10.

15 The d-folio of a rooted graph. A rooted graph (H, q 1, . . . , q k) is a rooted minor of another rooted graph (G, r 1, . . . , r k) if there exists a minor model φ of H in G such that for every i ∈ [k]

it holds that ri ∈ φ(qi).Given an integer d ≥ 0 and a rooted graph (G, R), the d-folio of G, denoted as d-folio (G, R), is the set of all rooted graphs (H, Q) of detail at most d that are rooted minors of (G, R).

The (k, d )-folio with respect to a vertex set. We now let (G, R ) be an annotated graph. The 

(k, d )-folio of (G, R ), denoted by (k, d )-folio (G, R ), is the union of the d-folios over all rooted graphs (G, R) where R = {r1, . . . , r k} is an ordered multisubset of R.

The (k, d )-Folio problem and its rooted sibling. The (k, d )-Folio problem may now be formally defined as the problem that takes as input an annotated graph (G, R ) and whose task is the computation of the (k, d )-folio of (G, R ).The Rooted d-Folio problem is closely related to the (k, d )-Folio problem. Here, the input is a rooted graph (G, R) with |R| ≤ k and the task is to determine d-folio (G, R).We stress that (k, d )-Folio with input (G, R ) may be reduced to computing d-folio (G, R) for all rooted graphs (G, R) where R is a set of k roots selected from R.To see that the k-Disjoint Paths problem is contained in the Rooted 0-Folio problem on 2k roots, consider the following example. Let H = ( H, x 1, x 1, x 2, x 2, . . . , x k, x k) be the rooted graph with 2k roots and vertex set {x1, . . . , x k} and where E(H) = ∅. Now, if G =(G, s 1, t 1, s 2, t 2, . . . , s k, t k) is a rooted graph with distinct vertices s1, . . . , s k, t 1, . . . , t k, then there exist k pairwise vertex-disjoint paths P1, . . . , P k such that Pi has endpoints si and ti if and only if H is a rooted minor of G. To see this, notice that the existence of the paths Pi is enough to produce a rooted minor model of H in G. For the other direction, if there is a rooted minor model φ of H in G, then for each i ∈ [k] it must be true that si, t i ∈ φ(xi) and, since the φ(xi)

are connected and pairwise disjoint it follows that each φ(xi) contains one such path Pi.It is easily seen that by definition, H is a rooted graph with detail 0 and thus, in or-der to solve the k-Disjoint Paths problem on the instance G, it suffices to solve the 

Rooted 0-Folio problem on the rooted graph (G, {s1, . . . , s k, t 1, . . . , t k}) and check if H ∈

0-Folio (G, {s1, . . . , s k, t 1, . . . , t k}).Hence, in order to prove Theorem 1.4, Theorem 1.6, and to obtain a double-exponential FPT -algorithm for k-Disjoint Paths it suffices to prove the following theorem. 

Theorem 2.2. There exists an algorithm for Rooted d-Folio that takes as input a rooted graph (G, R) with bidim (G, R) ≤ b and |R| ≤ k and runs in time 22poly (b+d)·poly (k) · | G|2.Since the number of possible k-tuples with elements from a set R of order k is in O(kk) and by our discussion on how (k, d )-Folio may be reduced to Rooted d-Folio , Theorem 2.2 gives rise to the following corollary. 

Corollary 2.3. There exists an algorithm for (k, d )-Folio that takes as input an annotated graph (G, R ) with bidim (G, R ) ≤ b and |R| ≤ k and runs in time 22poly (b+d)·poly (k) · | G|2.When (G, R ) is an annotated graph with |R| ≤ k then known algorithms are already able to solve 

(k, d )-Folio and its rooted counterpart in single-exponential time depending on the treewidth of G. See for example the algorithm of Adler, Dorn, Fomin, Sau, and Thilikos [ADF +11]. 16 Proposition 2.4 (Adler, Dorn, Fomin, Sau, and Thilikos [ADF +11]) . There exists an algorithm for Rooted d-Folio that takes as input a rooted graph (G, R) with tw (G) ≤ w and |R| ≤ k

and runs in time 2poly (w+k+d) · | G|.Hence, the only remaining step towards deriving Theorem 2.2 is an algorithmic version of Theorem 1.3. In particular, in order to meet the quadratic running time of the algorithm from Theorem 2.2, we require a way to find a single irrelevant vertex in linear time . Indeed, the following is the algorithmic core of this paper. 

Strongly irrelevant vertices. Let k, d be non-negative integers and (G, R ) be an annotated graph. We say that a vertex v ∈ V (G) \ R is strongly irrelevant for (k, d )-folio (G, R ) if for every ordered multiset R consisting of k roots chosen from among the vertices of R it holds that 

d-folio (G − v, R) = d-folio (G, R).

Theorem 2.5. There exists a function f2.5 : N3 → N and an algorithm that takes as input an annotated graph (G, R ) of bidimensionality at most b, and either correctly determines that 

tw (G) ≤ f2.5(k, b, d ) or finds a vertex v ∈ V (G) \ R such that v is strongly irrelevant for 

(k, d )-folio (G, R ) in time 22poly (b+d)·poly (k) · | G|. Moreover, f2.5(k, b, d ) ∈ 2poly (b+d) · poly (k).Here something interesting happens. Our observation that (k, d )-Folio can naturally be reduced to solving Rooted d-Folio on all arising rooted graphs also gives rise to a reverse observation when it comes to the irrelevance of some vertex. If there is a vertex v ∈ V (G) that is strongly irrelevant for (k, d )-folio (G, R ) then this means in particular that also d-folio (G, R) = 

d-folio (G − v, R) for all possible ways to select an ordered multiset R of k roots from R. Hence, in the main body of the paper we will only be concerned with the annotated version, that is with (k, d )-folio (G, R ).The linear running time of the algorithm from Theorem 2.5 allows for the following simple algorithm meeting the requirement of Theorem 2.2. 

Input: A rooted graph (G, R) with bidim (G, R R) ≤ b and |R| ≤ k.

Step 1: Run the algorithm from Theorem 2.5 on (G, R). This yields one of two outcomes: 

Case 1.1: The treewidth of G is at most f2.5(k, b, d ). In this case we forward (G, R) to 

Step 2 .

Case 1.2: The algorithm returns a vertex v ∈ V (G) \ RR such that v is strongly irrelevant for (k, d )-folio (G, R R). In this case forward (G − v, R) back to the beginning of 

Step 1 .

Step 2: Run the algorithm from Proposition 2.4 on (G, R), then return d-folio (G, R) and 

terminate the algorithm. Since the instance shrinks by one vertex every time the algorithm enters Case 1.2 , the loop in 

Step 1 repeats at most |G| times. Hence, since the algorithm from Theorem 2.5 runs in linear time, we are sure to enter Step 2 after at most |G| iterations and at most |G|2 steps. 

# 3 Preliminaries 

There are a variety of established frameworks for the work in the structural theory surrounding the Graph Minors Series and careful definitions are needed throughout. We opt to mainly work 17 from a set of definitions for annotated graphs that is taken from [GPW26] and which are largely based on definitions that evolved from the Graph Minors Series by Robertson and Seymour and were refined in [KTW18, KTW21, GSW25]. Later on in Section 10, we will expand our view and consider graphs in which vertices may be marked with many different colours. As we will need these notions briefly in Section 8, we introduce them here as well, but will be able to avoid working in this more complicated setting for most of the paper. 

3.1 General definitions 

Here, we introduce a series of fundamental definitions required throughout the paper. 

Paths, linkages, and separations. A linkage L in a graph G is a set of pairwise vertex-disjoint paths. Let T ⊆ V (G) be the set of endpoints of paths in L, then we call L a T -linkage . We define the pattern of L via τ (L) := {{ s, t } | there is L ∈ L with endpoints s and t}.We say that a path P in G is internally disjoint from a set X ⊆ V (G) if V (P ) ∩ X does not contain any vertex of P that is not an endpoint. Given a graph G and two subsets A, B ⊆ V (G),

an A-path in G is a path with both endpoints in A and internally disjoint from A, and an 

A-B-path is a path with one endpoint in A, the other in B, and internally disjoint from A ∪ B.An A-B-linkage in G is a linkage consisting of A-B paths. If H is a subgraph of G, an H-path 

is a V (H)-path of length at least one with no edge in E(H).Let G be a graph and k be a positive integer. A separation of G is a tuple (A, B ) such that 

A, B ⊆ V (G) with A ∪ B = V (G) and for every edge uv ∈ E(G) we have u, v ∈ A or u, v ∈ B.We call |A ∩ B| its order . The following classic tool will be helpful to us in many ways. 

Proposition 3.1 (Menger [Men27]) . Let k be a positive integer, let G be a graph, and let 

X, Y ⊆ V (G) be two sets with at least k elements each. Then there does not exist a separation 

(A, B ) in G of order less than k with X ⊆ A and Y ⊆ B if and only if there exist k pairwise disjoint X-Y -paths in G.

Surfaces. By a surface we mean a compact 2-dimensional manifold Σ with or without boundary. Let X ⊆ Σ. The boundary and interior of X will be denoted bd (X) and int (X), respectively. The topological closure of X is denoted by cl (X). If Σ is a surface with boundary then we refer to the connected components of bd (Σ) as its cuffs .Given a pair (h, c) ∈ N × N we define Σ(h,c) to be the surface without boundary created from the sphere by adding h handles and c crosscaps (see [MT01] for more details). By the surface classification theorem, every compact connected surface without boundary is homeomorphic to Σ(h,c) for some h, c ≥ 0. Note that by Dyck’s theorem [Dyc88, FW99], two crosscaps are equivalent to a handle in the presence of a third crosscap. If c = 0 the surface Σ(h,c) is an orientable surface, otherwise it is called non-orientable . We let the genus of Σ be 2h + c, where Σ(h,c) is a surface to which Σ is homeomorphic. Let Σ and Γ be surfaces. A homeomorphism h : Σ → Γ is a bijective function from Σ to Γ which is continuous and has a continuous inverse. A homeomorphism h : Σ → Σ on a surface Σ with boundary such that h fixes every point on the boundary of Σ is called a bd -homeomorphism .18 Let γ : [0 , 1] R → Σ be continuous and injective on [0 , 1[ R, then we call its image γ([0 , 1] R) a

curve in Σ and γ(0) , γ (1) its endpoints. A curve is closed if its endpoints agree. A curve with both endpoints on the boundary of Σ is called a boundary curve .Two curves C, C ′ ⊆ Σ are homeomorphic if there is a homeomorphism h : Σ → Σ which maps 

C to C′. C and C′ are homotopic if there is a continuous function f : Σ × [0 , 1] R → Σ such that f (x, 0) = C(x) and f (x, 1) = C′(x) and for every t ∈ [0 , 1] R the function ft(x) := f (x, t )

maps the boundary of Σ to the boundary of Σ. We call f a homotopy . Homotopy induces an equivalence relation on the set of curves on a surface Σ. We refer to the equivalence classes as 

homotopy classes and to the class containing a curve C ⊆ Σ its homotopy type .Let Σ be a connected surface. A curve C ⊆ Σ is contractible if one of the components of Σ − C

is homeomorphic to an open disc. Otherwise it is non-contractible . C is separating if Σ − C is not connected. A non-separating, non-contractible curve is called essential or genus reducing .The following is a simple result on the number of homotopy classes of non-contractible curves on a given surface that can be realised simultaneously 4. In [JMM96], Juvan et al. prove similar results for closed curves disjoint from the boundary. See e.g. Lemma 3.2 in that paper. 

Lemma 3.2. Let Σ be a connected surface of genus g with b ≥ 1 boundary components. Let L

be a set of pairwise disjoint simple curves on Σ whose endpoints are all on the boundary of Σ.Then the number of homotopy types realised by curves in L is ≤ 1 in case b = 1 and g = 0 , it is 

≤ 3 in case b = 2 and g = 0 , and otherwise it is bounded by 4b + 6 g − 6.

Proof. In the special case that b = 1 and g = 0 Σ is a disc and L is a set of simple curves with all endpoints on the boundary. Thus all curves in L are null-homotopic and therefore there is only one homotopy type that is realised by L.The other special case we need to consider is b = 2 and g = 0 . In this case Σ is a cylinder and there are at most three possible homotopy types that can be realised simultaneously: one type for each of the two cuffs realised by curves with both endpoints on that cuff and the third type realised by a curve with both endpoints on different cuffs. Note that there is an unbounded number of pairwise non-homotopic curves with endpoints on different cuffs, which are essentially determined by the number of times they wind around the cylinder. But no two of these can be realised at the same time in L.So we may now assume that b > 1 or g > 0. Let L ∈ L be a curve with both endpoints a, b on the same boundary component C of Σ. We say that L is null-homotopic if L together with one of the two components of C − { a, b } bounds a disc on Σ. Clearly any two null-homotopic curves with endpoints on the same boundary are homotopic. Thus there are at most b null-homotopic curves in L which realise different homotopy types in Σ.Let M ⊆ L be a maximal subset of L such that no two curves in M are homotopic and furthermore no curve in M is null-homotopic in the sense above. Let Σ′ be obtained from Σ by closing each cuff C with a disc ∆( C). For each C let T (C) be the endpoints of curves in M on 

C. For each cuff C choose a point v = v(C) ∈ int (∆( C)) and for each u ∈ T (C) a curve Lu in 

∆( C) between v and u such that for u̸ = u′ ∈ T (C) these curves are disjoint except for v. We can then extend each curve L ∈ M with endpoints a, b by the curves La, L b to obtain a new 

> 4This lemma in different formulation is almost certainly found in standard topology texts. Our use for it is related to [Maz13] (see Claim 7 in said paper for comparison.)

19 set M ′ of curves whose endpoints are all contained in {v(C) : C a cuff of Σ}. Without loss of generality we assume that M ′ is maximal in the sense that there is no non-null-homotopic curve with endpoints in {v(C) : C a cuff of Σ} that is internally disjoint from each curve in M ′ and is not homotopic to a curve in M ′.As M ′ does not contain any null-homotopic curve, there is a triangulation N of Σ′ such that 

M ′ ⊆ N . See e.g. [FM12]. By Euler’s formula [Eul58], |V (N )| − | E(N )| + |F (N )| = 2 − 2g, 

where V (N ) denotes the set of vertices of N, E (N ) the set of arcs, and F (N ) the set of faces of the embedding N . By construction, |V (N )| = b and |E(N )| = |N | ≥ | M ′|. Let f := |F (N )|.Thus we obtain |N | = b + f + 2 g − 2.On the other hand, as N triangulates Σ′, we obtain 2|N | = 3 f . Combining the two equations yields |N | = 3 b + 6 g − 6.Thus, together with the at most b null-homotopic curves we removed above, the maximal number of pairwise non-homotopic curves in L is ≤ 4b + 6 g − 6.

Embeddings. Given a graph G, we say that G has an embedding ψ into a surface Σ, if ψ is a function with domain V (G) ∪ E(G) such that i) ψ(v) is a point of Σ for each v ∈ V (G),

ii) ψ(u)̸ = ψ(v) for all distinct u, v ∈ V (G),

iii) ψ(uv ) is a simple curve in Σ with the ends ψ(u), ψ (v) for all uv ∈ E(G),

iv) ψ(uv ) ∩ ψ(wx ) ⊆ { ψ(u), ψ (v)}, for all uv, wx ∈ E(G), and v) ψ(uv ) ∩ ψ(w) = ∅ for all uv ∈ E(G) and w ∈ V (G) \ { u, v }.We let ψ(G) be the union of all points and curves in its image and call the connected components of Σ \ ψ(G) the faces of ψ. If every face of ψ is homeomorphic to an open disc, we say that ψ is a 2-cell-embedding .Given a sequence of cycles C = ⟨C1, . . . , C s⟩ in G we call these cycles concentric (with respect to ψ) if there is a disc ∆ ⊆ Σ such that ψ(⋃ C) ⊆ ∆ and ψ(Ci) bounds a disc ∆i such that 

∆1 ⊊ . . . ⊊ ∆s.We will generally work with graphs with a fixed embedding and thus identify the elements of G

with the points and curves in Σ which ψ maps to each other. The minimum number of vertices of G that is intersected by any non-contractible curve in Σ meeting G only in vertices is called the representativity (or face-width ) of ψ. We consider the representativity of an embedding in the sphere to be infinite. 

3.2 Definitions from Graph Minors 

We continue by briefly introducing some key concepts for handling the general structure of 

H-minor-free graphs. 

Separations and tangles. Let G be a graph and k be a positive integer. Let t ≥ 1. A sequence of separations ⟨(Ai, B i)⟩i∈[t] of G is laminar if Ai ⊆ Aj and Bj ⊆ Bi for every pair 1 ≤ i ≤ j ≤ t.We denote by Sk(G) the collection of all separations (A, B ) of order less than k in G.An orientation of Sk(G) is a set O such that for all (A, B ) ∈ S k(G) exactly one of (A, B ) and 

(B, A ) belongs to O. A tangle of order k in G is an orientation T of Sk(G) such that for all 

(A1, B 1), (A2, B 2), (A3, B 3) ∈ T , it holds that G[A1] ∪ G[A2] ∪ G[A3]̸ = G. If T is a tangle and 

(A, B ) ∈ T we call A the small side and B the big side of (A, B ).20 Let G be a graph and T and D be tangles of G. We say that D is a truncation of T if D ⊆ T .Let G and H be graphs as well as T be a tangle in G. We say that a minor-model μ of H in G

is controlled by T if there does not exist a separation (A, B ) ∈ T of order less than |V (H)| and an x ∈ V (H) such that μ(x) ⊆ A \ B.Let T be a tangle of order k in a graph G and let S ⊆ V (G) be a set of size at most k − 2. Notice that every separation (A, B ) of order at most k − | S| − 1 in G − S corresponds to a separation 

(A ∪ S, B ∪ S) of order at most k − 1 in G. It follows that TS := {(A, B ) : (A ∪ S, B ∪ S) ∈ T } 

is a tangle of order k − | S| in G − S. Now suppose that G − S has components G1, . . . , G p. Then there exists i ∈ [p] such that V (Gi) ⊆ B for all separations of order 0 in TS . We call Gi the 

T -big component of G − S.

Meshes. Let n, m be integers with n, m ≥ 2. A (n × m)-mesh is a graph M which is the union of paths M = P1 ∪ · · · ∪ Pn ∪ Q1 ∪ · · · ∪ Qm where  

> •

P1, · · · , P n are pairwise vertex-disjoint, and Q1, · · · , Q m are pairwise vertex-disjoint.  

> •

for every i ∈ [n] and j ∈ [m], the intersection Pi ∩ Qj induces a path,  

> •

each Pi is a V (Q1)-V (Qm)-path intersecting the paths Q1, · · · Qm in the given order, and each Qj is a V (P1)-V (Pm)-path intersecting the paths P1, · · · , P h in the given order. We say that the paths P1, · · · , P n are the horizontal paths , and the paths Q1, · · · , Q m are the 

vertical paths . The union P1 ∪ Pn ∪ Q1 ∪ Qm is a cycle called the perimeter of M . The unique cycle in the union Pi ∪ Pi+1 ∪ Qj ∪ Qj+1 , where i ∈ [n − 1] and j ∈ [m − 1] , is called a brick 

of M . A mesh M ′ is a submesh of a mesh M if every horizontal (vertical) path of M ′ is a subpath of a horizontal (vertical) path of M, respectively. We write n-mesh as a shorthand for an (n × n)-mesh. Let r ∈ N with r ≥ 3, let G be a graph, and M be an r-mesh in G. Let TM be the orientation of Sr such that for every (A, B ) ∈ T M , the set B \ A contains the vertex set of both a horizontal and a vertical path of M . We call B the M -majority side of (A, B ). Then TM is the tangle 

induced by M . If T is a tangle in G, we say that T controls the mesh M if TM is a truncation of T .

Paintings in surfaces. A painting in a surface Σ is a pair Γ = ( U, N ), where N ⊆ U ⊆ Σ, N is finite, U \ N has a finite number of arcwise-connected components, called cells of Γ, such that each cell is homeomorphic to an open disc in Σ, cl (c) is a closed disc in Σ, and cl (c) ∩ cl (c′) ⊆ N

for two distinct cells. We define NΓ(c) := cl (c) ∩ N . If |NΓ(c)| ≥ 4, the cell c is called a vortex .We further let N (Γ) := N, let U (Γ) := U, and let C(Γ) be the set of all cells of Γ.Any given painting Γ = ( U, N ) defines a hypergraph with N as its vertices and the set of closures of the cells of Γ as its edges. Accordingly, we call N the nodes of Γ.

Σ-renditions. Let G be a graph and Σ be a surface. A Σ-rendition of G is a triple ρ = (Γ , σ, π ),

where  

> •

Γ is a painting in Σ, 

> •

for each cell c ∈ C(Γ) , σ (c) is a subgraph of G, and  

> •

π : N (Γ) → V (G) is an injection, such that 

R1 G = ⋃ 

> c∈C(Γ)

σ(c),

R2 for all distinct c, c ′ ∈ C(Γ) , the graphs σ(c) and σ(c′) are edge-disjoint, 21 R3 π(NΓ(c)) ⊆ V (σ(c)) for every cell c ∈ C(Γ) , and 

R4 for every cell c ∈ C(Γ) , we have V (σ(c) ∩ ⋃

> c′∈C(Γ) \{ c}

(σ(c′))) ⊆ π(NΓ(c)) .We write N (ρ) for the set N (Γ) , let Nρ(c) = NΓ(c) for all c ∈ C(Γ) , and similarly, we lift the set of cells from C(Γ) to C(ρ). If it is clear from the context which ρ is meant, we will sometimes simply write N (c) instead of Nρ(c), and if the Σ-rendition ρ for G is understood from the context, we usually identify the sets π(N (ρ)) and N (ρ) along π for ease of notation. Given a graph G with a Σ-rendition ρ and a subgraph G′ ⊆ G, we define the rendition ρ′ of G′

induced by ρ by letting the nodes of ρ′ be N (ρ) ∩ V (G′), letting the cells of ρ′ be the cells c of ρ

such that (σρ(c) ∩ G′) − N (ρ) is non-empty, and adjusting σ appropriately. Note that every embedding ψ of a graph G in a surface Σ defines a rendition ρψ of G in Σ where the graph of every cell corresponds to a unique edge of G. The cell itself can be an open disc with the two endpoints of the edge in its boundary. Thus all definitions for renditions naturally transfer to embeddings. 

Blank renditions and renditions of annotated graphs. Let ρ = (Γ , σ, π ) be a Σ-rendition of an annotated graph (G, R ). By slightly abusing notation, we call a cell c of ρ a vortex if it is either a vortex of Γ or V (σ(c)) ∩ R̸ = ∅. If 

π(N (ρ)) ∪ ⋃{V (σ(c)) : c ∈ C(ρ) and c is not a vortex }

is disjoint from R, we call ρ a blank rendition (of (G, R )).

Societies. Let Ω be a cyclic ordering of the elements of some set. Given that Ω = ⟨v1, . . . , v r⟩,

then we denote the set {v1, . . . , v r} by V (Ω) . A society is a pair (G, Ω) , where G is a graph and Ω is a cyclic ordering with V (Ω) ⊆ V (G). For a given set S ⊆ V (Ω) an element s ∈ S is an endpoint of S if there exists an element t ∈ V (Ω) \ S that immediately precedes or succeeds 

s in Ω. We call S a segment of Ω if S has two or less endpoints. We call a segment proper if 

V (S)̸ = V (Ω) . The ordering of S induced by Ω is the restriction of Ω to S.Let (G, Ω) be a society and let Σ be a surface with one boundary component B homeomorphic to the unit circle. A rendition of (G, Ω) in Σ is a Σ-rendition ρ of G such that the image under 

πρ of N (ρ) ∩ B is V (Ω) and Ω is one of the two cyclic orderings of V (Ω) defined by the way the points of πρ(V (Ω)) are arranged in the boundary B.

Traces of paths and cycles. Let ρ be a Σ-rendition of a graph G. For every cell c ∈ C(ρ) with 

|Nρ(c)| = 2 , we select one of the components of bd (c) \ N (c). This selection will be called a 

tie-breaker in ρ, and we assume that every rendition comes equipped with a tie-breaker. Let G be a graph and ρ be a Σ-rendition of G. Let Q be a cycle or path in G that uses no edge of σ(c) for every vortex c ∈ C(ρ). We say that Q is grounded if it uses edges of σ(c′) and σ(c′′ )

for two distinct cells c′, c ′′ ∈ C(ρ), or Q is a path with both endpoints in N (ρ). If Q is grounded we define the trace of Q as follows. Let P1, . . . , P k be distinct maximal subpaths of Q such that 

Pi is a subgraph of σ(c) for some cell ci. Fix i ∈ [k]. The maximality of Pi implies that its endpoints are π(n1) and π(n2) for distinct nodes n1, n 2 ∈ N (ρ). If |Nρ(ci)| = 2 , let Li be the component of bd (ci) selected by the tie-breaker, and if |Nρ(ci)| = 3 , let Li be the component of 

bd (ci) \ (N (ci) ∩ V (Pi)) that is disjoint from Nρ(ci). We define L′ 

> i

by pushing Li slightly so that it is disjoint from all cells in C(ρ), while maintaining that the resulting curves intersect only at a common endpoint. 22 The trace of Q is defined to be ⋃ 

> i∈[k]

L′

> i

. If Q is a cycle, its trace is the homeomorphic image of the unit circle, and otherwise, it is an arc in Σ with both endpoints in N (ρ).

Linear decompositions of societies. Let (G, Ω) be a society. A linear decomposition of (G, Ω) is a labelling v1, v 2, . . . , v n of V (Ω) such that v1, v 2, . . . , v n appear in Ω in the order listed, together with sets ordered as ⟨X1, X 2, . . . , X n⟩ such that i) Xi ⊆ V (G) and vi ∈ Xi for all i ∈ [n],

ii) ⋃ 

> i∈[n]

Xi = V (G) and for every uv ∈ E(G) there exists i ∈ [n] such that u, v ∈ Xi, and iii) for every x ∈ V (G) the set {i ∈ [n] : x ∈ Xi} forms an interval in [n].The adhesion of a linear decomposition is max {| Xi ∩ Xi+1 | : i ∈ [n − 1] }. The width of a linear decomposition is max {| Xi| : i ∈ [n]}. We write α = (⟨v1, . . . , v n⟩, ⟨X1, . . . , X n⟩) for the respective linear decomposition. Let 1 ≤ i ≤ j ≤ n and S = [ i, j ]. Then we call (⟨vi, . . . , v j ⟩, ⟨Xi, . . . , X j ⟩)

the S-restriction of α.

Aligned curves and grounded subgraphs. Let G be a graph and let ρ = (Γ , σ, π ) be a Σ-rendition of G. We say that a 2-connected subgraph H of G is grounded (in ρ) if every cycle in H is grounded and no vertex of H is drawn by Γ in a vortex of ρ. A curve in Σ is called 

ρ-aligned if it only intersects Γ in nodes. In turn, a disc in Σ is called ρ-aligned if its boundary is 

ρ-aligned and we call it vortex-free if its interior is disjoint from all vortices in ρ. If H is planar, we say that it is flat in ρ if there exists a vortex-free, ρ-aligned disc ∆ ⊆ Σ which contains all cells c ∈ C(ρ) with E(σ(c)) ∩ E(H)̸ = ∅.For any ρ-aligned disc ∆, we call the subgraph of G that is the union of σ(c) for all cells c of 

ρ in ∆ the crop of G by ∆ (in ρ). Furthermore, the restriction δ′ of ρ by ∆ is defined as the 

∆-rendition that consists of the restriction of both Γ, σ, and π to ∆.This allows to define a society associated with ∆ as follows. Let V (Ω ∆) be the set of all vertices whose corresponding nodes are drawn in the boundary of ∆ and let Ω∆ be the cyclic ordering of 

V (Ω ∆) obtained by traversing along the boundary of ∆ in the anticlockwise direction. Now, let 

G∆ be the crop of G by ∆. We call the society (G∆, Ω∆) the ∆-society (in ρ). If ρ is clear from the context, we do not mention it. We also call the restriction of ρ by ∆, the restriction of ρ to 

(G∆, Ω∆).

Let P be an X-Y -linkage in G such that X ∩ V (G∆) ⊆ V (Ω ∆) and Y ⊆ V (G∆) and assume that each path in P is grounded in ρ. Then we define the ∆-truncation (in ρ) of P to be the 

V (Ω ∆)-Y -linkage in G∆ which consists of the minimal V (Ω ∆)-Y -subpaths of the paths in P.Let ρ be a rendition of a society (G, Ω) in a surface Σ that is not the sphere. Given a cycle 

C ⊆ G that is grounded in ρ we define the C-disc (in ρ) as the unique ρ-aligned disc ∆ ⊆ Σ

bounded by the trace of C in ρ. We also use the terms C-society (in ρ) to denote the ∆-society in ρ and C-truncation (in ρ) to denote the ∆-truncation in ρ of an appropriately defined linkage in G.

Transactions and cylindrical renditions. Let (G, Ω) be a society. A transaction in (G, Ω) is an 

A-B-linkage for disjoint segments A, B of Ω consisting of V (Ω) -paths. A rendition of (G, Ω) in the disc with a unique vortex c0 is called a cylindrical rendition of (G, Ω) around c0.

Nests and radial linkages. Let ρ be a rendition of a society (G, Ω) in a surface Σ other than the sphere. Further, let C = ⟨C1, . . . , C s⟩ be a sequence of pairwise disjoint cycles in G, such that each of them is grounded in ρ and we have ∆1 ⊊ . . . ⊊ ∆s ⊆ Σ, where ∆i is the Ci-disc for 23 each i ∈ [s]. We say that the cycles in C are concentric (in ρ) and call C1 the inner cycle and 

Cs the outer cycle of C in ρ.A nest C (in ρ) is a set of concentric cycles with the inner cycle C such that every vortex of ρ is found in the C-disc. Moreover, we call a V (Ω) -V (C)-linkage R a radial linkage (in ρ) for C if all paths in R are grounded in ρ and internally disjoint from V (Ω) .If (G, Ω) is a society with a nest C in a rendition ρ of (G, Ω) in a disc, we say that a radial linkage R for C is orthogonal to C if for all C ∈ C and all R ∈ R the graph C ∩ R is a path. 

Inner and outer graphs of a cycle. Let (G, Ω) be a society with a Σ-rendition ρ. Further, let C be a grounded cycle whose trace bounds a disc ∆C and the ∆C -society (G′, Ω′). We call 

G′ ∪ C the inner graph of C (in ρ) and call G′ itself the proper inner graph of C (in ρ). Let B =

π(N (ρ) ∩ bd (∆ C )) . We define the proper outer graph of C (in ρ) as G′′ := G[B ∪ (V (G) \ V (G′))] 

and call G′′ ∪ C the outer graph of C (in ρ). 

Depth of vortices. Let G be a graph and ρ be a Σ-rendition of G with a vortex cell c0. Notice that c0 defines a society (σ(c0), Ωc0 ), where V (Ω c0 ) is the set of vertices of G corresponding to 

Nρ(c0). The ordering Ωc0 is obtained by traversing along the boundary of the closure of c0 in counterclockwise direction. We call (σ(c0), Ωc0 ) as obtained above the vortex society of c0.

We define the depth of a society (G, Ω) as the maximum cardinality of a transaction in (G, Ω) .The depth of the vortex c0 is thereby defined as the depth of its vortex society. It easily follows that every society with a linear decomposition of adhesion at most k has depth at most 2k. What interests us here is the reverse statement which was shown by Robertson and Seymour in [RS90]. 

Proposition 3.3 ( [RS90]) . Let k be a non-negative integer and (G, Ω) be a society of depth at most k. Then (G, Ω) has a linear decomposition of adhesion at most k. 

Finally, we define the width of a Σ-rendition of a graph G as the minimum non-negative integer 

w such that every vortex society of ρ admits a linear decomposition of width at most w. Further, we define the breadth of ρ as the number of vortex cells of ρ and the depth of ρ as the maximum depth of its vortex societies. 

Flat Meshes. Let n ≥ 2 be an integer. Let G be a graph, and let M ⊆ G be an n-mesh. We say that M is a flat mesh in G if there exists a rendition ρ of G on the sphere with a single vortex c0 such that M is flat in ρ and the trace of the perimeter of M in ρ separates all vertices 5

in N (ρ) ∩ V (M ) from c0. We say that ρ witnesses the flatness of M. 

Cylindrical meshes. In some settings it will be easier to work with a version of meshes that is cylindrical. Let m, n be positive integers, let M be a graph, and let C1, . . . , C m be cycles and P1, . . . , P n be paths in M such that the following holds for all i ∈ [m] and j ∈ [n]: 

> •

C1, . . . , C m are pairwise vertex-disjoint, P1, . . . , P n are pairwise vertex-disjoint, and M =

C1 ∪ · · · ∪ Cm ∪ P1 ∪ · · · ∪ Pn. 

> •

Ci ∩ Pj is a path, and if i ∈ { 1, m } or j ∈ { 1, n }, then Ci ∩ Pj has exactly one vertex, 

> 5Note that this may mean that non-nodes belonging to the perimeter of the mesh may be drawn in cells outside of the vortex.

24 • when traversing Ci starting from an endpoint of P1 ∩ Ci, then either the paths P1, . . . , P n

are encountered in the order listed or the next Pj one encounters is Pn and from here the paths are encountered in the order Pn, . . . , P 1, and  

> •

Pj has one end in C1 and the other in Cm, and when traversing Pj starting from its endpoint on C1, the cycles C1, . . . , C m are encountered in the order listed. If the above conditions hold for M, we call M an (n×m)-cylindrical mesh . The cycles C1, . . . , C m

are called the concentric cycles , or cycles , of M and the paths P1, . . . , P n are called the radial paths , or rails , of M . We also call (n × n)-cylindrical meshes n-cylindrical meshes .Let n, m ≥ 3 be integers, G be a graph, and M be an (n × m)-cylindrical mesh in G. Similarly to meshes, let TM be the orientation of Sr, where r = min {n, m }, such that for every (A, B ) ∈ T M ,

the set B \ A contains the vertex set of both a concentric cycle and a radial path of M, we call 

B the M -majority side of (A, B ). Then TM is the tangle induced by M . If T is a tangle in G, 

say that T controls the mesh M if TM is a truncation of T .

3.3 Manipulating vital linkages 

At several points in our proofs we will want to delete vertices, edges, and decompose graphs at separations while preserving the existence of vital linkages. Most of these operations have been considered already by Robertson and Seymour in [RS09] and we will reuse several of their results on these operations. 

Proposition 3.4. Let (G, T ) be an annotated graph and L a vital T -linkage in G. Let (A, B )

be a separation in G and let S := A ∩ B. Let TB := T ∩ B. Then (G[B], T B ∪ S) is an annotated graph admitting a vital (S ∪ TB )-linkage L′ such that each path in L′ is a subpath of a path in L.

Proposition 3.5. Let (G, T ) be an annotated graph and L a vital T -linkage in G. Let 

v ∈ V (G) \ V (T ) and G′ := G − v. Let u, w ∈ V (G) be the two vertices adjacent to v such that uv, vw ∈ E(L) for some L ∈ L . Let T ′ := T ∪ { u, w }. Then (G′, T ′) is an annotated graph admitting a vital T ′-linkage L′ such that each path in L′ is a subpath of a path in L.If v ∈ V (G) is an isolated vertex, then v ∈ T and there is some path L ∈ L consisting solely of v. Further, (G − v, T \ { v}) is an annotated graph with a vital linkage L′ such that L′ ⊆ L .Let G, H be graphs with H ⊆ G and let L be a linkage in G, then we define L ∩ H to be 

{P : L ∈ L and P is a component of H ∩ L}. The following is an immediate consequence of (2.3) in [RS09] 6.

Proposition 3.6. Let G, H be graphs with H ⊆ G and let L be a linkage in G. If L is vital in 

G, then L ∩ H is vital in H.A key tool for us will be [RS09, Theorem 2.5]. This is essential for our later proof of Theorem 6.4 analysing the number of “non-trivial types” a vital linkage can “induce” on the separators given a sequence of laminar separations. The following is a transcription to our setting. 

> 6Note that in Robertson and Seymour’s setting separations are defined as tuples of subgraphs that intersect only in vertices.

25 Proposition 3.7 ([RS09, Theorem 2.5]) . Let k, d ∈ N and let f (k, d ) := (2 k+1)( k+d+1) 2( k+d)+1 .Let L be a vital linkage of order k in a graph G, and for i ∈ [f (k, d )] let (Ai, B i) be a separation of G of order d, such that i) Ai ⊆ Aj and Bj ⊆ Bi for 1 ≤ i < j ≤ n, and ii) for 1 ≤ i < n, there is a linkage Mi in G[Bi] ∩ G[Ai+1 ] of order d, each path of which has one end in Ai ∩ Bi and the other in Ai+1 ∩ Bi+1 .Then there exists i ∈ [n] such that ⋃ L ∩ G[Bi] ∩ G[Ai+1 ] = ⋃ Mi.

3.4 Colorful graphs 

To later deal with the folio-problem, we will need definitions for graphs which feature several different colours. We define these here since we will briefly deal with these graphs and the folio-problem in Section 8 as well. We use the patently incorrect spelling of colour when defining these colorful graphs to stay in line with the name given to them in [PTW25]. Let q be a non-negative integer. A q-colorful graph is a pair (G, χ ) where G is a graph and 

χ : V (G) → 2[q]. For a vertex v ∈ V (G) we call χ(v) the palette of v. A q-colorful graph (G, χ )

where χ(G) ⊊ [q] is called restricted and a q-colorful graph (G, χ ) with χ(G) = ∅ is called blank .A q-colorful graph (G, χ ) is said to be rainbow if χ(v) = [ q] for all v ∈ V (G). Annotated graphs correspond directly to 1-colorful graphs. Let (G, χ ) and (H, ψ ) be colorful graphs. We say that a minor model φ of H in G is a colorful minor model of (H, ψ ) in (G, χ ) if for every v ∈ V (H) and every i ∈ ψ(v) there is some vertex 

u ∈ φ(v) such that i ∈ χ(u). To simplify notation, we may simply say that (H, ψ ) is a colorful minor of (G, χ ). Accordingly, in a 1-colorful graph G that has H as a red minor, H is also a rainbow (colorful) minor. 

3.5 The Local Structure Theorem for annotated graphs 

One of the key results we will use is a variant of the Local Structure Theorem (first proven in [RS03] as (3.1)) recently provided by Gorsky, Protopapas, and Wiederrecht [GPW26]. Their statement of this theorem (see Theorem 5.1 in [GPW26]) is quite a bit more technical than what we use here. We simplify their formulation in three ways. First, we assume that we are working on an annotated graph with bounded dimensionality, which gets rid of one of the options in their statement. Secondly, we will not require the complicated structure that their 

layout -definition provides and thus will simply extract the parts of their structure that are of use to us. (Accordingly the proposition we state here is quite a bit weaker than what they actually prove.) Third, we reformulate their first outcome by digging only mildly into their proof (which uses Proposition 8.2 to guarantee this point) to respect a blank Kt-minor model instead of the mesh. 

Proposition 3.8 (Gorsky, Protopapas, and Wiederrecht [GPW26]) . There exist functions 

apex 3.8, depth 3.8 : N2 → N and mesh 3.8 : N3 → N such that for all integers t ≥ 1, r ≥ 4, and 

w ≥ 3, every annotated graph (G, R ) with bidim (G, T ) ≤ r, and every mesh 3.8(r, t, w )-mesh 

M ⊆ G one of the following holds. i) (G, R ) has a blank K⌊5t/2⌋-minor model ψ and a separation (X, Y ) of order at most t − 1

such that the Tψ-big component of G − (X ∩ Y ) is blank, 26 ii) (G, R ) has a red Kt-minor model controlled by M, or iii) there exists a set A ⊆ V (G) with |A| ≤ apex 3.8(t, r ) and a surface Σ of genus less than 9t2 such that (G − A, R \ A) has a blank Σ-rendition ρ with breadth at most 

> 3

/2(t − 1)(3 t − 4) + r(r − 1) − 3, depth at most depth 3.8(t, r ), and there exists a vortex-free, 

ρ-aligned disc ∆ ⊆ Σ such that the restriction of ρ to ∆ contains a flat w-wall. Moreover, it holds that apex 3.8(t, r ), depth 3.8(t, r ) ∈ poly (t + r) and mesh 3.8(t, r, w ) ∈ poly (t +

r) + O(t2w).

# 4 Taming linkages in surfaces 

This subsection develops the structural framework needed to control how linkages interact with nested cycles in surface embeddings. The central objective is to enforce a controlled interaction between a family of paths and a system of concentric cycles drawn in a disc, ensuring that paths penetrate the cycles in a well-organised and hierarchical manner. This machinery has been inspired by the result of Frédéric Mazoit in [Maz13] who proved a single exponential bound for the linkage function on surface embeddable graphs. This result is based on an earlier result of Geelen, Huynh, and Richter in [GHR18] on topological linkages. The treatment presented here can be viewed as a streamlined reconstruction of the ideas of [Maz13], adapted to our setting and developed with an emphasis on clarity and structural transparency. 

4.1 Preparing the linkage 

This subsection is dedicated to establishing that we can force a set of paths interacting with a set of concentric cycles on a disc to intersect in an orderly manner. What we present here is a version of a fairly standard approach (see for example cheap linkages in [AKK +11] and valleys 

in [Maz13]) adapted to our setting. Let s be a positive integer. An s-well W = ( G, Ω, ρ, C, P) is a society (G, Ω) with a vortex-free, cylindrical rendition ρ in a disc ∆ such that G = ⋃ C ∪ ⋃ P for a set of pairwise internally disjoint V (Ω) -paths P and C = ⟨C1, . . . , C s⟩ is a sequence of concentric cycles in ∆. Thus for each P ∈ P , we may let T be the trace of P in ρ and there exists a unique disc ∆P in ∆ − T

such that the intersection of ∆P and the trace of C1 is empty. We call the closure of ∆P the 

interior of P . See Figure 2 for an example of a 4-well. We say that an s-well W = ( G, Ω, ρ, C, P) is drained if either |P| ≤ 1 or  

> •

for each P ∈ P we have that for all i ∈ [s − 1] , if P ∩ Ci is non-empty, then there exists 

Q ∈ P \ { P } such that the trace of Q ∩ Ci+1 is non-empty and found in ∆P , and  

> •

for all i ∈ [s], no Ci-path P ′ in P that is disjoint from V (C \ { Ci}) is contained in a cell 

c ∈ C(ρ) such that σ(c) contains an edge of Ci.In drained wells the vortex-free rendition tells us that any path that moves deeply into a drained well implies the existence of many other paths that also go deep. This is captured in the following observation which we will apply implicitly whenever we work with drained wells. 

Observation 4.1. Let W = ( G, Ω, ρ, C, P) be a drained s-well and let P ∈ P be a path such that Ci ∩ P is non-empty for some i ∈ [s]. Then there exist (s − i) + 1 distinct paths 27 P ∆  

> ∆1
> ∆PC1C2
> C3
> C4

Figure 2: A 4-well with a single path drawn in violet. The disc ∆1 ⊆ ∆ bounded by C1 forms the “bottom” of the well and is illustrated in gray. As drawn, it is possible for the outermost cycle to intersect the boundary of the disc onto which the well is embedded in nodes. 

Ps, P s−1, . . . , P i+1 , P i = P such that Pj ∩ Cj is non-empty for all j ∈ [i, s ] and we have ∆Ps ⊊

. . . ⊊ ∆Pi+1 .We start by proving that we can drain any given well by rearranging the paths within it without changing the underlying set of cycles that make up the well. 

Lemma 4.2. Let s be a positive integer and let W = ( G, Ω, ρ, C, P) be an s-well. Then there exists an s-well W′ = ( G′, Ω, ρ ′, C, P′) that is drained and such that G′ ⊆ G, ρ ′ is the rendition of 

G′ induced by ρ, |P| = |P ′|, and for each P ∈ P there exists a P ′ ∈ P ′ with the same endpoints. 

Proof. Suppose the statement is false and that W is a minimal counterexample with respect to 

|E(C ∪ P )|. Let C = ⟨C1, . . . , C s⟩, where ∆i is the Ci-disc in ρ for each i ∈ [s], and let P ∈ P 

intersect some cycle Ci with i ∈ [s − 1] .We first establish the second property in the definition of being drained. Observe that if there exists a cell c ∈ C(ρ) such that σ(c) contains both an edge of Ci and a Ci-path P ′ ⊆ P with endpoints u, v, then we may simply replace P ′ in P with the unique u-v-path in Ci ∩ σ(c). This would contradict the minimality of W.Towards the first property, suppose that Ci+1 is not intersected by any path whose trace lies in 

∆P . Since ρ is vortex-free, we know that Ci+1 ∩ P is non-empty. Then let a, b be the first and last vertex we see of P within Ci+1 ∩ P when traversing P from one endpoint to the other. If there exists a grounded a-V (P )-path L in Ci+1 − E(P ) whose trace is found in ∆P (see the left side of Figure 3), then according to our assumptions on P and Ci+1 , no other path in P

whose trace lies in ∆P intersects L. However, this would allow us to shortcut P along Ci+1 ,

contradicting the minimality of W.Let P ∗ ⊆ P be the first Ci+1 -Ci-path or Ci+1 -path with a trace in ∆i+1 that we see when traversing P starting in a and heading towards b. Note that such a path must exist, since 

P ∩ Ci is non-empty and it must be grounded, according to our prior observation. Let a′ be the endpoints of P ∗ closest to a on P .28 P P

a a

∆P ∆P

Ci

Ci+1 

L L′

Figure 3: An illustration for Lemma 4.2 showing the two kinds of paths L and L′ that lead to a contradiction to minimality in the context of the proof of the lemma. As there does not exist a grounded a-V (P )-path in Ci+1 − E(P ) whose trace is found in ∆P and due to our choice of P ∗ (see the right side of Figure 3), there now exists a grounded a′-V (P )-path 

L′ in Ci+1 − E(P ) whose trace is found in ∆P and we arrive at a contradiction exactly as we did earlier with L.For some applications the above lemma will be sufficient, but we will also need wells that act much more orderly but provide stronger assumptions on the structure of the cycles. Let C = ⟨C1, . . . , C s⟩ be a sequence of concentric cycles in a ∆-rendition ρ of a graph G in a disc ∆ and let ∆i be the Ci-disc in ρ for each i ∈ [s], with ∆0 = ∅. We say that C is tight (in 

ρ) if for all i ∈ [s] there does not exist a grounded Ci-path whose trace is found in ∆i \ ∆i−1.Given a vortex c with c ⊆ ∆1, we say that C is tight around c (in ρ) if there does not exist a grounded C1-path whose trace is found in ∆1. In general, we call a set of concentric cycles C′

tight in a rendition ρ′ (around a vortex) if we can find a disc such that the restriction of ρ′ to 

∆′ allows us to call C′ tight. A well W = ( G′, Ω, ρ ′, C′, P) tight if C′ is tight in ρ′.Finding tight concentric cycles is an easy exercise and many articles in the literature provide algorithmic proofs that turn a concentric set of cycles into a tight, concentric set of cycles (see the discussion of tight cycles in [AKK +11] and cozy nests in [GSW25] for example). Thus we state the following result without proof. 

Proposition 4.3. Let C = ⟨C1, . . . , C s⟩ be a set of concentric cycles in a ∆-rendition ρ of a graph G in a disc ∆ with ∆s being the Cs-disc in ρ. Then there exists a tight concentric set of cycles C′ = ⟨C′

> 1

, . . . , C ′

> s

⟩ such that the trace of each cycle in C′ lies in ∆s.Under the assumption that we are working with a tight well, we can actually guarantee a much stronger property than simply being drained. We say that a well W = ( G, Ω, ρ, C =

⟨C1, . . . , C s⟩, P) is dry if W is drained and for all P ∈ P we have that i) the graph C1 ∩ P is either empty or a single path, ii) there exists a unique i ∈ [s] such that Ci ∩ P is a single path, iii) for all j ∈ [i − 1] the graph Cj ∩ P is empty, and iv) for all j ∈ [i + 1 , s ] the graph Cj ∩ P consists of exactly two paths. It turns out that guaranteeing the existence of a dry well once given a tight well is quite easy, since we already proved Lemma 4.2. 29 Lemma 4.4. Let s be a positive integer and let W = ( G, Ω, ρ, C, P) be a tight s-well. Then there exists a tight, dry s-well W′ = ( G′, Ω, ρ ′, C, P′) such that G′ ⊆ G, ρ ′ is the rendition of G′

induced by ρ, |P| = |P ′|, and for each P ∈ P there exists a P ′ ∈ P ′ with the same endpoints. 

Proof. Suppose the statement is false and that W is a minimal counterexample with respect to |E(C ∪ P )|. Thanks to Lemma 4.2, we may assume that W is already drained and we let 

C = ⟨C1, . . . , C s⟩, where ∆i is the Ci-disc in ρ for each i ∈ [s].Thanks to the second property of being drained, all paths we discuss from this point forward can be assumed to have a trace. Furthermore, we observe that, due to the tightness of C, no path in P may have a C1-path whose trace intersects the interior of ∆1.Suppose now that there exists a path P ∈ P and an i ∈ [s] such that P contains a Ci-path 

P ′ with the endpoints a, b whose trace is found outside of ∆i \ bd (∆ i). Then we choose P to maximise i and let L be the a-b-path in Ci such that the P ′ ∪ L-disc is disjoint from ∆i \ bd (∆ i).Due to the maximality of i and the fact that ρ is vortex-free, we conclude that L is internally disjoint from V (P). Thus by replacing P ′ with L in P we produce a contradiction to the minimality of W.As a consequence of the observations we have just made, for any path P ∈ P such that C1 ∩ P

is non-empty, the graph C1 ∩ P must be a path. This guarantees the first property of being dry. Suppose now that there instead exists a path P ∈ P such that for no i ∈ [s] the graph Ci ∩ P

consists of a single component. We choose P such that the value i ∈ [s] for which Ci ∩ P is non-empty is maximum and for all Q ∈ P such that the interior ∆Q of Q contains P there does actually exist a j ∈ [s] such that Cj ∩ Q is a path. Clearly, the fact that Ci ∩ P is comprised of at least two components implies the existence of a Ci-path P ′ in P . As we have observed earlier, 

P ′ must have its trace in ∆i. But since i is maximum and P is chosen to be the “outermost” path violating the second property at i, P ′ must be disjoint from all other cycles in C and thus the tightness of C prohibits its existence. This ensures that the second property of dryness holds. The third property is then easily derived from the fact that C is concentric and ρ is vortex-free. So we may finally suppose that the fourth property is violated and that there exists a P ∈ P 

such that Ci ∩ P consists of more than two components for some i ∈ [s]. By again choosing P

and i to be maximal as in the previous paragraph, we arrive at another contradiction, completing our proof. We note at this point that while the ideas behind our considerations in this subsection play an important role in the upcoming discussion of the bounded genus case of the Vital Linkage Theorem, we need somewhat stronger minimality assumptions on the type of “wells” that will appear there. Nonetheless our results in this subsection and the remainder of this section are cut from similar cloth and we will require wells – both drained and dry – at several points throughout the paper, as they form a basic type of configuration we encounter. 

4.2 Linkages in graphs on a surface 

In 2013 Mazoit proved a single exponential upper bound for the irrelevant vertex theorem for graphs embedded into a fixed surface. More precisely, he proved the following [Maz13, Theorem 1]. Let G be a graph embedded into a surface Σ of genus g ≥ 0. Suppose that G contains a sequence ⟨C1, . . . , C t⟩ of pairwise disjoint cycles such that each Ci bounds a disc ∆( Ci) ⊆ Σ

30 with ∆( Ci) ⊆ int (∆( Ci+1 )), for all 1 ≤ i < t . Let L ⊆ G be a linkage of order k in G

such that no path L ∈ L has an endpoint in ∆( Ct). In this setting Mazoit proved that if 

t ≥ f (g, k ) := 20 9 · k · c3( g−1)+2 k, where c = 3 e 10 3e is a small constant, then there is a linkage 

L′ ⊆ G with τ (L) = τ (L′) and L′ is disjoint from G ∩ int (∆( C1)).To prove the theorem, Mazoit first performs some preprocessing steps to reduce the input instance to a simpler form that he calls a reduced instance which corresponds to what we call a wedding cake below. See Definition 4.8 for details. The technical core of his argument is to show that in such a reduced instance the vertices deep in the middle of a separating set of concentric cycles is irrelevant. Mazoit made his proof available as a preprint on arXiv [Maz13], but to date it has not appeared in a peer-reviewed venue. His proof in [Maz13] is at some places very condensed and not always completely polished and therefore occasionally a bit hard to follow. Therefore, in this section, we reprove the part of his result that we need in full detail and also adapt it to the notation in the rest of this paper. Before we state the theorem we prove we first need to introduce some notation. 

Wedding cakes We first define the kind of surfaces we work with. 

Definition 4.5. For a number g ≥ 0, a disc with g strips is a surface Σ obtained from a closed disc ∆ as follows. Let d11, d 21, . . . , d 1

> g

, d 2 

> g

be pairwise disjoint closed and connected subsets of 

bd (∆) . Let S1, . . . , S g be closed discs and, for all 1 ≤ i ≤ g, let s1 

> i

and s2 

> i

be disjoint connected closed subsets of bd (Si). Then Σ is obtained from ∆ by gluing, for all 1 ≤ i ≤ g, s 1 

> i

onto d1 

> i

and 

s2 

> i

onto d2 

> i

in any of the two possible orientations. We say that Σ is generated by (∆ , S 1, . . . , S g) and denote this by Σ ˆ =(∆ , S 1, . . . , S g).We refer to the discs S1, . . . , S g as the strips of Σ and to ∆ as its base . The curves s1 

> i

and s2 

> i

are the sides of Si.The segments of Σ are the components of bd (∆) ∩ bd (Σ) . A pre-segment of Σ is either a segment of Σ or a side of a strip. In this section we will only work with graphs G embedded into a surface Σ generated by 

(∆ , S 1, . . . , S g). It is therefore convenient for us to assume that G ⊆ Σ, i.e. the vertices of G

are points on Σ and the edges are simple curves connecting their endpoints. Our goal is to show that any vertex in G that is separated from a set of terminals by a sufficient number of concentric cycles will be irrelevant for the existence of a linkage connecting the terminals. In the next definition we formally define what we mean by a set of concentric cycles. 

Definition 4.6. Let C := ⟨C1, . . . , C t⟩ be a sequence of pairwise disjoint cycles in G. We say that C is a canonical sequence of concentric cycles if each Ci, for 1 ≤ i < t, bounds a closed disc 

∆( Ci) ⊆ ∆ such that ∆( Ci) ⊆ int (∆( Ci+1 )). The number t is the order of C.As mentioned in the introduction of this section, we will only prove the irrelevant vertex theorem for instances of a very special form. In the next definition we introduce notation for linkages that we need to formally define the special form of instances we work with later on. Recall that the segments of Σ ˆ =( δ, S 1, . . . , S g) are the components of bd (∆) ∩ bd (Σ) .31 S1 S2Figure 4: A wedding cake of genus 2, order 4, and depth 4. The 4 segments are marked by the grey areas on the outer cycle. 

Definition 4.7. Let Σ be a disc with g strips generated by (∆ , S 1, . . . , S g). Let G ⊆ Σ be a graph and let C be a canonical sequence of concentric cycles of order t embedded into ∆ such that bd (∆) = Ct.Let L ⊆ G be a linkage whose endpoints are all contained in the segments of Σ, i.e. in bd (Σ) ∩

bd (∆) .A component L of L ∩ ∆ is a valley if there is d ≤ t such that the vertices of L, as they appear, are ⟨v0, . . . , v 2d⟩ with vi, v 2d−i ∈ V (Ct−i), for all 0 ≤ i ≤ d. We call d the depth of the valley L.The linkage L is clean (w.r.t. Σ and C) if each component L of L ∩ ∆ is a valley and, if g ≥ 1,

then the two endpoints of L are contained in different pre-segments of Σ.A property of valleys that is implicit in their definition is that every edge of a valley has its endpoints on different consecutive cycles of C. We will need this property below. We are now ready to define the special form of instances for the irrelevant vertex problem we will work with. See Figure 4 for an illustration. 

Definition 4.8. Let Σ be a disc with g strips generated by (∆ , S 1, . . . , S g). Let G ⊆ Σ be a graph, C = ⟨Ct, . . . , C 1⟩ be a canonical set of concentric cycles of order t, and let L ⊆ G be a linkage of order k. The tuple (Σ , G, C, L) is a wedding cake of depth t, genus g, and order k if it meets the following conditions. (i) L is clean (w.r.t. Σ and C), the endpoints of the paths in L are contained in the segments of Σ, and otherwise L is disjoint from bd (Σ) .(ii) ∆( Ct) = ∆ .(iii) V (G) = V (L) = V (C), E (C) ∩ E(L) = ∅, and E(G) = E(C) ∪ E(L).Given a wedding cake (Σ , G, C, L), we say that a vertex v ∈ V (G) is irrelevant if G−v contains a linkage L′ with τ (L′) = τ (L).Finally, we fix an orientation of bd (∆) which also orients all cycles in C in the same way. This allows us to say that a vertex u in a pre-segment s of Σ comes before or after a vertex v on s.Before stating the main theorem of this section we collect a few useful properties of wedding cakes we use below. 

Lemma 4.9. Let W := (Σ ˆ= (∆ , S 1, . . . , S g), G, C, L) be a wedding cake of depth t, genus g, and order k.32 Let p ⊆ bd (∆) be a pre-segment and let P = {P0, . . . , P ℓ} be the paths in L ∩ ∆ with an endpoint in p ordered so that the endpoints p0, . . . , p ℓ of P0, . . . , P ℓ appear in this order on bd (∆) w.r.t. to the orientation of bd (∆) .Then for each 0 ≤ j ≤ ⌈ ℓ 

> 2

⌉ the paths Pj and Pℓ−j both contain a subpath linking their endpoint on p and a vertex on Ct−j .

Proof. Suppose the claim was false and let j be minimal such that Pj or Pℓ−j does not contain a subpath linking their endpoint on p with a vertex on Ct−j . W.l.o.g. we assume that Pj does not contain such a subpath. It is easily seen that j > 0. By our choice of j, the paths Pj−1 and Pℓ+1 −j both contain subpaths 

Ij−1 ⊆ Pj−1 and Iℓ+1 −j ⊆ Pℓ+2 −j linking their endpoints pj−1 and pℓ+1 −j on p, resp., to some vertex qj−1 and qℓ+1 −j , resp., on Ct−(j−1) . But if Pj is disjoint from Ct−j , then p ∪ Ij−1 ∪ Iℓ+1 −j

together with the subpath C′ ⊆ Ct−j between qj−1 and qℓ+1 −j bounds a closed disc D that contains Pj with bd (D) ∩ bd (Σ) = p. But this is a contradiction to the requirement of valleys that the other endpoint of Pj is not on p.Given a segment p in a wedding cake we will refer to the set of paths I1, . . . , I ℓ constructed in the previous lemma as a pyramid over p below. We are now ready to state the main technical theorem in Mazoit’s paper. 

Theorem 4.10 (see [Maz13, Theorem 2]) . Let f4.10 (g, k ) := 20 9 k · (3 e 10 3e )g and let 

(Σ ˆ= (∆ , S 1, . . . , S g), G, C, L) be a wedding cake of depth t ≥ f4.10 (g, k ), genus g, and order 

k. Then there is a linkage L′ with τ (L′) = τ (L) which is disjoint from int (∆( C1)). That is, every vertex of G inside int (∆( C1)) is irrelevant for the existence of a linkage in G realising τ (L).In the remainder of this section we prove the previous theorem. So far we have worked with linkages L as sets of paths in G. For some of our arguments we will work with topological linkages which are simply sets of disjoint curves on Σ. We introduce the required notation next. 

Definition 4.11. Let G be a graph and let A ⊆ V (G). A pattern on A is a set τ ⊆ {{a, b } :

a, b ∈ A} of pairs of vertices of A (not necessarily disjoint). If A = V (G) we simply say that τ is a pattern. Let Σ be a surface. A topological linkage T in Σ with pattern τ is a set of pairwise disjoint simple curves such that T contains for each pair {a, b } ∈ τ a curve with endpoints a and b. We denote the pattern of T by τ (T ).A pattern τ is realisable (in G) if there is a linkage L in G with τ (L) = τ and it is topologically feasible (in Σ) if there is a topological linkage T in Σ with τ (T ) = τ .Obviously if τ is feasible then it must also be topologically feasible. The converse is not true in general. We call a topological linkage T realisable in G if there is a linkage L ⊆ G such that 

τ (L) = τ (T ).Throughout this part we will use L (possibly with subscripts) to denote linkages in G and T

(again possibly with subscripts) to denote topological linkages in Σ.We first need the following easy lemma which proves a special case to which we reduce in the sequel. 33 Lemma 4.12. Let G be a graph embedded on a disc ∆ and let C := ⟨C1, . . . , C t⟩ be a canonical sequence of concentric cycles such that Ct = bd (∆) . Furthermore, let P be a V (Ct)−V (C1)-linkage of order 2k in G such that |V (P ∩ Cj )| = 1 for each P ∈ P and 1 ≤ j ≤ t. Let τ be a pattern of order k on V (Ct) ∩ V (P).If t ≥ k and τ is topologically feasible then it is realisable in G. Furthermore, τ can be realised in G \ int (∆( C1)) ⊆ Σ.

Proof. We prove the lemma by induction on k. Let P := {P1, . . . , P 2k} and, for 1 ≤ j ≤ 2k, let 

pj be the endpoint of Pj on Ct. As τ is topologically feasible, there must be a pair {a, b } ∈ τ

such that Ct contains a subpath C(a, b ) with ends a and b that does not contain any other vertex occurring in an element of τ . Let A ⊆ τ be the set of such pairs. Thus, |A| ≥ 1.We construct a pattern τ ′ as follows. For {a, b } ∈ τ \ A let Pa, P b be the paths in P with endpoints a, b, resp., and let a⋆ be the vertex in Pa ∩ Ct−1 and let b⋆ be the vertex in Pb ∩ Ct−1.Let P ⋆a and P ⋆b be the subpaths of Pa and Pb between a and a⋆ and b and b⋆, resp. Then 

τ ′ := {{ a⋆, b ⋆} : {a, b } ∈ τ \ A}.By construction, τ ′ is a pattern of order k′ for some k′ < k and all vertices occurring in 

τ ′ are contained in V (Ct−1). Let C′ := ⟨C1, . . . , C t−1⟩ and let P′ := P ∩ ∆( Ct−1). Thus, 

G′ := G ∩ ∆( Ct−1), P′, C′, and τ ′ satisfy the assumptions of the induction hypothesis and hence there is a linkage L′ ⊆ G′ \ int (∆( C1)) ⊆ Σ with τ (L′) = τ ′. For each L′ ∈ L ′ with endpoints 

a⋆ and b⋆ let L = P ⋆a ∪ L ∪ P ⋆b be the extension of the path L′ ∈ L to the cycle Ct and let 

L := {L : L′ ∈ L ′} ∪ { C(a, b ) : {a, b } ∈ A}. Then L ⊆ G \ int (∆( C1)) ⊆ Σ and τ (L) = τ as required. We also need the following lemma in later sections which can be proved in a similar way. 

Lemma 4.13. Let G be a graph embedded into a disc ∆ and let C := ⟨C1, . . . , C t⟩ with t ≥ 2k

be a canonical sequence of concentric cycles such that Ct = bd (∆) and int (∆( C1)) = ∅. Let P

be a V (Ct)−V (C1)-linkage of order 2k in G such that |V (Ci) ∩ V (P )| = 1 , for all 1 ≤ i ≤ t and all P ∈ P . Finally, let τ be a pattern of order k on (V (Ct) ∪ V (C1)) ∩ V (P).If τ is topologically feasible then it is realisable in G.

Proof. A pair {a, b } ∈ τ is local if {a, b } ⊆ V (C1) or {a, b } ⊆ V (Ct). We prove the lemma by induction on the number of local pairs in τ .We first consider the case where τ does not have a local pair. Fix an orientation of ∆ which implies a consistent orientation of Ct and C1. Let τ := {{ai, b i} : 1 ≤ i ≤ k} such that all 

ai ∈ V (Ct) and all bi ∈ V (C1), numbered such that a1, . . . , a k occur in this order on Ct. As G is planar and τ is topologically feasible, b1, . . . , b k must also appear in this order in C1.Let P (a1) ∈ P be the path containing a1 and let c1 be the other endpoint of P (a1) on C1. Let 

S1 be the subpath of C1 starting at c1 and ending at b1 in the direction of C1 and let S2 be the other subpath of C1 starting at b1 and ending at c1. Let P (b1) ∈ P be the path with endpoint 

b1.At least one of S1, S 2 contains ≥ k1 endpoints of paths in P \ { P (a1), P (b1)}. W.l.o.g. we assume that this is S2.Let a′ be the unique vertex in V (P (a1)) ∩ C⌊ t  

> 2⌋

and let b′ be the unique vertex of V (P (b1)) ∩ C⌊ t 

> 2⌋

.Let S be the subpath of C⌊ t  

> 2⌋

between a′ and b′ in the same direction as S1. Let L be the union 34 of S, the subpath of P (a1) between a1 and a′, and the subpath of P (b1) between b′ and b1. By construction, L links a1 and b1.Let L′ be a linkage of order k − 1 between A := {a2, . . . , a k} and B := {b2, . . . , b k} in G − L.Such a linkage exists, for otherwise, by Menger’s theorem, there would be a separation (A′, B ′)

of G − L of order < k − 1 with A ⊆ A′ and B ⊆ B′. But this is impossible because there are 

k − 1 disjoint paths in P \ { P (a1), P (b1)} with an endpoint in B which intersect each of the cycles Cj with 1 ≤ j ≤ ⌊ t 

> 2

⌋ − 1, there are k − 1 paths in P \ { P (a1), P (b1)} with an endpoint in 

A which intersect each of the cycles Cj with t ≥ j ≥ ⌊ t 

> 2

⌋ + 1 and, by our choice of S1, there are 

k − 1 paths in P \ { P (a1), P (b1)} linking S2 ⊆ C1 to Ct. As |V (A′) ∩ V (B′)| ≤ k − 2, the union of these paths and cycles contains an A−B-path disjoint from V (A′) ∩ V (B′), a contradiction. Thus the A−B-linkage L′ exists. As G − L is a planar graph with A and B contained in disjoint subpaths of the outer cycle, L′ must link ai to bi, for all 2 ≤ i ≤ k. Thus L := {L} ∪ L ′ is a linkage realising τ . This concludes the induction base. Now suppose that τ does contain a local pair {a, b }. We can now argue exactly as in the proof of Lemma 4.12. In particular, as τ is topologically feasible, τ must contain a local pair {a, b }

such that one of the two subpaths of the cycle C ∈ { Ct, C 1} containing a, b between a and b

contains no other terminal from τ . Let P ⊆ τ be the set of all such pairs. Then we can link these pairs directly by these subpaths of the cycle containing them without intersecting any other terminal pair. Let τ ′ := τ \ P . For each terminal a ∈ V (Ct) occurring in τ ′ let P (a) ∈ P 

be the path in P containing a and let a′ be the unique vertex in V (P (a) ∩ Ct−1). Analogously, for each b ∈ V (C1) occurring in τ ′ let P (b) ∈ P be the path containing b and let b′ be the unique vertex of P (b) ∩ V (C2). Let P′ be the set of subpaths of paths in P between Ct−1 and C2. Let 

G′ := P′ ∪ ⋃{C2, . . . , C t−1}. By induction hypothesis, there is a linkage L′ in G′ realising τ ′.This can easily be extended to a linkage L in G realising τ .

4.3 Proof of Theorem 4.10 

We are now ready to start proving Theorem 4.10. The main idea is as follows. Let 

(Σ ˆ= (∆ , S 1, . . . , S g), G, C, L) be a wedding cake. We now consider the subpaths of L within a single strip Si, i.e. the linkage L ∩ Si. If L crosses Si only a bounded number of times, we can remove Si from Σ and treat the vertices in L ∩ bd (Si) as new terminals. If this can be done for every strip then we arrive at a planar instance embedded into ∆ with all terminals on bd (∆) .This is the simplest case that we prove in Lemma 4.15. Otherwise we can take a strip Si which L crosses sufficiently often. We then apply the following theorem by Geelen, Huynh, and Richter [GHR18], which is the topological engine of Mazoit’s argument. 

Theorem 4.14. [GHR18, Theorem 2.6] Let Σ be a surface and let P be a non-separating bd (Σ) -path in Σ. For any linkage L in Σ whose ends are disjoint from P, there is a bd -homeomorphism 

ϕ : Σ → Σ such that each path of ϕ(L) intersects P at most twice. This will allow us to show that the pattern τ (L) can be realised by a topological linkage Ti

which crosses Si only a bounded number of times. Repeating this for each strip we obtain a topological linkage T which realises the pattern τ (L) but crosses each strip only a bounded number of times. The difficult step in Mazoit’s proof is to show that T can be realised by a 35 linkage in G which also crosses each strip only a bounded number of times. Once this is done we are in the case that we already discussed above. We now give the details of this proof strategy. We start with the base case which essentially settles the case where L crosses each strip only a bounded number of times. 

Lemma 4.15. Let (Σ := ∆ , G, C, L) be a wedding cake of depth t ≥ 2k, genus 0, and order k.Then there is a linkage L′ with τ (L′) = τ (L) which is disjoint from int (∆( C1)). That is, every vertex of G in int (∆( C1)) is irrelevant for the existence of a linkage in G to realise τ (L).

Proof. The proof is almost identical to the proof of Lemma 4.12. As Σ has no strips, the instance is planar with all terminals on the outer cycle Ct. Thus, there must be a pair {a, b } ∈ τ (L) such that Ct contains a subpath P (a, b ) with ends a and b which is internally disjoint from L (in fact, by the definition of wedding cakes, a = b, but this does not matter here). As in the proof of Lemma 4.12 we add P (a, b ) to L′ for all such pairs and apply induction on the remaining pairs and the sequence ⟨C1, . . . , C t−1⟩ of cycles. We now prove the main lemma that establishes the inductive step. For 0 ≤ i ≤ g we define 

Σi := Σ \ ((S1 ∪ . . . S i) \ bd (∆) ). That is, Σ0 = Σ and, for 1 ≤ i ≤ g, Σi is obtained from the disc ∆ by attaching only the strips Si+1 , . . . , S g. For 0 ≤ i ≤ g, aGiven a linkage L, we define the size of a strip Si, denoted by |Si|, as the number of components in Si ∩ L .Recall that, by definition of a wedding cake, L is clean. 

Lemma 4.16. Let (Σ ˆ= (∆ , S 1, . . . , S g), G, C, L) be a wedding cake of genus g ≥ 1, order k, and depth t ≥ 2k3g. If |Si| ≥ 3k3i + 1 , for all 1 ≤ i ≤ g, then every vertex in int (∆( C1)) is irrelevant. 

Proof. Let 1 ≤ i ≤ g and let si := |Si| − 1. Let p be one of the two sides of Si and let J := L ∩ Si.Let J = {J0, . . . , J si } be ordered in the order in which the endpoints p0, . . . , p si of the paths in 

J appear on p. By Lemma 4.9, the paths in ∆ ∩ L with an endpoint in {p0, . . . , p si } contain subpaths I0, . . . , I si such that Ij links pj and Ct−min {j,s i−j}.Now let p′ be the other side of Si. For 0 ≤ j ≤ si let p′ 

> j

be the endpoint of Jj on p′. Note that either p′

> 0

, . . . , p ′ 

> si

appear in this order on p′ or in reverse. Again, by Lemma 4.9, the paths in 

∆ ∩ L with an endpoint in p′ contain subpaths I′

> 0

, . . . , I ′ 

> si

such that I′ 

> j

links p′ 

> j

and Ct−min {j,s i−j}.Thus, S′ 

> i

:= {Jj ∪ Ij ∪ I′ 

> j

: 0 ≤ j ≤ si} is a linkage which contains for each 0 ≤ j ≤ si a path Pj

containing pj which has both endpoints on Ct−min {j,s i−j}. Let l1 := k ·3i and l2 := l1 +⌊ 12 ·k ·3i−1⌋.Let r2 := 2 k · 3i and let r1 := r2 − ⌊ 12 k · 3i−1⌋.We define Si := {Pj : l1 ≤ j ≤ r2} and set 

• Sli := {Pj : l1 ≤ j < l 2},

• Smi := {Pj : l2 ≤ j < r 1}, and 

• Sri := {Pj : r1 ≤ j < r 2}.We also define Sll i := {Pj : 0 ≤ j < l 1} and Srr i := {Pj : r2 < j ≤ si}. See Figure 5 for an illustration. By construction, |S li |, |S ri | = 12 k3i−1 and |S mi | = 2 k3i−1. Note that |S ll i | = |S rr i | =

k · 3k and thus |S ll i | = |S li | + |S mi | + |S ri |. This will be important below. 

Claim 4.16.1 . There is a topological linkage T ⊆ Σ with τ (T ) = τ (L) such that, for all 1 ≤ i ≤ g, 

T crosses Si at most 2 · k · 3i−1 times. Furthermore, T ∩ Si ⊆ S mi , for all 1 ≤ i ≤ g.36 Figure 5: Illustration of the constructions of the sets Sli , Smi , Sri . The paths marked in orange are the paths Ij (left) and I′ 

> j

(right). The paths in blue are the paths Jj . The paths in the middle in the darkest colours are Smi , the outermost paths in the very light colours are the paths in Sll i and Srr i , resp. 

Proof of claim. We prove by induction on 0 ≤ i ≤ g that there is a topological linkage Ti with 

τ (Ti) = τ (L) such that, for all 1 ≤ j ≤ i, Ti crosses Sj at most 2 · k · 3j−1 times and Tj ∩ Sj ⊆ S mj .Furthermore, |T i ∩ Σi| ≤ k · 3i.For i = 0 we can choose T0 = L, which obviously satisfies the conditions as Σ0 = Σ .Now suppose Ti−1 has already been defined, for some 1 ≤ i ≤ g. By the induction hypothesis, 

|T i−1 ∩ Σi−1| ≤ k · 3i−1.Let R ⊆ Si \ bd (∆) be a boundary curve in Si separating its two sides. By Theorem 4.14 there is a bd -homeomorphism ϕ : Σ i−1 → Σi−1 that maps Ti−1 to a topological linkage T ′ 

> i

= ϕ(Ti−1)

with the same pattern as Ti−1 in Σi−1 such that each path in T ′ 

> i

crosses Si at most twice. Thus, in total T ′ 

> i

crosses Si at most 2 · k · 3i−1 times. As |S mi | = 2 · k3i−1, we may shift T ′ 

> i

to obtain a linkage Ti with τ (Ti) = τ (T ′ 

> i

) such that Ti ∩ Si = Smi .It follows that |T i ∩ Σi| = |T i−1 ∩ Σi−1| + |T i ∩ Si| ≤ k · 3i−1 + 2 · k · 3i−1 = k · 3i as required. We set T := Tg which satisfies the requirements of the claim. ⊣

We show next that the pattern τ (T ) can also be realised by a linkage in G. For this, we first prove the following claim. Let s be a segment of Σi, for some 1 ≤ i ≤ g, and let p0, . . . , p r be the vertices of T ∩ s in the order in which they appear on s. Similar to the discussion below Lemma 4.9 we define a pyramid 

P(s) for s as a set of paths P0, . . . , P r such that each vertex of T ∩ s is endpoint of exactly one path and for 0 ≤ j ≤ ⌈ r 

> 2

⌉ the paths Pj and Pr−j link a vertex on Ct and a vertex on Ct−j . Note that, by construction, if s is a side of Si, for some 1 ≤ i ≤ g, then |T ∩ s| ≤ 2 · 3i−1.

Claim 4.16.2 . Let p1, p 2 be the two segments of Σg−1, i.e., the two components of bd (∆) − bd (Sg).Then G ∩ ∆ contains disjoint pyramids P(p1) and P(p2) of p1 and p2, resp., which are disjoint from Sg.

Proof of claim. By induction on 0 ≤ i < g we show that G contains a pyramid Pi(s) for each segment s of Σi. For i = 0 this follows immediately from Lemma 4.9 and the fact that 

τ (L) = τ (T ). It is easily seen that for different segments s̸ = s′ these pyramids are disjoint (as 

t > k ). 37 sl sr

Sli SriFigure 6: Illustration of the routing in Case 2. Now suppose that we have already constructed a pyramid Pi−1(s) for each segment of Σi−1. Let 

s be a segment of Σi. We distinguish between the following three cases. 

Case 1. If s is already a segment of Σi−1 then we simply set Pi(s) := Pi−1(s).

Case 2. The next case we consider is that s is the union of one of the sides sm of Si and the two segments sl, s r of Σi−1 to the left and to the right of sm. See Figure 6 for an illustration. Let a0, . . . , a p−1, b 1, . . . , b q−1, and c0, . . . , c r−1 be the vertices of T ∩ sl, T ∩ sm, and T ∩ sr, resp., in the order in which they appear on bd (∆) . Recall the definition of the sets Si as well as Sli , Smi ,

and Sri from the beginning of this proof. W.l.o.g. we assume that on the side sm of Si the paths in Sil appear before the paths in Sim and that the paths in Sir come last. By construction of T ,

T ∩ sm ⊆ S mi ∩ sm.Let Ql be the components in Sli ∩ ∆ with an end in sm and let Qm and Qr be defined analogously. Let Ql := {Ql

> 0

, . . . , Q l

> |Q l|− 1

} be ordered in the order in which their endpoints appear on sm and define Qr := {Qr

> 0

, . . . , Q r 

> |Q r|− 1

} analogously. As observed above, q ≤ 2 · k · 3i−1 = |Q m| and |Q l|, |Q r| ≥ 12 · k · 3i−1. Furthermore, |T ∩ Σi−1| ≤ 

k · 3i−1 and therefore p, r ≤ k · 3i−1. Let L0, . . . , L p−1 be the paths of Pi−1(sl) such that Lj

contains aj , for 0 ≤ j ≤ p − 1, and let R0, . . . , R r−1 be the paths of Pi−1(sr), again numbered such that Rj contains cj , for 0 ≤ j ≤ r − 1. We now construct a pyramid Pi(s) as follows. 

• For 0 ≤ j ≤ ⌈ p−12 ⌉ we set P (aj ) := Lj and for 0 ≤ j ≤ ⌈ r−12 ⌉ we set P (cr−j ) := Rr−j .

• For 0 ≤ j ≤ q − 1 we set P (bj ) to be the subpath of the path P ∈ S m with endpoint bj of the right length for it to be a proper part of the pyramid. This is always possible as the paths in Sm link Ct to Ct−k·3i .

• For 0 ≤ j ≤ ⌊ p−12 ⌋ we construct the path P (ap−j ) as follows. Let P ′ be the union of Lp−j ,Qlj , and the part of Ct−j that connects Lp−j and Qlj and is disjoint from Qim. P ′ is a path that connects ap−j to Ck·3i and thus we can take a subpath P (ap−j ) ⊆ P ′ with ap−j as one end and the other end on Ct−(p−j).The paths P (cr−j ), for 0 ≤ j ≤ ⌊ r−12 ⌋ are defined analogously using the paths in Qr

instead. The paths constructed in this last step are marked in orange in Figure 6. Now we set Pi(s) := {P (u) : u ∈ { a0, . . . , a p−1, b 0, . . . , b q−1, c 0, . . . , c r−1}} . By construction, 

Pi(s) is a pyramid over s, as required. 38 Ql 

> 1

Ql

> 2

p1 p2 p3Figure 7: Illustration of Case 3 in Lemma 4.16. The two orange paths illustrate the rerouting. 

Case 3. The last case we consider is the case where s is the union of both sides s1 and s2 of Si

and the segments p1, p 2, p 3, where p1 is the segment before s1 on Ct, p 2 is the segment between 

s1 and s2, and p3 is the segment after s2 on Ct. See Figure 7 for an illustration of this case. Recall the definition of Sli , Smi , and Sri from above. In this case we also need the sets Sll i and 

Srr i .For 1 ≤ j ≤ 3 let aj

> 0

, . . . , a jhj be the vertices of pj ∩T and for 1 ≤ j ≤ 2 let bj

> 0

, . . . , b jfj be the vertices of sj ∩ V (G). By construction, f1, f 2 ≥ 3k3i + 1 . Furthermore, h1 + h2 + h3 ≤ T ∩ Σi−1 ≤ k · 3i−1.As in the previous case we let Q1 

> l

be the components of Sli ∩ ∆ with an end in s1 and we define 

Q1

> m

, Q1 

> r

, Q1

> ll

, and Q1 

> rr

analogously. In the same way we define Q2 

> l

as the components of Sli ∩ ∆

with an end in s2 and we define Q2

> m

, Q2 

> r

, Q2

> ll

, and Q2 

> rr

analogously. W.l.o.g. we assume that the endpoints of Q2

> ll

, Q2 

> l

, Q2

> m

, Q2 

> r

, Q2 

> rr

appear in this order on s2.Our goal is to construct a pyramid P(s) as in Case 2 by rerouting some of the paths in P(p1)

along the cycles in C and then through the paths in P(s1) and likewise for the paths in P(p3).The main problem here is that we also need to reroute the paths in P(p2). As these are the innermost paths of s they also need to go deepest into the set C of concentric cycles but as 

|P (p2)| ≤ k · 3i−1 the paths in P(p2) are not guaranteed to go deep enough themselves. We therefore need to reroute them as well. See Figure 7 for an illustration. The crucial observation is that as h1 ≤ k · 3i−1 but |Q 1

> ll

| = k · 3i, we can easily reroute the paths in Pi−1(p1) with endpoints a1  

> ⌈12h1⌉

, . . . , a 1 

> h1

along the cycles Ct−h1 , . . . , C t−⌈ 12 h1⌉ (in this order) to the paths in Q1

> ll

. More precisely, let Q1 

> ll

:= {Q1,ll  

> 0

, . . . , Q 1,ll k3i−1} be ordered by their endpoints on s1 and let Pi−1(p1) := {L0, . . . , L |P i−1(p1)|}. Then for all 0 ≤ j ≤ 12 |P i−1(p1)| we add the path Lj to Pi(s). For 12 |P i−1(p1)| < j ≤ 12 |P i−1(p1)| we add the path obtained from the union of Lj , the subpath of C = Ct−|P i−1(p1)|+j between Lj and Q1,ll j and the subpath of Q1,ll j between 

C and Ct−j .The next paths we need to reroute are the paths in Q1

> m

. Recall that these are precisely 2k3i−1

paths and we need to route them to the cycles Ct−|P i−1(p1)|+1 to Ct−|P i−1(p1)|+2 k3i−1 . So far we have only used ≤ k · 3i−1 paths from Q1,ll i . As |Q 1,ll i | = k3i there are still 2k3i−1 paths unused in 

Q1,ll i . We will use these paths to route the paths of Q1 

> m

along the cycles Ct−k·3∗i−1, . . . , C t−k·3i

and then along the yet unused paths in Q1,ll i to the cycles Ct−|P i−1(p1)|+1 to Ct−|P i−1(p1)|+2 k3i−1 .39 We route the paths in Pi−1(p3) and Q2,m i symmetrically. The way we rerouted the paths so far ensures that we have not yet used any path in Q1,r i ∪ Q 2,l i .Thus we can use these paths to route the paths in Pi−1(p2). This concludes the construction of the pyramid Pi(s) in Case 3. This concludes the induction step and thus the proof of the claim. ⊣

We can now conclude the proof of the lemma. Let p1 and p2 be the two segments of Σg−1 and let s1 and s2 be the two sides of Sg such that p1, s 1, p 2, s 2 appear in this order on bd (∆) . We proceed as in the proof of the previous claim to find a set of disjoint paths linking (p1 ∪ p2) ∩ T 

to Ct−k·3g −1. By Lemma 4.12 there is a linkage L′ ⊆ G with τ (L′) = τ (T ) which avoids 

int (∆( C1)).We are now ready to prove Theorem 4.10. 

Proof of Theorem 4.10. If g = 0 then we can apply Lemma 4.15. Thus we may assume that 

g ≥ 1.Let S1, . . . , S g be the strips of Σ ordered such that |Si| ≤ | Si+1 |, for all 1 ≤ i < g, where 

|Si| := |L ∩ Si|. We define a := 10 3 .If |Si| ≥ k · 3i + 1 , for all 1 ≤ i ≤ g, then we can apply Lemma 4.16 to obtain the required linkage. Otherwise, let i1 be maximal such that |Si1 | < k · 3i1+1 . Now suppose ij has already been defined. If there is some i > 0 such that |Si1+··· +ij +i| ≤ k · aj+1 · i1 · i2 · . . . · ij · 3i1+··· ij +i then we choose 

ij+1 as the maximal such number. Otherwise the construction concludes at this point. Let ℓ be maximal such that iℓ exists but iℓ+1 does not. As explained above, ℓ ≥ 1. For 1 ≤ j ≤ ℓ

we define dj := ∑jx=1 ix and mj := ∏jx=1 ix. Note the disparity between the indices in the upper bound for |Si1+... +ij |: for j ≤ ℓ we require |Si1+... +ij | ≤ k · aj · mj−1 · 3dj , i.e. the sum in the exponent runs from i1 to ij but the product before the exponential term only runs from i1 to 

ij−1.We now consider τ (L ∩ Σ) , which is a pattern of order k′ for some k′. We first establish a bound on k′.

k′ = k + (|S1| + . . . + |Si1 |) + (|Si1+1 | + · · · | Si1+i2 |) + . . . + (|Sdℓ−1+1 + . . . + |Sdℓ |)

≤ k + i1 · | Si1 | + . . . + iℓ|Sdℓ |

(as |Sj′ | ≤ | Sij | for all 1 ≤ j ≤ ℓ and j′ ≤ j

≤ k + i1 · k · a · 3i1 + i2 · k · a · i1 · 3i1+i2 + . . . + k · iℓ · aℓ · mℓ−1 · 3dℓ

(as |Sdj | ≤ k · aj · mj−1 · 3dj , for all j ≤ ℓ)

= k + k · a · i1 · 3i1 + k · a · i1 · i2 · 3i1+i2 + . . . + k · aℓ · mℓ3dℓ

= k · aℓ · mℓ · 3dℓ ·

( 1 

> aℓ·mℓ·3dℓ

+ 1 

> aℓ−1·i2·... ·iℓ·3i2+... +iℓ

+ . . . + 1 

> a·iℓ·3i1

+ 1 

)

≤ k · aℓ · mℓ · 3dℓ ·

(

1 + 13a + 1(3 a)2 + . . . + 1(3 a)ℓ

)

≤ k · aℓ · mℓ · 3dℓ · 1(3 a)ℓ · (3 a)ℓ+1 −13a−1

≤ k · 13ℓ 

> (3 a)ℓ+1 −13a−1

· mℓ · 3dℓ .

40 We show next that |Sdℓ+j | > 3k′3j , for all j > 0, so that we can apply Lemma 4.16. The maximality of ℓ implies that for all j > 0 we have 

3 · k′ · 3j = 3a − 13 · k′ · 3j (as a = 10 3 )

< (3 a)ℓ+1 

(3 a)ℓ+1 − 1 · 3a − 13 · k′ · 3j

≤ (3 a)ℓ+1 

(3 a)ℓ+1 − 1 · 3a − 13 ·

(

k · 13ℓ · (3 a)ℓ+1 − 13a − 1 · mℓ · 3dℓ

)

· 3j

= k · aℓ+1 · mℓ · 3dℓ+j

≤ | Sdℓ+j |

We now want to apply Lemma 4.16 to the instance ((∆ , S dℓ+1 , . . . , S g), G, C, L\ (Sdℓ+1 ∪. . . ∪Sg)).Let g′ := g − dℓ, which is the number of strips in the instance. What is left is to calculate the size of C so that the lemma yields an irrelevant vertex. For this we need to show that t ≥ 2k′ · 3g′

.

2k′ · 3g′

≤ 2 ·

(

k · 13ℓ · (3 a)ℓ+1 − 13a − 1 · mℓ · 3dℓ

)

· 3g′

≤ 2k · aℓ+1 33a − 1 · mℓ · 3dℓ · 3g′

= 2 k · a · 33a − 1 · aℓ · mℓ · 3g

≤ 20 9 k ·

(

a · dℓ

ℓ

)ℓ

· 3g

≤ 20 9 k ·

( a · gℓ

)ℓ

3g (as dℓ ≤ g)The factor ( a·gℓ

)ℓ is maximised for ℓ = a·ge . Therefore 2k′ · 3g′

≤ 20 9 k · e 10 ·g 

> 3e

· 3g = f (g, k ). Thus, Lemma 4.16 implies that all vertices in int (∆( C1)) are irrelevant. This concludes our proof. 

# 5 Linking vortices up to some gap 

This section is dedicated to the proof of a version of [DKMW12, Lemma 15] suitable for our needs: We want to change our rendition slightly in order to guarantee that the graphs of vortices are d-linked up to some bounded gap . Intuitively speaking, this means that there is a linear decomposition of some segment of the vortex society, that “covers” all but a few society vertices, and such that the adhesion of that linear decomposition is d and there is a linkage of order d

that “links” the first to the last bag of the decomposition. We will need this to apply a variant of Proposition 3.7 in a later section. The main idea to achieve linkedness being that, if we find d + 1 concentric cycles around a vortex of depth d, we may try to “push” the cycles into the vortex as deeply as possible in order to “calibrate” regions of the vortex that are of depth lower than d by bloating these up artificially. Unfortunately, we cannot easily guarantee all the assumptions needed for the referenced theorem; more precisely, we may not be able to find 41 Figure 8: The setting for linking vortices. Red cells denote vortices, each of which come with two layers of concentric cycles: purple areas are schematic representations of (d + 1) 

concentric cycles and yellow areas are schematic representations of the remaining concentric cycles. The cycle whose outer-layer is yellow is the vortex one currently tries to link, where the inner purple layer is used to push cycles deeply into the vortex. “private” nests of “large enough” size for every vortex. Worse even, it may happen that the nest of one vortex is contained in the disc bounded by a cycle of the nest of another vortex – this will be one outcome of what we will call stacked – without yielding immediate contradictions to any “distance” assumptions between vortices; see Figure 8 for a schematic representation of the setting. It turns out that this is, however, not really a problem when trying to link vortices; it may simply happen that one vortex is “absorbed” by another without increasing the depth of the former by too much. 

5.1 Linked linear decompositions 

We will need renditions where vortices are linked up to some bounded gap ; we transcribe the following definition of [DKMW12] to our setting. 

Definition 5.1. Let d ∈ N and m ≥ 1. Let (H, Ω) be a society. Let α =(⟨u1, . . . , u m⟩, ⟨U1, . . . , U m⟩) be a linear decomposition of (H, Ω) .Let 1 ≤ p ≤ q ≤ m and let S = [ p, q ]. Let αS be the S-restriction of α. Let Zi := ( Ui ∩ Ui+1 ) \

V (Ω c) for i ∈ [p, q − 1] . We call αS d-linked if i) for every i ∈ [p, q ], u i ∈ Ui and Ui ∩ V (Ω) ⊆ { ui−1, u i}, where u0 := u1

ii) for every i ∈ [p, q − 1] , |Zi| = d, and iii) there is a Up-Uq-linkage M in G[⋃qi=p Ui] \ V (Ω) of order d.Note that by definition for every i ∈ [p, q − 1] , it holds Ui ∩ Ui+1 ⊆ Zi ∪ { ui}. We say that M

witnesses that (H, Ω) is d-linked .If additionally the following holds iv) there is a path P ∗ ⊆ G disjoint from M such that Nρ(P ∗) = V (Ω) ,

then we call α d -stuffed . We say that M ∪ { P ∗} witnesses that (H, Ω) is d-stuffed . Finally, we say that α is properly d-linked if M ∪ { P ∗} ⊆ G[⋃qi=p Ui].42 If (H, Ω) = ( σ(c), Ω) is a vortex society for some vortex c ∈ C(ρ) given some Σ-rendition of some graph G in a surface Σ, then we say that M witnesses that c is d-linked and M ∪ { P ∗}

witnesses that c is d-stuffed , respectively, for simplicity. While properly d-linkedness can in general not be easily guaranteed – we work with renditions and paths cannot be easily “tucked” into vortices – we will need it for technical reasons in Section 7 where we essentially reduce to an embedded instance. For completeness, we give the definition here. We extend the definition of (properly) linked and stuffed linear decompositions, to linear decompositions with gaps. 

Definition 5.2. Let d ∈ N, and ℓ, m ≥ 1. Let (H, Ω) be a society. Let u−(ℓ−1) , . . . , u 0, u 1, . . . , u m

be the vertices of V (Ω) appearing in Ω in the order listed together with a sequence of sets 

⟨U−(ℓ−1) , . . . , U 0, U 1, . . . , U m⟩ such that i) Ui ⊆ V (H) and ui ∈ Ui for all i ∈ [−(ℓ − 1) , m ],

ii) ⋃ 

> i∈[−(ℓ−1) ,m ]

Ui = V (H) and for every uv ∈ E(H) there exists i ∈ [−(ℓ − 1) , m ] such that u, v ∈ Ui,

iii) for every x ∈ V (H), the set {i ∈ [m] : x ∈ Xi} forms an interval in [m] and the set 

{i ∈ [−(ℓ − 1) , 0])] : x ∈ Xi} forms an interval in [−(ℓ − 1) , 0] ,

iv) let X− := ⋃0 

> i=−(ℓ−1)

Ui and X+ := ⋃mi=1 Ui, then X− ∩ X+ ⊆ (Um ∩ U−(ℓ−1) ) ∪ (U0 ∩ U1).Let α =

> (

⟨u−(ℓ−1) , . . . , u 0, u 1, . . . , u m⟩, ⟨U−(ℓ−1) , . . . , U 0, U 1, . . . , U m⟩

> )

, then we call α a linear decomposition of (H, Ω) with gap ℓ.Let −(ℓ − 1) ≤ p ≤ q ≤ m and let S = [ p, q ]. We call αS = (⟨up, . . . , u q⟩, ⟨Up, . . . , U q⟩) the 

S-restriction of α. We call αS (properly) d-linked or d-stuffed if αS is a (properly) d-linked or 

d-stuffed linear decomposition of (G[⋃qi=p Ui], Ω′), respectively, where Ω′ is the restriction of 

Ω to {ui | i ∈ [p, q ]}. We say that αS is (properly) d-linked, respectively d-stuffed, with gap 

ℓ′ ≤ ℓ if p = −(ℓ′ − 1) and q ≥ 1 and the [1 , q ]-restriction of α is (properly) d-linked, respectively 

d-stuffed. We say that α is (properly) d-linked, respectively d-stuffed, with gap ℓ if the [1 , m ]-restriction of 

α is (properly) d-linked, respectively d-stuffed. Note that linear decompositions with gaps are special cases of so called cyclic decompositions; see for example [DJKK25]. Given some vortex c in some Σ-rendition ρ, we may say that a linear decomposition of (σ(c), Ωc)

is a d-linked linear decomposition with gap ℓ of c for simplicity, not stating the exact choice of Ωc (there are two up to cyclic rotation). We say that (σ(c), Ωc) or c is (properly) d-linked, respectively d-stuffed, with gap ℓ if it admits a (properly) d-linked, respectively d-stuffed, linear decomposition with gap ℓ, and so on. Furthermore, we extend the definition of concentric cycles to more general renditions as follows. 

Definition 5.3. Let Σ be a surface, s ≥ 1 and ρ a Σ-rendition of some graph G. Let ⟨C1, . . . , C s⟩

be a sequence of disjoint cycles in G, then we call them concentric in ρ if there exists a ρ-aligned disc ∆ ⊆ Σ such that ⟨C1, . . . , C s⟩ are concentric in the restriction ρ∗ of ρ by ∆. Further, for every i ∈ [s] we let ∆Ci denote the respective Ci-disc in ρ∗ (and hence in ρ). Note that whenever s ≥ 2 the Ci-disc is unambiguously defined via the order ⟨C1, . . . , C s⟩ even if Σ is the sphere. 43 Finally, we slightly extend the definition of crop of a graph by a disc as follows. 

Definition 5.4. Let Σ be a surface and let ρ be a Σ-rendition of some graph G. Let C ⊆ G be a grounded cycle and let ∆C be a ρ-aligned disc bounded by the trace of C. We define G[ρ, ∆C ]

as the extended crop of G by ∆C obtained from the crop G∆C of G by ∆C , by adding to it the cycle C, i.e., G[ρ, ∆C ] := G∆C ∪ C.If ∆C is uniquely defined by C or is clear from context, we write G[ρ, C ] for simplicity, and refer to it as the extended crop of G by C.Note that if Σ is not the sphere and the trace of C bound a disc in Σ, then the extended crop of 

G by C is unambiguously defined. 

5.2 Kissing vortices 

As a first lemma will need an adaptation of [DKMW12, Lemma 15]; the main difference being that we do not want to introduce new (major) apices when changing the rendition. Following their proof yields a possible major vertex u say 7. This can easily be mitigated by introducing a “small gap” where we do not impose as strict restrictions on the behaviour inside the graph of the vortex by simply redrawing u on the resulting vortex boundary and adding a bag to the linear decomposition that takes care of all the formerly introduced apices. While the modification is easy – put all the deleted vertices into a single bag – we provide a proof for completeness. Note that the main part of the proof simply follows the proof of [DKMW12, Lemma 15], thus we omit some details by transcribing relevant claims from their setting to ours. Furthermore, note that they work with what they call “properly attached cells”; this is mitigated in our setting by working with grounded paths and nests. We define the following, giving a name to a set of paths “pushed tightly into a vortex”. 

Definition 5.5. Let Σ be a surface and ρ a Σ-rendition of depth d of some graph G. Let c ∈ C(ρ)

be a vortex. Let s ≥ 1 and let C = ⟨C1, . . . , C s⟩ be concentric cycles in ρ such that c ⊆ ∆C1 .Let G[ρ, ∆Cs ] be the extended crop of G by ∆Cs .Let B = {B1, . . . , B s} and P = {P1, . . . , P s} be linkages in G[ρ, ∆Cs ] such that for distinct 

i, j ∈ [s] the paths Pi, B j are internally disjoint and {Bi ∪ Pi | i ∈ [s]} is a set of s disjoint cycles where Bi ⊊ Ci for every i ∈ [s]. We call B a base of P in C.Let C∗ ⊆ G[ρ, ∆Cs ] be a grounded cycle in ρ and let ∆∗ be a disc bounded by the trace of C∗

containing c. We say that C∗ ρ-envelopes P at B if P ∪ B is contained in the extended crop of 

G by ∆C∗ and additionally C∗ = Ps ∪ Bs; we call (Ps, B s) the perimeter of (P, B) and ∆∗ the 

C∗-disc (in ρ containing c). We say that (P, B) ρ-kisses c in C if for every linkage P′ of order s such that B is a base of P′ in 

C and such that C′ ρ-envelopes P at B, it holds that ∆C∗ is contained in the respective C′-disc. Note that in general, C-discs in ρ are only defined if Σ is not the sphere: This is because if it is a sphere there are two natural choices. We may however talk about the C-disk containing 

X ⊆ Σ which then unambiguously defines it, i.e., if the trace of C bounds a disc ∆ in Σ such that X ⊆ ∆, then we call ∆ the C-disc (in ρ) containing X.

> 7Note that all but one of the resulting apices in their proof have all their original neighbours in the graph of the newly constructed vortex, hence they are minor apices.

44 (a) (P, B) kissing a vortex. (b) The resulting linked vortex. 

Figure 9: A schematic illustration of the proof of Theorem 5.8. Non-linked vortices are red together with purple regions marking (d + 1) concentric cycles and yellow regions marking the remaining concentric cycles. Linked vortices are green together with their remaining set of cycles in orange. All vortices are stacked. On the left hand side a (d + 1) linkage P (purple) together with a base B (green) ρ-kissing a vortex are depicted. On the right hand side, the resulting linked vortex is depicted, where some vortices have been absorbed. We have the following version of [DKMW12, Lemma 15]. 

Lemma 5.6. Let d ∈ N. Let Σ be a surface and ρ a Σ-rendition of depth d of some graph G.Let c ∈ C(ρ) be a vortex. Let ∆ be a closed ρ-aligned disc such that the restriction ρc of ρ to ∆

is a cylindrical rendition around c of the ∆-society with a nest C = ⟨C1, . . . , C d+1 ⟩ such that C

is tight around c.Then there exists a Σ-rendition ρ′ of G together with a cell c∗ ∈ C(ρ′) \ C(ρ) such that ρ′ agrees with ρ on Σ \ c∗ and c ⊆ c∗ ⊆ ∆ and either |N (c∗)| ≤ 3 or the c∗-society (σρ′ (c∗), Ωc∗ ) is d-stuffed with gap at most 1 and the depth of c∗ is at most 4d + 2 . In the latter case, there exist linkages 

P = {P1, . . . , P d+1 } and B = {B1, . . . , B d+1 } of order (d + 1) in G satisfying the following: i) {P1, . . . , P d} witnesses that c∗ is d-linked with gap at most 1,

ii) Pd+1 satisfies V (Pd+1 ) ∩ N (ρ′) ⊆ V (Ω c∗ ), in particular P witnesses that c∗ is d-stuffed with gap at most 1, and iii) for every i ∈ [d + 1] it holds Bi ⊊ Ci and B is a base for P,

such that C∗ := Pd+1 ∪ Bd+1 ρ-envelopes P at B (it may not be grounded in ρ′) with V (C∗) ∩

N (ρ′) = V (Ω c∗ ) and (P, B) ρ-kisses c in C.

Proof. Let c, C, ρ and ∆ be as in the lemma. Since the traces of all the cycles of the nest are contained in a common disc ∆, we may choose a common orientation of their traces, i.e., orient all of them counter-clockwise say, and by the choice of nest every cycle Ci comes with a uniquely defined disc ∆i containing ci.45 If T := N (ρ) ∩ V (Cd+1 ) ≤ 3 simply define c∗ := ∆ Cd+1 \ T ; by construction c∗ ⊆ ∆. Let ρ′ be obtained from ρ by deleting all cells contained in c∗ and adding the cell c∗. Finally, let ρ′ agree with ρ on all cells in C(ρ′) ∩ C(ρ) and let σρ′ (c∗) be the graph of the ∆Cd+1 -society in ρ. Then 

ρ′ is as desired; henceforth assume that N (ρ) ∩ V (Cd+1 ) ≥ 4.Let (σ(c), Ωc) be a c-society fixing a cyclic order Ωc visiting the nodes u1, . . . , u n of c in that order. Let α = ( ⟨u1, . . . , u n⟩, ⟨U1, . . . , U n⟩) be a linear decomposition of (σ(c), Ωc) of adhesion at most d which exists by Proposition 3.3. Pick a vertex vd+1 ∈ V (Cd+1 ) and let γ be a shortest ρ-aligned curve – where length is taken with respect to the number of nodes it intersects – from vd+1 to some node in N (c), say ui for some respective i ∈ [n], internally disjoint from c. Then, using tightness of C, γ intersects at most 

d + 2 nodes; see the blue squiggly line on the left hand side of Figure 9. Let ⟨vd+1 , v d, . . . , v 1, u i⟩

be the order of the nodes visited when traversing γ starting in vd+1 . Then vj ∈ V (Cj ) for every 

j ∈ [d+1] where v1 = ui possibly but vj̸ = vℓ for distinct j, ℓ ∈ [d+1] . Let F := {vd+1 , . . . , v 1, u i}.Let Zi := Ui ∩Ui−1, then |Zi| ≤ d since the adhesion of α is at most d. Let G′ be obtained from G

by deleting F ∪ Zi; these are the vertices we will need to “add back” later. Since the nest C is grounded in ρ by definition, for j ∈ [d+1] the vertex vj has a unique predecessor xj ∈ V (Cj )∩N (ρ)

and successor yj ∈ V (Cj ) ∩ N (ρ) – they are not equal since |N (ρ) ∩ V (Cj )| ≥ 4 – with respect to the counter-clockwise orientation of the trace of Cj , such that there are a grounded path P xj ⊊ Cj

from xj to vj not visiting yj as an internal vertex, and a grounded path P yj ⊊ Cj from vj to yj not containing xj as an internal vertex, and such that no internal vertex of either path is a node of ρ.Fix X := {xj | j ∈ [d + 1] } and Y := {yj | j ∈ [d + 1] }. Define B := {P xj ◦ P yj | j ∈ [d + 1] } to be the set consisting of the paths obtained by concatenating P xj and P yj at vj ; B is an X-Y -linkage in G by construction where each path has length at least 1 since xj̸ = yj for all j ∈ [d + 1] . Let 

B = {B1, . . . , B d+1 } where Bj is the path with endpoints xj , y j for j ∈ [d + 1]; see the green paths on the left hand side of Figure 9 for a schematic illustration of B.Let P0 = {P1, . . . , P d+1 } be the unique X-Y -linkage in G′ – and thus in G – obtained from C

by deleting F in the obvious way, in particular Pj ⊊ Cj and E(Pj ) = E(Cj ) \ ⋃d+1  

> i=1

E(P xi ∪ P yi )

for j ∈ [d + 1] . Then B is a base for P0 in G by construction and additionally {Pj ∪ Bj | j ∈

[d + 1] } = {Cj | j ∈ [d + 1] }. Thus, Cd+1 ρ-envelopes P0 at B as in Definition 5.5, whence 

(Pd+1 , B d+1 ) is the perimeter of (P0, B).We have the following. 

Claim 5.6.1 . Let P be an X-Y -linkage in G′. Then B is a base for P in G.

Proof of claim. This is immediate from the fact that B is internally disjoint from V (G′) and every path in B shares its endpoints with a unique path in P. ⊣

The following summarises Equation (4) and its implications as given in the proof of [Die10, Lemma 15] transcribed to our setting; again the paths being grounded in ρ take over the role of properly attached cells in their setting. 

Claim 5.6.2 . For every set P of d + 1 disjoint X–Y -paths in G′ whose traces are contained in ∆,

the path P starting in yd+1 is grounded in ρ and ends in xd+1 .Combining Claim 5.6.2 and Claim 5.6.1 we derive the following. 46 (⋆) Let P be an X-Y -linkage in G′ such that the trace of every path in P is contained in ∆.Let P ∈ P be the unique path starting in yd+1 and ending in xd+1 . Then C(P ) := P ∪ Bd+1 

is a cycle that ρ-envelopes P at B, in particular (P, B d+1 ) is the perimeter of (P, B).Note that P0 and Pd+1 satisfy Claim 5.6.2, and given the respective cycle C(Pd+1 ) by Claim 5.6.2, the C(Pd+1 )-disc ∆( Pd+1 ) in ρ containing c satisfies c ⊆ ∆( Pd+1 ) and the trace of every path in P0

is contained in ∆( Pd+1 ). Let P, P and C(P ) be as in (⋆) and let ∆( P ) be the ρ-aligned C(P )-disc. We define G′[ρ, C (P )] as the extended crop of G′ by C(P ). As in the proof of [DKMW12, Lemma 15] let P and P ∗ ∈ P be chosen to satisfy Claim 5.6.2 – hence (⋆) – minimizing G′[ρ, C (P ∗)]; see the left hand side of Figure 9 for a schematic illustration of such a linkage P, forgetting about the remaining vortices in the figure. By our choice of P and P ∗, together with (⋆) and the Definition 5.5 of ρ-kissing, we derive the following. 

(⋆⋆ ) ( P, B) ρ-kisses c at C and (P ∗, B d+1 ) is the perimeter of (P, B).Let Ω′ = ⟨yd+1 , w 1, . . . , w k, x d+1 ⟩ be a cyclic ordering of V (P ∗)∩N (ρ) = {w1, . . . , w k, x d+1 , y d+1 }

respecting the orientation of the trace of P ∗ when starting at yd+1 and ending at xd+1 for some respective k ∈ N; note that (G′[ρ, C (P ∗)] , Ω′) defines a society. Then Diestel, Kawarabayashi, Müller, and Wollan. [DKMW12, Lemma 15] prove that one can slightly shrink ∆( P ∗) to obtain a new disc ∆′ ⊆ ∆( P ∗) ⊆ ∆ satisfying the following (transcribed to our setting). 

Claim 5.6.3 . There is a rendition ρ′ of G′ = G−(F ∪Z) of depth at most 2d+2 , that agrees with ρ

outside of ∆′, and such that ∆′ \ (V (P ∗) ∩ N (ρ)) is a vortex c′ of ρ′ with σρ′ (∆ ′) ⊆ G[ρ, C (P ∗)] 

and P ∗ ∩ σρ′ (∆ ′) = V (P ∗) ∩ N (ρ′). Further (σρ′ (∆ ′), Ω′) is a c′-society that admits a d-stuffed linear decomposition α′ = (⟨yd+1 , w 1, . . . , w k, x d+1 ⟩, ⟨Yd+1 , W 1, . . . , W k, X d+1 ⟩) , witnessed by P,

where the d-linkedness is witnessed by P \ { P ∗}.Note that the depth is at most 2d + 2 since the adhesion of the linear decomposition is ≤ d + 1 .See the right hand side of Figure 9 for a schematic illustration of the resulting vortex. We continue with the outcome of Claim 5.6.3. Note that when constructing ∆′ in their proof, they “push” certain cells of ρ out of the new vortex that a priori intersect ∆( P ∗). Then, the reason why the path P ∗ visiting the society vertices exists in their setting is guaranteed by the fact that said cells are properly attached, whereas in our setting this follows from the fact that the path was grounded in ρ to begin with (this is simply a matter of choice of definitions for the setting). Note that after this construction, the path P ∗ is in general not grounded in ρ′ and may be partially contained in the graph of the new vortex. Up to here nothing – besides transcribing to our setting – inherently changed when comparing to [DKMW12, Lemma 15]; we are left to “add back F ∪ Z” to G′ by allowing a gap. We change ρ′ slightly to a rendition of G, adding back F ∪ Z as follows. Note that by Claim 5.6.3 the nodes of xd+1 and yd+1 in ρ′ are the same points in Σ as the respective nodes in ρ. By construction of ∆′ the curve γ ⊊ Σ with nodes F intersects the boundary of ∆′ ⊆ ∆( P ∗) ⊆

∆( Pd+1 ) ⊆ ∆ in Σ. Let ξ be the intersection point of γ and ∆′ closest to the original node of π−1 

> ρ

(vd+1 ) in Σ, possibly equal to it. Fix πρ′ (ξ) = vd+1 and denote the resulting vortex via 

c∗ := c′ \ { ξ}. Fix 

σρ∗ (c∗) := G[V (σρ′ (c)) ∪ (Z ∪ F )] ,

47 noting that, by construction of ∆′, all cells of ρ that had a vertex of F \ { vd+1 } as a node are completely contained in ∆′, and Z ⊆ V (σρ(c)) by definition. Finally, since all the cells of ρ that had vd+1 as a node are either completely contained in ∆′ or agree with the cells of ρ′, this yields a valid Σ-rendition ρ∗ of G with the desired properties as in the lemma. Note that the depth of ρ∗ may only be marginally higher than that of ρ′: Since the depth of ρ′

is at most 2d + 2 and |Z ∪ F | ≤ 2d, the depth of c∗ is at most 4d + 2 and so is the depth of ρ∗.Let Ω∗ := ⟨vd+1 , y d+1 , w 1, . . . , w k, x d+1 ⟩, then Ω∗ is a cyclic order of the nodes of c∗ by the above construction, in particular (σρ∗ (c∗), Ω∗) is a c∗-society and P ∗ is a path satisfying V (P ∗)∩N (ρ∗) ⊆

V (Ω ∗ 

> c

) concluding ii ) of the lemma. Define α∗ = (⟨vd+1 , y d+1 , w 1, . . . , w k, x d+1 ⟩, ⟨vd+1 , y d+1 , w 1, . . . , w k, x d+1 ⟩) by setting Vd+1 :=

F ∪Z ∪Yd+1 ∪Xd+1 . Then α∗ is a linear decomposition of (σρ∗ (c∗), Ω∗) with gap 1 by construction, and since (⟨yd+1 , w 1, . . . , w k, x d+1 ⟩, ⟨Yd+1 , W 1, . . . , W k, X d+1 ⟩) is a d-stuffed linear decomposition of (G[Yd+1 ∪ Xd+1 ∪ ⋃ki=1 Wi], Ω′) where Ω′ is the restriction of Ω to {yd+1 , w 1, . . . , w k, x d+1 },α∗ is d-stuffed with gap 1 by Definition 5.2 and this is still witnessed by P concluding i) of the lemma. By Claim 5.6.1 we derive iii ) of the lemma (this only depends on ρ not ρ∗), and by (⋆)

C∗ = P ∗ ∪ Bd+1 is a cycle grounded in ρ with V (C∗) ∩ N (ρ∗) = V (Ω c∗ ) ρ-enveloping P at B

and (P, B) ρ-kisses c at C by (⋆⋆ ).This concludes the proof. 

5.3 Linking stacked vortices 

In light of the discussion above, we make precise what we mean by “stacked vortices”; see Figure 8 for a schematic illustration. 

Definition 5.7. Let s1, s 2 ≥ 1. Let Σ be a surface, and let ρ be a Σ-rendition of a graph G.Let ∆10, ∆20 be two distinct vortices in ρ. Let C1 = ⟨C11 , . . . , C 1 

> s1

⟩ and C2 = ⟨C21 , . . . , C 2 

> s2

⟩ be two sequences of concentric cycles in ρ around ∆10 and ∆20, respectively. Let ∆ij for i ∈ [2] and j ∈ [si]

be the Cij -disc in ρ containing ∆i 

> 0

such that ∆i 

> 0

⊊ ∆i 

> 1

⊊ . . . ⊊ ∆isi , and Ci is tight around ∆i 

> 0

for both i ∈ [2] . Then we say that (C1, ∆10) and (C2, ∆20) are stacked with respect to each other if we either have that ∆1 

> s1

and ∆2 

> s2

are disjoint, or there exists an i ∈ [2] and a j ∈ [si] such that 

∆3−is3−i is found in ∆ij − (bd (∆ ij ) ∪ ∆ij−1), i.e., in the interior of the annulus bounded by traces of 

Cij and Cij−1.The following is the main theorem of this section. The main idea is that, given two vortices 

(C1, ∆10) and (C2, ∆20) as in Definition 5.7 with enough concentric cycles – meaning b(d + 1) many where b is the number of vortices – and after contracting the graph of the first vortex together with the (b − 1)( d + 1) inner cycles of C1 into a single vertex x and subsequently applying Lemma 5.6 resulting in a new linked vortex ˜∆20, we can guarantee that x will not be part of the adhesion of the “ d-linked part” of ˜∆20. This is possible since Lemma 5.6 results in a “tight” set 

P of d paths witnessing linkedness – this is made precise by the notion of ρ-kissing – which, due to the presence of d + 1 concentric cycles around the contracted vertex x are “deflected” from x

by the choice of “tightness” for P. See the left hand side of Figure 9 for an illustration of this, where c2 may be thought of as the focused vortex with the purple region close around it – these are the (d + 1) cycles needed to link it – and c1 is a vortex inside the purple region of c2, where 48 the yellow region is to be thought of as the (b − 1)( d − 1) cycles that are “protected” by the purple region of (d + 1) -layers needed to deflect the paths. After linking c2, there are more than 

(d + 1) cycles around it left – see the right hand side Figure 9 where these cycles are marked by the orange region – that can be used to deflect paths in a next iteration step. More precisely, the whole vortex ∆10 will either be contained in one of the bags of the resulting linear decomposition of ˜∆20, i.e., it was absorbed by the second vortex, or ∆10 together with the inner (b − 1)( d + 1) cycles of C1 will lie outside of ˜∆20. Note that once a vortex is absorbed, it will no longer be a cell, and thus no longer be a vortex in the resulting rendition; in particular no vortex is absorbed more than once. If the first vortex was not absorbed, we continue linking it in a second iteration. Note that this does not result in an exponential blow-up, as the number of cycles needed to link a vortex is only (d + 1) and similarly only (d + 1) concentric cycles are needed to guarantee that a vortex can be safely absorbed. Therefore, we have enough cycles left to continue linking ∆10 possibly absorbing other vortices, and after having linked ˜∆20, it has enough concentric cycles left around it so that it can be safely absorbed in a later step. For technical reasons we will work with (b + 1)( d + 1) many concentric cycles, in order to easily witness that the resulting rendition remains stretched , i.e., vortex boundaries are disjoint, and since we will need “disjoint” d-stuffed linear decompositions, this easily guarantees that the resulting linkages witnessing this are too. We continue with a formal formulation and proof of the above. 

Theorem 5.8. Let d, b ∈ N. Let Σ be a surface and ρ a Σ-rendition of depth d of some graph G. Let {c1, . . . , c b} ⊆ C(ρ) be the (possibly empty) set of all vortex cells. For i ∈ [b] let 

Ci = ⟨Ci

> 1

, . . . , C i

> (b+1) ·(d+1)

⟩ be disjoint sequences of (b + 1) · (d + 1) concentric cycles around ci,

with ∆i being the closed Ci

> 1

-disc in ρ containing ci, such that (Ci, c i) and (Cj , c j ) are stacked for all distinct i, j ∈ [b].Then there exists a Σ-rendition ρ′ of G together with a set of b′ cells {c∗ 

> i1

, . . . , c ∗ 

> ib′

} for 1 ≤ i1 <. . . i b′ ≤ b such that for every j ∈ [b′], c ∗ 

> ij

has either ≤ 3 nodes or it is d-stuffed with gap at most 1 together with linkages Pij , Bij of order d + 1 , such that i) for all ℓ ∈ [b] there exists j ∈ [b′] such that cℓ ⊆ c∗ 

> ij

⊆ ∆ij ,

ii) for every j ∈ [b′], Pij witnesses that c∗ 

> ij

is d-stuffed with gap 1,

iii) for all distinct j, k ∈ [b′], (Pij , Bij ) ρ-kisses cij in ⟨Cij 

> 1

, . . . , C ij

> d+1

⟩, and for all Xj ∈ {P ij , Bij }

and Xk ∈ {P ik , Bik }, X j and Xk are disjoint, and the restrictions of ρ and ρ′ to Σ \ ⋃b′ 

> j=1

c∗ 

> ij

agree. In particular, every vortex of C(ρ′) is part of {c∗ 

> i1

, . . . , c ∗ 

> ib

}.

Proof. If there are no vortices in C(ρ) then there is nothing to show. Let {c1, . . . , c b} ⊆ C(ρ)

be the set of vortices for some b ≥ 1. Note that then every vortex comes with at least 2

concentric cycles around it, and hence the respective Cij -discs are unambiguously defined for 

j ∈ [( b + 1) · (d + 1)] and i ∈ [b]. Let V0 ⊆ { c1, . . . , c b} be the set of those vortices that are 

not d-stuffed with gap at most 1 and let W0 ⊆ { c1, . . . , c b} be the set of those vortices that are 

d-stuffed with gap 1; clearly W0, V0 partition {c1, . . . , c b}. The proof is by induction on |V 0| and without loss of generality let it be b; no vortex is d-stuffed with gap 1. Let ρ0 := ρ

For 0 ≤ i ≤ t ≤ b for some respective t, we will inductively construct ρi, Vi, Wi maintaining the following induction invariants: 49 ρi: We have that ρi is a Σ-rendition of G such that ρi agrees with ρ on Σ \ (⋃ Vi ∪ ⋃ Wi), and the set of vortices of ρi is contained in Vi ∪ W i.

Vi: It holds Vi ⊊ Vi−1 is a strict subset, in particular |V i| < |V i−1|, where Vi ⊆ C(ρi) is the set of those vortices that are not d-stuffed with gap at most 1 in ρi. Further for every vortex 

c ∈ V i there is a set of (b + 1 − i)( d + 1) tight concentric cycles CV (c) in ρi around c. See the left hand Figure 9 for an illustration where Vi is the set of vortices highlighted in red, and the set CV (c) is highlighted in yellow. 

Wi: The set Wi ⊆ C(ρi) is a set of cells of ρi that either have at most 3 nodes or they are 

d-stuffed vortices c∗ 

> j

∈ W i with gap at most 1 witnessed by some linkage Pj of order (d + 1) 

together with a linkage Bj of order (d + 1) such that (Pj , Bj ) ρi-kisses c∗ 

> j

at ⟨Cj 

> 1

, . . . , C jd+1 ⟩

for some respective j ∈ [b]. Further for every c∗ ∈ W i there is some vortex c ∈ C(ρ) such that c ⊆ c∗ and there is a set of (b − i + 1)( d + 1) (not necessarily tight) concentric cycles 

CW (c) in ρi around c∗. See the left hand Figure 9 for an illustration where Wi is the set of vortices highlighted in green, and the set CW (c) is highlighted in orange. 

(⋆): For every vortex c ∈ C(ρ) it holds that either c ∈ V i or c ⊆ c∗ for some c∗ ∈ W i and 

Wi, Vi partition the set of vortices of ρi. Furthermore, for any pair of two distinct vortices 

c, c ′ ∈ C(ρi) it holds that (C(c), c ) and (C(c′), c ′) are stacked, where C(c) ∈ {C V (c), CW (c)}

and C(c′) ∈ {C V (c′), CW (c′)}, respectively; note that for i = b there are still (d + 1) 

concentric cycles left, hence the notion of stacked is well-defined. Let C1, . . . , Cb be as in the theorem, then V0, W0, ρ 0 satisfy the induction invariant; thus assume that we constructed Vi−1, Wi−1, ρ i−1 as in the theorem for some 1 ≤ i ≤ b – note that for 

i = b we are done as then |V b| = 0 – and let 1 ≤ |V i−1|, otherwise we are done again. Note that |V i−1| ≤ b − i + 1 .Let b∗ := |V i−1| + |W i−1|, then b∗ ≤ b and for simplicity let {c1, . . . , c b∗ } = Vi−1 ∪ W i−1 with 

c1 ∈ V i−1; we will “stuff” c1 in order to construct Vi, Wi, ρ i.By assumption (⋆), there exist (C1, c 1), . . . , (Cb∗ , c b∗ ) that are pairwise stacked, and – after possibly renaming the cycles for vortices in Wi−1, as they may not be the respective most inner set of the tight concentric cycles following the induction invariant – let Cj = ⟨Cj 

> 1

, . . . , C j

> (b−i+2)( d+1)

⟩). Let 

∆ij be the Cij -disc in ρ containing ci for i ∈ [b∗] and j ∈ [( b − i + 2)( d + 1)] . By Definition 5.7 of stacked, we derive that for every j ∈ [b∗] either ∆j 

> (b−i+2)( d+1)

⊆ ∆1(d+1) or they are disjoint; recall that b − i + 2 ≥ 1.Let I ⊆ [b∗] \ { 1} be maximal with ∆i 

> (b−i+2)( d+1)

⊆ ∆1

> d+1

; note that for all j ∈ [b∗] \ (I ∪ { 1})

the following construction does not interfere with the vortices or the respective sets of concentric cycles around them guaranteed by the fact that they are stacked using the induction invariant. For every j ∈ I let G[ρ, C j

> (b−i+1)( d+1)

] denote the extended crop of G by Cj

> (b−i+1)( d+1)

. Furthermore, let G∗ be obtained from G by contracting for every j ∈ I the graph G[ρ, C j

> (b−i+1)( d+1)

] to a single vertex xj . Let ρ∗ 

> i

be the resulting rendition obtained from ρi−1 by deleting all the cells contained in ⋃ 

> j∈I

∆j 

> (b−i+1)( d+1)

and identifying all the nodes of N (ρ) ∩ Cj 

> (b−i+1)( d+1)

to xj for all 

j ∈ I. Then ρ∗ 

> i

is a rendition of G∗ and since we did not create any new vortices by the above deletion and subsequent contraction, the restriction ρ∗ of ρ∗ 

> i

to ∆1 

> d+1

is a cylindrical rendition around c1 of the ∆1

> d+1

-society in ρ∗ 

> i

. Finally, since for all j ∈ I, (Cj , c j ) and (C1, c 1) were stacked we derive that C′ 

> 1

:= ⟨C11 , . . . , C 1

> d+1

⟩ is still a set of tight concentric cycles around c1 in ρ∗ 

> i

by the induction invariant on Vi−1, in particular it is a nest in ρ∗. And further 50 (⋆⋆ ) for every j ∈ I the sequence ⟨Cj

> (b−i+1)( d+1)+1

, . . . , C j

> (b−i+2)( d+1)

⟩ consists of (d+1) concentric cycles around xj in ρ∗ 

> i8

.To illustrate (⋆⋆ ): The purple outer regions of vortices depicted on the right hand side of Figure 9 are schematic illustrations of the respective sequences ⟨Cj

> (b−i+1)( d+1)+1

, . . . , C j

> (b−i+2)( d+1)

⟩, where the yellow regions have been contracted to vertices xi in the above process. Thus, we may apply Lemma 5.6 to (C′

> 1

, c 1), ∆1 

> d+1

and ρ∗ 

> i

deriving the following: There exists a Σ-rendition ρ′ 

> i

of G∗ together with a cell c∗ 

> 1

∈ C(ρ′

> i

) \ C(ρ∗ 

> i

) such that ρ′ 

> i

agrees with ρ∗ 

> i

on 

Σ \ c∗ 

> 1

and c1 ⊆ c∗ 

> 1

⊆ ∆1 

> d+1

and one of two cases occur, i.e., |N (c∗)| ≤ 3 or not. We start with the former; let I∗ ⊆ I be maximal such that for j ∈ I∗ it holds xj ∈ σρ′ 

> i

(c∗

> 1

) (intuitively this represents the set of vortices that have been absorbed by c∗ 

> 1

in the process). 

|N (c∗

> 1

)| ≤ 3: In this case define Vi := Vi−1\{ c1, c j | j ∈ I∗} and Wi := ( Wi−1\{ cj | j ∈ I∗})∪{ c∗

> 1

}.Finally let ρi be obtained from ρ′ 

> i

by “uncontracting” every xj for j ∈ I \ I∗ in the obvious way such that ρi agrees with ρi−1 on Σ \ c∗

> 1

. This reintroduces the vortices cj together with their “nests” ⟨Cj 

> 1

, . . . , C j

> (b−i+1)( d+1)

⟩ of possibly tight – depending on whether they are in Vi−1 or Wi−1 – concentric cycles around cj for every j ∈ I \ I∗.By construction Vi, Wi and ρi satisfy the inductive invariants concluding the proof for this case. Thus we continue with the case that |N (c∗

> 1

)| > 3, in particular c∗ 

> 1

is a vortex and by Lemma 5.6 there is a d-stuffed linear decomposition α with gap at most 1 of the c∗

> 1

-society (σρ′ 

> i

(c∗

> 1

), Ωc∗ 

> 1

).Further there exist two linkages P = {P1, . . . , P d+1 } and B = {B1, . . . , B d+1 } of order (d + 1) in 

G∗ satisfying the following: i) {P1, . . . , P d} witnesses that c∗ 

> 1

is d-linked with gap at most 1, and ii) Pd+1 satisfies V (Pd+1 ) ∩ N (ρ′) ⊆ V (Ω c∗ ), in particular P witnesses that c∗ is d-stuffed with gap at most 1, and iii) for every i ∈ [d + 1] it holds Bi ⊊ C1 

> i

and B is a base for P

such that the cycle C∗ 

> 1

:= Pd+1 ∪ Bd+1 ρ∗ 

> i

-envelopes P at B with V (C∗ 

> 1

) ∩ N (ρ′

> i

) = V (Ω c∗ 

> 1

) and 

(P, B) ρ∗ 

> i

-kisses c1 in C′

> 1

. Let X, Y ⊆ V (G∗) be disjoint such that P and B are X-Y -linkages; these exist since B is a base for P in C.Let α = (⟨u0, u 1, . . . , u m⟩, ⟨U0, U 1, . . . , U m⟩) and for p ∈ [m − 1] let Zp := ( Up ∩ Up+1 ) \ V (Ω c∗ 

> 1

),

then |Zp| = d.

Claim 5.8.1 . It holds (V (Ω c∗ 

> 1

) ∪ ⋃dp=1 Zp) ∩ { xj | j ∈ I} = ∅.

Proof of claim. Note that {xj | j ∈ I} ∩ V (⋃ B) = ∅ since {xj | j ∈ I} ∩ V (⋃ C′

> 1

) = ∅ and B is a base for P at C′

> 1

. Thus if V (Ω c∗ 

> 1

) ∩ { xj | j ∈ I}̸ = ∅ implies V (Pd+1 ) ∩ { xj | j ∈ I}̸ = ∅.Since (P, B) ρ∗ 

> i

-kisses c1 in C′

> 1

, we derive by Definition 5.5 that for every linkage P′ of order 

(d + 1) such that B is a base of P′ in C′ 

> 1

and such that C′ ρ∗ 

> i

-envelopes P at B, it holds that 

∆C∗ 

> 1

is contained in the C′-disc. Let j ∈ I and assume towards a contradiction that the claim is wrong. We have two cases to consider. 

Case xj ∈ V (Ω ∗): As discussed above this implies xj ∈ V (Pd+1 ). Let H := G∗[ρ∗ 

> i

, C ∗ 

> 1

] be the extended crop of G∗ by C∗ 

> 1

in ρ∗ 

> i

, and let H′ = H − xj . Note that if there is an X-Y -linkage 

P′ = {P ′

> 1

, . . . , P ′

> d+1

} in H′ after deleting the internal vertices of B, then (P′, B) ρ∗ 

> i

-kisses  

> 8Concentric cycles around a vortex are defined as concentric cycles around the cell consisting solely of x.

51 c1 in C′ 

> 1

with perimeter (P ′

> d+1

, B d+1 ); this follows analogously to (⋆⋆ )5.6 in the proof of Lemma 5.6 using Claim 5.6.2. By definition of ρ∗ 

> i

-kissing this is impossible since for the cycle C′ = P ′ 

> d+1

∪ Bd+1 ̸ = C∗ 

> 1

the ρ∗ 

> i

-aligned C′-disc ∆C′ is contained in the C∗ 

> 1

-disc as a contradiction to the fact that (P, B) ρ∗ 

> i

-kisses c∗ 

> 1

in C′

> 1

.However, Menger’s Theorem Proposition 3.1 guarantees the existence of such a linkage 

P′ as a contradiction. To see this, assume the contrary. Then there exists a separation 

(A, B ) in H′ of order at most d such that X ⊆ A and Y ⊆ B; let S := V (A) ∩ V (B).Since Pd+1 is a grounded path in ρ∗ 

> i

and since by (⋆⋆ ) we derive that ⋃(b−i+2)( d+1)  

> ℓ=( b−i+1)( d+1)+1

Cjℓ

is grounded in ρ∗ 

> i

satisfying xj ∈ ∆j 

> (b−i+1)( d+1)+1

⊊ . . . ⊊ ∆j

> (b−i+2)( d+1)

, we derive that 

|V (Pd+1 ) ∩ V (Cjℓ )| ≥ 2 for all ℓ ∈ [( b − i + 1)( d + 1) + 1 , (b − i + 2)( d + 1)] .Now P \ { Pd+1 } is still a linkage of size d in H, in particular S ⊆ ⋃di=1 V (Pi). By the pigeonhole principle, there is a t ∈ [( b − i + 1)( d + 1) + 1 , (b − i + 2)( d + 1)] such that 

V (Cjt ) ∩ S = ∅. Let P in 

> d+1

, P out  

> d+1

⊊ Pd+1 be disjoint paths of shortest possible length such that P in  

> d+1

has one endpoint in Y and the other in V (Cjt ), and P out  

> d+1

has one endpoint in 

V (Cjt ) and the other in X. Clearly xj /∈ V (P in 

> d+1

) ∪ V (P out 

> d+1

). But then P in  

> d+1

∪ P out  

> d+1

∪ Cjt

is a connected subgraph in H′ − S with one vertex in X and one in Y as a contradiction to the assumption that (A, B ) was a separation of order d separating X from Y .

Case xj ∈ Zp: Let p ∈ [m]. By i) every path in {P1, . . . , P d} contains exactly one vertex of 

Zp for every p ∈ [m]. If xj ∈ Zp, then xj ∈ V (Pj ) for some j ∈ [d]. Again by Mengers Theorem Proposition 3.1, analogously to the case xj ∈ V (Ω c∗ 

> 1

), we derive the existence of an X-Y -linkage P′ of order (d + 1) in H′ := H − xj . Then this is a contradiction to the fact that (Zp ∪ { up}) \ { xj } witnesses a separation (A, B ) of order d in H′.This concludes the proof of the claim. ⊣

By Claim 5.8.1 we derive that for every j ∈ I if xj ∈ Up for p ∈ [m] then for all p′ ∈ [m] \ { p}

we have xj /∈ Up′ . Note that a priori it may happen that xj ∈ U0 ∩ U1 or xj ∈ U0 ∩ Um, however, this is of no importance for the statement the theorem, as we are working with linkedness up to exactly that gap. Recall the definition of I∗. Then we construct Vi, Wi and ρi equivalently to the case |Nρ′ 

> i

(c∗

> 1

)| ≤ 3; we repeat it for ease of readability. 

|Nρ′ 

> i

(c∗

> 1

)| ≥ 4: D Vi := Vi−1 \ { c1, c j | j ∈ I∗} and Wi := ( Wi−1 \ { cj | j ∈ I∗}) ∪ { c∗

> 1

}. Finally let ρi be obtained from ρ′ 

> i

by “uncontracting” every xj for j ∈ I \ I∗ in the obvious way such that ρi agrees with ρi−1 on Σ \ c∗

> 1

. This reintroduces the vortices cj together with a sequence ⟨Cj 

> 1

, . . . , C j

> (b−i+1)( d+1)

⟩ of (b − i + 1)( d + 1) tight concentric cycles around cj for every j ∈ I \ I∗.We have the following. 

Claim 5.8.2 . Vi, Wi and ρi satisfy the induction invariants. 

Proof of claim. By construction ρi is a Σ-rendition of G such that ρi agrees with ρi−1 on Σ \ c∗

> 1

,

and hence since ρi−1 satisfies the induction invariant by assumption, we derive that ρi agrees with ρ on Σ \ (⋃ Vi ∪ ⋃ Wi). Similarly by construction the set of vortices of ρi is contained in Vi ∪ W i: To see this note that for all the cells cj for j ∈ I∗ the graph σρi−1 (cj ) is contained in 

σρi (c∗

> 1

), in particular cj ⊆ c∗ 

> 1

⊆ Σ whence it is not a vortex in ρi. And further Vi ∪ W i partition 52 (Vi−1 ∪ W i−1) \ { cj | j ∈ I∗}, hence this follows by assumption that Vi−1, Wi−1, ρ i−1 satisfy the induction invariants. This proves the invariant on ρi.By definition Vi is a strict subset of Vi−1 and Vi consists exactly of the vortices in ρi that are not yet d-stuffed with gap 1, for those vortices are part of Wi and both sets are disjoint and partition the vortices of ρi as derived above. But every cell c ∈ W i is either in Wi−1 or is equal to c∗

> 1

; each of them are d-stuffed with gap at most 1. For c∗ 

> 1

this follows by construction, and for all others by the fact that Wi−1 satisfies the induction invariant together with the fact that ρi

agrees with ρi−1 on Σ \ c∗

> 1

. By the same arguments we derive that Wi ⊆ C(ρi) is a set of cells of ρi that either have at most 3 nodes or they are d-stuffed vortices with gap at most 1. By construction of c∗

> 1

, (P, B) ρ∗ 

> i

-kisses c1 in C′ 

> 1

and in particular it ρi-kisses c1 in C′

> 1

, and for the other vortices in Wi this remains true by the induction invariant and the construction of ρi

using Claim 5.8.1 (the linkages P, B do not intersect the linkages respective witnessing that the remaining vortices in Wi are d-stuffed with gap 1). For every c ∈ V i we derive that there is a set of (b − i + 1)( d + 1) tight concentric cycles CV (c) in 

ρi around c: This follows from the fact that Vi = Vi−1 \ { c1, c j | j ∈ I∗} and the fact that for every j ∈ I \ I∗ the sequence ⟨Cj 

> 1

, . . . , C j

> (b−i+1)( d+1)

⟩ is still a sequence of tight concentric cycles around cj by the previous construction; see the construction in the case |Nρ′ 

> i

(c∗

> 1

)| ≥ 4. Further, for all c ∈ V i−1 \ I this follows from the fact that ρi agrees with ρi−1 on Σ∗ \ c∗ 

> 1

and our initial choice of I using that the original families of vortices were stacked. This proves the induction invariant for Vi.Using analogous arguments, for every c∗ ∈ W i there is some vortex c ∈ C(ρ) such that c ⊆ c∗

and there is a set of (b − i + 1)( d + 1) (not necessarily tight) concentric cycles CW (c) in ρi around 

c, disjoint from the respective linkages witnessing that it is d-stuffed with gap at most 1, that is disjoint from the respective linkages of (Pc, Bc) that ρi-kisses c. Note that this is true for c∗ 

> 1

by the fact that c∗ 

> 1

⊆ ∆1(d+1) ⊊ ∆1(d+2) ⊊ . . . ⊊ ∆1(b−i+2)( d+1) , hence ⟨C1

> d+2

, . . . , C 1(b−i+2)( d+1) ⟩ is a sequence of (b − i + 1)( d + 1) concentric cycles around c∗ 

> 1

satisfying the above. This proves the induction invariant for Wi.Finally (⋆) holds true by the above and the fact that the sequences of concentric cycles are subsequences of C1, . . . , Cb which were stacked in the first place. ⊣

Since (Vi, Wi, ρ i) maintain the inductive invariants, let t ≤ b be minimal such that |V t| = 0; 

then ρt, Wt satisfy the theorem where the vortices in Wt are d-stuffed with gap 1 and satisfy 

i), ii ), iii ) of the theorem by construction, concluding the proof. Note that a careful analysis of the above proof shows that depth of the resulting rendition ρ′ is at most 4d + 2 – using Lemma 5.6, but as we do not need explicit bounds on the depth – we only need d-linkedness up to some bounded gap – we omitted a thorough proof. In light of Theorem 5.8 we define the following. 

Definition 5.9. Let Σ be a surface and let ρ be a Σ-rendition of some graph G. Let d, ℓ ∈ N.We call ρ (properly) d-linked, respectively d-stuffed with gap ℓ, if every vortex of ρ is (properly) 

d-linked, respectively d-stuffed with gap ℓ, and for every pair of distinct vortices c1, c 2 ∈ C(ρ),

the paths P1, P2 witnessing that they are (properly) d-linked, respectively d-stuffed with gap ℓ, 

are disjoint. We derive the following from Theorem 5.8. 53 Corollary 5.10. Let d, b ∈ N. Let Σ be a surface and ρ a Σ-rendition of depth d of some graph G. Let {c1, . . . , c b} ⊆ C(ρ) be the (possibly empty) set of all vortex cells. For i ∈ [b] let 

Ci = {Ci

> 1

, . . . , C i

> (b+1) ·(d+1)

} be disjoint sets of (b + 1) · (d + 1) concentric cycles around ci, with 

∆i being the closed Ci

> 1

-disc in ρ containing ci for each i ∈ [b], and (Ci, c i) and (Cj , c j ) are stacked for all distinct i, j ∈ [b].Then there exists a Σ-rendition ρ′ of G that is d-stuffed with gap at most 1 such that for every vortex c ∈ C(ρ) there is a vortex c∗ ∈ C(ρ′) with c ⊆ c∗.

# 6 The apex-free case 

Throughout this section we work with renditions in surfaces, in particular we are apex-free . The main goal of this section is to prove that, given an instance (G, T ) with a vital T -linkage L and a blank Σ-rendition of (G, T ), then there exists another instance (G′, T ′) with a vital T ′-linkage L′

such that |T ′| ∈ poly (|T |) · 2poly (b) where b = bidim (G, T ) and such that (G, T ) can be embedded in a surface Σ′ with all terminals drawn on boundary components of Σ′, where the surfaces ˆΣ′

and ˆΣ obtained by “capping their holes with discs” are homeomorphic. We will formulate and prove the relevant results in a more general setting as it is more natural. We need specific renditions throughout this section; we call a rendition ρ stretched if for any pair of distinct vortices c, c ′ ∈ C(ρ) it holds N (c) ∩ N (c′) = ∅. Recall the Definition 5.3 of concentric cycles in ρ, and that, given a sequence ⟨C1, . . . , C s⟩ of concentric cycles in ρ, we let ∆Ci denote the respective Ci-disc in ρ satisfying ∆C1 ⊊ . . . ⊊ ∆Cs .

Definition 6.1. Let Σ be a surface. Let m ≥ 1. Let (G, T ) be an annotated graph. Let ρ

be a blank and stretched Σ-rendition of (G, T ) and let C∗ ⊆ C(ρ) be its set of vortices. Let 

M = ⟨C1, . . . , C m⟩ be a sequence of concentric cycles in ρ such that ∆Cm is vortex-free 9. Then we call (ρ, M ) an m-locus (of (G, T ) in Σ). We refer to Ci as a cycle of M for every i ∈ [m].We call (G, T ), L, (ρ, M ) exhausted if 

G = ⋃ L ∪ 

> m

⋃

> i=1

Ci ∪ ⋃

> c∈C∗

σ(c) and E(⋃ L) ∩ E(

> m

⋃

> i=1

Ci) = ∅.

Note that due to the definition of m-locus, no vertex of T is contained in the interior of ∆Cm .Furthermore, recall that by definition of concentric cycles, each cycle of M is grounded in ρ, in particular it is edge-disjoint from the graph of every vortex. 

Definition 6.2. Let Σ be a surface, G a graph and ρ a Σ-rendition of G. Let c ∈ C(ρ) be a cell with N (c) = {ac, b c} such that σ(c) consists of the single edge acbc. Then we call c dead 10 .We call ρ a Σ-skeleton of G if every non-vortex cell is dead. Given a Σ-rendition, we will classify different homotopy types of paths whose traces have both endpoints in vortex-boundaries: These will be loops, if both endpoints lie on the society of a common vortex, and links otherwise.          

> 9If m= 1 and there are two choices for ∆cm– in particular C∗=∅– fix one of them.
> 10 Such cells are sometimes referred to as “trivial” in the literature.

54 Definition 6.3. Let Σ be a surface and ρ a Σ-rendition of some graph G. Let c, c ′ ∈ C(ρ) be vortices. Let P ⊆ G be grounded such that both its endpoints are in N (c) ∪ N (c′). If c̸ = c′ we call P a c-c′ link or simply link . If c = c′, we call P a loop (at c).Given a loop P at c, let γ ⊊ Σ be the trace of P . If there exists an arc-wise connected component 

τ ⊊ cl (c) \ { u, v } such that γ ∪ τ bounds a disc ∆P (c) ⊆ Σ that contains no vortex of ρ and is disjoint from the closure of all vortices distinct from c, we call P simple .Let C∗ ⊆ C(ρ) be the set of vortices. We call two links (or loops) ρ-homotopic if their traces are homotopic in Σ \ ⋃ 

> c∈C∗

int (c), respectively. Note that given a simple loop P the disc ∆P (c) is unique. The following is the main theorem of this section; note that if a rendition is stretched then no path can be simultaneously a link and a loop. 

Theorem 6.4. Let t, ξ, g, k ∈ N and d ≥ 1. Let Σ be a surface of genus g. Then there exist functions terminals : N4 → N, cycles : N3 → N fat : N2 → N satisfying the following. Let (G, T ) be a k-annotated graph such that  

> •

there exists a cycles (k, d, t )-locus (ρ, M ) of (G, T ) in Σ such that ρ is d-stuffed with gap at most d admitting at most ξ vortices, and  

> •

there exists a vital T -linkage in G.Then there exists a terminals (k, ξ, d, g )-annotated graph (G′, T ′), and a t-locus (ρ′, M ′) of (G′, T ′)

in Σ together with a vital T ′-linkage L′ in G′ such that i) ρ′ is a Σ-skeleton with at most ξ vortices, and (G′, T ′), L′, (ρ′, M ′) is exhausted, ii) all vortices c ∈ C(ρ′) satisfy σ(c) = ( N (c), ∅),

iii) let L ∈ L ′, then L is either a non-simple loop or a link; in particular it is internally disjoint from Nρ′ (c) for every vortex cell c ∈ C(ρ′),

iv) let P ∈ L ′ be a non-simple loop or a link in G′, and let L′(P ) ⊆ L ′ be the maximum size linkage of paths ρ-homotopic to P . Then |L ′(P )| ≤ fat (k, d ).Moreover, terminals (k, ξ, d, g ) ∈ poly (k + ξ + g) · 2poly (d), cycles (k, d, t ) ∈ poly (k + t) · 2poly (d),

and fat (k, d ) ∈ poly (k) · 2poly (d),

6.1 Exhausting the instance 

In order to prove Theorem 6.4 we need several technical steps; the first one – marking the main result of this subsection – allows us to reduce an instance (G, T ), L, (ρ, M ) where (ρ, M ) is some 

(m + 1) -locus of (G, T ) in a surface Σ, to that of an exhausted instance (G′, T ), L′, (ρ′, M ′) on the same set of annotations where (ρ′, M ′) is an m-locus of (G′, T ′) in Σ; recall Definition 6.1. In particular, the instance we are left with comes with a Σ-skeleton, and thus it is “quasi-embedded”, meaning that it is essentially embedded up-to the vortex cells. The main techniques employed to prove this result expand on existing techniques [RS09, CKK24, AKK +17]. Unfortunately, we cannot easily transcribe the proposed results from the literature as we need to take care of further technicalities, and thus we give a full proof dedicated to our setting and needs for completion. The main idea of the proof being that no two paths in L can use non-node vertices of the graph of a common non-vortex cell, for the graphs of non-vortex cells can be separated from the rest by separations of order ≤ 3. This can be exploited in order to “throw away” cells with ≤ 3 nodes via simply replacing them with single edges respecting the linkage L. Continuing 55 (a) P ∗        

> iand forbidden configura-tions.
> (b) P∗
> iafter contraction. (c) Tucking in P∗
> i.

Figure 10: A schematic illustration of the proof of Theorem 6.5. The red regions depict a vortex 

ci. The figures depict a path P ∗ 

> i

in red together with paths of a vital linkage in orange and pink in some rendition, where blue regions denote cells. Yellow elements in cells denote “forbidden” configurations violating vitality of L. Figure (a) illustartes the initial setting. Figure (b) illustrates the setting after contracting the subpaths of P ∗

> i

in cells to edges. Figure (c) illustrates how to “tuck” P ∗ 

> i

into the vortex. this argumentation inductively by a careful analysis of the graph’s structure inside the cells with respect to the cells’ societies, we can reduce to Σ-skeletons. In a next instance, one then “throws away” vertices and contracts edges until left with an exhausted instance maintaining a large locus; recall the definitions from Section 4.1. There is one more technicality that we need to add to the above sketch, which we briefly discussed in Section 5: When given a d-stuffed vortex with gap 1, one of the (d + 1) paths witnessing that the vortex is d-stuffed, may partially “live” outside of the vortex, due to the fact that we work with renditions. We need to carefully “tuck” that path into the graph of the vortex when exhausting the instance, as we want the adhesion of our linear decomposition to match the size of the linkage inside the graph of the vortex “linking” the separators; compare with Proposition 3.7. To this extent, recall Definitions 5.2 and 5.9 of properly d-linked renditions with gap at most ℓ.

Theorem 6.5. Let Σ be a surface. Let m, d, ℓ ≥ 1 and let (G, T ) be an annotated graph admitting a vital T -linkage L. Let (ρ, M ) be an (m + 1) -locus of (G, T ) such that ρ is d-stuffed with gap at most ℓ. Let C∗ be the set of vortices of ρ.Then there exists a graph G′ that is a minor of G, such that (G′, T ) is an annotated graph admitting a vital T -linkage L′ with τ (L′) = τ (L) and an m-locus (ρ′, M ′) where M ′ is tight, and ρ′ is a Σ-skeleton of G′. Furthermore, (G′, T ), L′, (ρ′, M ′) is exhausted and ρ′ is properly 

d-linked with gap at most ℓ such that C∗ is the set of vortices of ρ′ and for every c ∈ C∗ it holds 

Nρ′ (c) = Nρ(c) and ⋃ 

> c∈C∗

σρ′ (c) ∩ ⋃ M ′ = ∅.

Proof. Throughout this proof, whenever we say rendition we mean a Σ-rendition, as Σ is clear from context. Let (G, T ), L, (ρ, M ) be as in the theorem. Let M = ⟨C1, . . . , C m+1 ⟩ and let 

C∗ = {c1, . . . , c b} be the set of vortices of ρ (possibly empty) for some b ∈ N with respective vortex societies (σρ(ci), Ωci ) for i ∈ [b].For every i ∈ [b], let Pi be a linkage of order (d + 1) witnessing that ci is d-stuffed with gap at most ℓ where Pi, Pj are disjoint for distinct i, j ∈ [b]. Let P ∗ 

> i

∈ P i be the unique path with its 56 nodes in V (Ω ci ) and ⋃(Pi \ { P ∗ 

> i

}) ⊆ σρ(ci) by Definition 5.2; call such a path P ∗ 

> i

a ci-hook . Since 

M is an (m + 1) -locus, for every i ∈ [m] it holds V (Ci) ∩ ⋃bj=1 σρ(cj ) = ∅; let M ′ := ⟨C1, . . . , C m⟩.Furthermore for every i ∈ [b] and ci-hook P ∗ 

> i

let P(P ∗ 

> i

) be the set of maximal subpaths of 

P ∗ 

> i

with both ends on V (Ω ci ) such that they are completely contained in the graph of some single non-vortex cell. By construction, for every i ∈ [b], P(P ∗ 

> i

) is a set of internally disjoint paths. Note that if P∗ 

> i

= ∅, then P ∗ 

> i

⊆ σ(ci), and hence ci is properly d-linked with gap ℓ by Definition 5.2. As a first step, let G′ be obtained from G by deleting all edges e ∈ E(G) that are not part of 

E(⋃ M ′), not part of E(⋃ L), not part of E(⋃bi=1 P ∗ 

> i

) and are not in ⋃bi=1 σρ(ci). Then G′ ⊆ G, V (G′) = V (G), L is still a vital T -linkage in G′, and (ρ, M ′) is an m-locus of (G′, T ) in Σ. For notational simplicity, let G = G′ and M = M ′; where the outercycle of M is by the above construction disjoint from ⋃bi=1 σρ(ci). We have the following. 

(⋆) G = ⋃ L ∪ ⋃ M ∪ ⋃bi=1 P ∗ 

> i

∪ ⋃bi=1 σ(ci),

and ρ is a rendition of G, d -stuffed with gap at most ℓ witnessed by the same linkages P1, . . . , Pb.We call a cell c ∈ C(ρ) dying if it is not a vortex, it is not dead and either E(σ(c)) = ∅ or 

V (σ(c)) = Nρ(c). Note that technically E(σ(c)) = ∅ is allowed for vortices, hence the additional assumption. 

Claim 6.5.1 . Let c ∈ C(σ) be a non-vortex cell. Then, either i) c is dying, or ii) there is a unique path L(c) ∈ L such that E(L(c)) ∩ E(σ(c)) ̸ = ∅ and |V (L(c)) ∩ Nρ(c)| ≥ 2.

Proof of claim. By assumption c is not a vortex cell. If c is dead ii ) is true and if it is dying i)

is true. Henceforth, assume that E(σ(c)) ̸ = ∅ as well as V (σ(c)) ̸ = Nρ(c), whence there exist a vertex u ∈ V (σ(c)) \ Nρ(c) and an edge e ∈ E(σ(c)) incident to u. Note that such an edge must exist since L is vital implying that u ∈ V (L) for some L ∈ L and since ρ is a blank rendition and c is not a vortex cell, u must be adjacent to some edge. Further, since u is not a node of the cell and ρ is a rendition, E(σ(c)) must contain at least one edge adjacent to u. Since ρ

is blank and |N (c)| ≤ 3 – for it is not a vortex – there is at most one path L ∈ L such that 

E(L) ∩ E(σ(c)) ̸ = ∅. To see this note that both terminals of L lie in V (G) \ V (σ(c)) since ρ is blank, in particular N (c) separates T from σ(c) with E(σ(c)) ∩ E(σ(c′)) = ∅ for all cells c′̸ = c.Thus, since |N (c)| ≤ 3 and paths in L are pairwise vertex-disjoint, at most one path in L may use an edge of σ(c). Similarly, since Nρ(c) separates u from T, at least one path of L satisfies 

E(L) ∩ E(σ(c)) ̸ = ∅. Combining both observations, such a path exists and is unique, and since both endpoints of the path are in T, it must have at least two common vertices with Nρ(c). This concludes the proof; see Figure 10 for a schematic illustration of the general setting. ⊣

Throughout the proof we will write L(c) for the unique path satisfying Claim 6.5.1 whenever applicable. 

Claim 6.5.2 . There is a minor G′ ⊆ G such that (G′, T ) is an annotated graph admitting a vital 

T -linkage L′ such that τ (L′) = τ (L). Further there is an m-locus (ρ′, M ) of (G, T ) such that ρ′

is d-stuffed with gap at most ℓ and vortices {c1, . . . , c b} (but it may not be equal to ρ on these). Let P′

> 1

, . . . , P′ 

> b

be respective linkages witnessing that ρ′ is d-stuffed with gap ℓ and with ci-hooks 

P ′ 

> i

respectively. Then every path in P(P ′ 

> i

) consists of a single edge. 57 Proof of claim. The proof is by induction on {P ∗ 

> 1

, . . . , P ∗ 

> b

}. Note that P ∗ 

> 1

, . . . , P ∗ 

> b

are disjoint, and further no two paths in ⋃bi=1 P(P ∗ 

> i

) are contained in the graph of the same cell by definition of P(P ∗ 

> i

). Thus, we may construct a minor G′ of G inductively by contracting the paths in  

> ⋃bi=1

P(P ∗ 

> i

) as follows. Let P ∈ P (P ∗ 

> i

) for some i ∈ [b] and let c ∈ C(ρ) be the respective cell with P ⊆ σ(c). If N (c) ⊆ V (P ), then, since V (P ) ∩ N (ρ) ⊆ V (Ω ci ), we can add the whole graph σρ(c) to σρ(ci), and the resulting rendition is still d-stuffed with gap at most ℓ as witnessed by the same linkages. Henceforth, assume that |N (P ) ∩ N (c)| = 2 and |N (c)| = 3; let 

N (c) = {u1, u 2, u 3} and let the endpoints of P be u1, u 2, say. If c is dying, then P is an edge, for |N (P ) ∩ N (c)| = 2 and we are done; hence assume that c is not dying. By Claim 6.5.1 we derive that either E(P ) ∩ E(L) = ∅ for every L ∈ L or E(P ) ∩ E(L(c)) ̸ = ∅

and it is disjoint from all other paths in L. If the former holds true P must again be an edge, for otherwise there is v ∈ V (P ) \ N (c) which is not part of any L ∈ L contradicting vitality of 

L. We derive that P ∩ L(c)̸ = ∅; note that their intersection must be a subpath of L(c), i.e., a single component, for else L was not vital as we could reroute L(c) using P . Contract every edge in e ∈ E(P ) ∩ E(L(c)) . Then this results in a graph G′ for which the resulting linkage L′

has the same pattern as L since T ⊆ V (G′) as the graphs of vortices have not been altered. We claim that L′ is still a vital linkage: Otherwise, let L∗ be a linkage in G′ with the same pattern as L′ but distinct from it. Uncontracting P now yields a linkage ˜L∗ in G with the same pattern as L but distinct from it as a contradiction. Finally, we claim that after the above contraction P consists of a single edge. If not, then there is 

u ∈ V (P ) \ { u1, u 2} with u ∈ σ(c). Note that u̸ = u3 for |V (P ) ∩ N (c)| = 2 . By Claim 6.5.1 there is a single path of L that has an edge in σ(c). Thus u ∈ V (L(c)) still. Let ui, u j ∈ { u1, u 2, u 3} be the two endpoints of L(c). Then {ui, u j } ∩ { u1, u 2}̸ = ∅, say ui = u1 for simplicity. Hence, there is a {u}-{u1}-path L′ ⊆ L(c) as well as a {u}-{u1}-path P ′ ⊆ P . Since E(P ) ∩ E(L(c)) = ∅ we can reroute L(c) along P ′ as a contradiction to vitality. See Figure 10 (a) and (b) for a schematic illustration depicting most cases of the steps discussed above. Repeating the above for all i ∈ [b] and all paths in P(P ∗ 

> i

) we conclude the proof, noting that we never alter the graphs of cells containing edges of ⋃ M . ⊣

For simplicity, assume that (G, T ) L, (ρ, M ) and P1, . . . , Pb as well as P ∗ 

> 1

, . . . , P ∗ 

> b

are such that they satisfy Claim 6.5.2. We are left to “tuck” the respective edges as given by P(P ∗ 

> i

) “into the vortices” to make the rendition properly d-linked with gap at most ℓ. To do this, note that for all i ∈ [b] and all P ∈ P (P ∗ 

> i

), we have P = uv for consecutive u, v ∈ V (Ω ci ). Define ρ′ from ρ by adding P to the graph σρ(ci) and removing it from the respective graph of the cell of ρ it was part of. This results in an m-locus (ρ′, M ) of (G, T ) such that ρ′ is properly d-linked with gap at most d. For notational simplicity, let ρ = ρ′. We summarise the above as follows: 

(⋆⋆ ) G = ⋃ L ∪ ⋃ M ∪ ⋃bi=1 σ(ci) and ρ is properly d-linked with gap at most ℓ.With this in mind, we continue to reduce ρ to a Σ-skeleton. The following is an easy, but slightly technical claim; it essentially states that whenever we can refine ρ by splitting one cell into two cells without creating new vortices, then we do so. Note that this does not affect G or L in any way but is a pure refining of the rendition at hand. 

Claim 6.5.3 . There is an m-locus (ρ′, M ) of (G, T ) satisfying (⋆⋆ ) such that for every non-vortex cell c ∈ C(ρ) with Nρ(c) = {u1, u 2, u 3} for distinct vertices and every separation (A, B ) in σ(c)

with A ∩ { u1, u 2, u 3}̸ = ∅ and B ∩ { u1, u 2, u 3}̸ = ∅, it holds |A ∩ B| ≥ 2.58 Proof of claim. The proof is by inductively refining ρ as follows. Let c ∈ C(σ) be a cell such that Nρ(c) = {u1, u 2, u 3} for distinct vertices and let (A, B ) be an order ≤ 1 separation in σ(c)

with A ∩ { u1, u 2, u 3}̸ = ∅ and B ∩ { u1, u 2, u 3}̸ = ∅: call such a cell bad . We prove how to refine the rendition by reducing the number of bad cells inductively. First note that if the separation is of order 0, then A, B partition {u1, u 2, u 3}. Thus, we may define ρ′ from ρ by removing the cell c and adding two new disjoint cells cA, c B ⊊ c ⊊ Σ by letting σρ′ (cA) = σρ(c)[ A] and σρ′ (cB ) = σρ(c)[ B] where cA has as nodes A ∩ { u1, u 2, u 3} and 

cB has as nodes B ∩ { u1, u 2, u 3}; both have ≤ 2 nodes. Then (ρ′, M ) is an m-locus of G in Σ

and P1, . . . , Pb still witness that it is d-stuffed with gap at most ℓ; the details are easy and left to the reader. In particular the number of bad cells in ρ′ is strictly less than the ones in ρ by construction. Thus let the separation be of order 1 and let x ∈ A ∩ B be the unique vertex (possibly 

x ∈ { u1, u 2, u 3}). Then construct ρ′ from ρ by deleting c and introducing new disjoint cells 

cA, c B ⊊ c ⊊ Σ with nodes A ∩ { u1, u 2, u 3} ∪ { x} and B ∩ { u1, u 2, u 3} ∪ { x} respectively, by letting σρ′ (cA) = σρ(c)[ A] and σρ′ (cB ) = σρ(c)[ B], and drawing x as a node inside c away from its boundary. One easily verifies that (ρ′, M ) is an m-locus of (G, T ) in Σ (after possibly fixing a tiebreaker if |Nρ′ (cA)| = 2 or |Nρ′ (cB )| = 2 ). To see this note that if some cycle C of M has an edge in E(σ(c)) , then the trace of C in ρ′ is still equal to its old trace except for its subsets of the boundary of cA and cB . Since cA, c B ⊆ c by construction, one can easily choose a tiebreaker (if necessary) such that the trace of C in ρ′ is as desired. Note however, that both cells cA and cB may have exactly three nodes each, and the nodes may still be separable by separators of order 1. In particular the number of bad cells may have increased. But one may now inductively continue with the cells cA and cB by refining the rendition ρ′ further at possible 1 separations. Since in each step we further decompose the graph 

σ(c), this procedure eventually stops, and we effectively reduced the number of bad cells. By repeating the above for every bad cell of ρ we conclude the proof (note that (⋆⋆ ) is still satisfied by construction). ⊣

Henceforth, we assume that (G, T ) and (ρ, M ) are as given by Claim 6.5.3; L is still a vital linkage in G.

Claim 6.5.4 . Let c ∈ C(ρ) be a non-vortex cell with Nρ(c) = {u1, u 2, u 3} for distinct vertices. If 

c is not dying, then |V (L(c)) ∩ Nρ(c)| = 2 .

Proof of claim. Assume that |V (L(c)) ∩ Nρ(c)) | = 3 , i.e., the path visits all three vertices. Fix an orientation of the path via a start and endpoint of the path and let ⟨v0, . . . , v m⟩ be a linear order on its vertices with respect to that orientation. Assume that ⟨u1, u 2, u 3⟩ are visited in that order by L(c) and let L′(c) ⊆ L(c) be the respective subpath starting in u1 and ending in u3. By Claim 6.5.3 we derive that there is a {u1}-{u3}-path P in σ(c) − u2. In particular 

P̸ = L(c)′. But since no path of L∗ := L \ { L(c)} uses an edge or vertex in V (σ(c)) – for L(c)

visits all three vertices {u1, u 2, u 3} by assumption – the path P is vertex-disjoint from every path in L∗. Let L be obtained from L(c) by replacing L′(c) with P, then L is a path and it has the same endpoints as L(c). By construction then L∗ ∪ { L} is a linkage in G with pattern τ (L)

contradicting the fact that L was vital. ⊣

Combining the above claims, one easily kills dying cells as follows. 59 Claim 6.5.5 . There exists a graph G′ ⊆ G, such that (G′, T ) is an annotated graph admitting a vital T -linkage L′ with τ (L′) = τ (L) and an m-locus (ρ′, M ) where ρ′ has no dying cells, and it agrees with ρ on all cells of ρ that are not dying, in particular the instance satisfies (⋆⋆ ).

Proof of claim. Let c ∈ C(ρ) be a dying cell. If E(σ(c)) = ∅ then simply delete c from the rendition; this does not have any effect on M, i.e., for every cycle C of M, C ⊆ G′ remains grounded in the resulting rendition, and no cell containing an edge of E(C) is altered. Henceforth assume that V (σ(c)) = Nρ(c) and E(σ(c)) ̸ = ∅. If |Nρ(c)| = 2 , then c is dead as a contradiction to it being dying; thus let Nρ(c) = {u1, u 2, u 3} for distinct vertices. By Claim 6.5.3 we derive that σ(c) is isomorphic to K3. We define ρ′ from ρ by deleting c and adding three new cells 

c1, c 2, c 3 /∈ C(σ) and defining σρ′ (cj ) to consist of the edge {ui, u k} for {i, j, k } = {1, 2, 3}. One easily verifies that ρ′ is a blank rendition of G still satisfying the assumptions of the claim, in particular, every cycle of M remains grounded in the new rendition. Note that this may affect at most one cycle of M, say C, since the cycles are pairwise disjoint. Furthermore, the cycles remain concentric, since the trace of C in the new rendition remains effectively equal when choosing the new cells carefully and setting the tie-breaker for the trace of the new cells accordingly. Finally, c1, c 2 and c3 are dead by definition. Repeating this argument for every dying cell concludes the proof. ⊣

Next, we kill cells away from cycles in M .

Claim 6.5.6 . There is an m-locus (ρ′, M ) of (G, T ) such that ρ′ agrees with ρ on all cells that contain an edge of a cycle in M . Further, all other non-vortex cells of ρ′ are dead, and the instance satisfies (⋆⋆ ).

Proof of claim. We proceed by induction, showing how to “kill” cells away from M . Let c ∈ C(ρ)

be a non-vortex cell that is not dead and such that it does not contain an edge of a cycle in M .By Claim 6.5.5 we may assume that it is not dying. Thus, by (⋆⋆ ) some path of L uses an edge of σ(c). Since c is not dying, Claim 6.5.1 implies that there is a unique path L(c) ∈ L using an edge in σ(c). Combining Claim 6.5.3 and Claim 6.5.4 we derive that |V (L(c)) ∩ Nρ(c)| = 2 . Let L′(c) be the maximum length subpath of L(c) contained in σ(c), and let u and v be its endpoints. Then u, v ∈ Nρ(c). Since no cycle of M admits an edge in σ(c) by assumption, we derive by (⋆⋆ ) that σ(c) = L(c). Thus, replace the cell c by introducing dead cells, one for each edge of L(c).By induction we can proceed as above until all non-vortex cells not containing an edge of a cycle of M are dead, never producing new non-dead cells, i.e., the induction stops after r ∈ N steps where r is the number of non-dead cells in C(ρ). Clearly the instance still satisfies (⋆⋆ ) for we did not alter the rendition on vortices. This concludes the proof of the claim. ⊣

Combining Claim 6.5.5 and Claim 6.5.6 we may assume that every non-vortex cell of ρ whose graph has no edge in common with a cycle in M is dead – by switching to the respective subgraph and rendition – and there are no dying cells left. Let M = ⟨C1, . . . , C m⟩ and fix 

C = {C1, . . . , C m}.

Claim 6.5.7 . Let c ∈ C(ρ) be a non-dead cell such that E(σ(c)) ∩ E(⋃ C)̸ = ∅. There exists a graph G′ that is a minor of G, such that (G′, T ) is a k-annotated graph having a vital T -linkage 60 L′ with τ (L′) = τ (L) and an m-locus (ρ′, M ) where ρ′ agrees with ρ on all cells c′̸ = c, and all other cells of ρ′ are dead; in particular the instance satisfies (⋆⋆ ).

Proof of claim. Let c be as in the claim and let e ∈ E(σ)∩E(⋃ C) and let C ∈ C be the respective cycle with e ∈ E(C). There are two cases to consider: |Nρ(c)| ∈ { 2, 3}.

Case 1; |Nρ(c)| = 2 : Let Nρ(c) = {u1, u 2} for distinct vertices. Every edge of E(⋃ C) is part of a grounded cycle. Thus, since C is a set of disjoint cycles σ(c) contains edges of exactly one cycle in C, hence C, and in particular it must contain a subpath of length at least 2 of 

C since e ∈ E(C) ∩ E(σ(c)); let PC ⊆ C be maximal such that E(Pc) ⊆ E(σ(c)) . Since C

is a grounded cycle we derive that PC must be a path with endpoints u1, u 2.Further, since c is not dying, Claim 6.5.1 implies that L(c) exists. Let L′(c) be the maximum subpath of L(c) contained in σ(c) with endpoints u1, u 2, then L′(c) by vitality of L we derive that L′(c) = PC , else we could reroute L(c) by replacing L′(c) with PC

contradicting that L was the unique linkage of its pattern. Furthermore, since L is vital we derive that V (σ(c)) ⊆ V (L′(c)) . But then E(σ(c)) = E(L′(c)) , for any other edge could be used to reroute L′(c) inside σ(c) again refuting vitality of L. Now we can refine the rendition ρ by deleting the cell c and introducing for each edge e = xy ∈ E(σ(c) a new cell 

ce ⊆ c such that σ(ce) consists exactly of the edge e with nodes x, y in the obvious way: clearly C is grounded in ρ′. Since each cell ce is contained in c, no matter the tiebreaker for each cell, M remains a sequence of concentric cycles in ρ′.

Case 2; |Nρ(c)| = 3 : Let Nρ(c) = {u1, u 2, u 3} for distinct vertices. Combining Claim 6.5.3 and Claim 6.5.4 we derive that L(c) is the unique path with an edge in E(σ(c)) and 

|V (L(c)) ∩ Nρ(c)| = 2; without loss of generality assume that u1, u 2 ∈ V (L(c)) and let 

L′(c) be the maximum subpath of L(c) contained in σ(c) with endpoints u1, u 2.Since M is a sequence of concentric cycles in ρ, at most one cycle of M, say C, has an edge in 

E(σ(c)) and C intersects σ(c) in a supath PC ⊊ C. By (⋆) we derive that σ(c) = L′(c) ∪ PC .Further every vertex u ∈ V (σ(c)) \ { u3} satisfies u ∈ L′(c) since L is vital. By Claim 6.5.3 we derive the existence of three (not necessarily disjoint) paths P1, P 2, P 3 ⊆ σ(c) of length at least 2 such that Pi has uj , u k as endpoints for {i, j, k } = {1, 2, 3}. Since u3 /∈ V (L′(c)) 

we may set P3 = L′(c) and we know that Pj̸ ⊆ L′(c) for j = 1 , 2 since both contain u3.Let P ′

> 1

, P ′ 

> 2

⊆ PC be maximal such that E(P ′ 

> i

) ∩ E(L′(c)) = ∅ for i = 1 , 2; these paths exist since σ(c) = L′(c) ∪ PC . Now both P ′ 

> 1

and P ′ 

> 2

have length at least 2, whence they must intersect L′(c).If there exists an edge e ∈ E(σ(c)) \ (E(L′(c)) ∪ E(P ′

> 1

) ∪ E(P ′

> 2

)) , then e ∈ E(PC ) and e

has both its endpoints on V (L(c)) , since Pc has two incidences with u3, and the respective edges are in E(P ′

> 1

) and E(P ′

> 2

) respectively. But then we can reroute L′(c) along e, and hence L(c), keeping the resulting path edge-disjoint from the remaining paths in L. This is a contradiction to the unique pattern of L. Henceforth, we may assume that no such edge e exists, whence σ(c) = P ′ 

> 1

∪ P ′ 

> 2

∪ L′(c). Analogously we derive that no edge of P ′ 

> 1

or 

P ′ 

> 2

has both its incidences with vertices of L′(c) for else we could reroute. Thus, again applying Claim 6.5.3 we derive that P ′ 

> 1

must end in u1, say, and P ′ 

> 2

must end in u2, say (or vice-versa but then rename the paths accordingly) and {P ′

> 1

, P ′

> 2

, L ′(c)} is an internally disjoint linkage. In particular it is a subdivision of K3 and admits a planar embedding. We may thus refine ρ accordingly by deleting c and introducing new cells, 61 one for each edge in E(P ′

> 1

) ∪ E(P ′

> 2

) ∪ E(L′(c)) keeping M a set of concentric circles in the resulting rendition ρ′ using analogous argumentation as in the previous proofs. As we did not alter any graphs of vortices, we derive that (⋆⋆ ) still holds. This concludes the proof of the claim. ⊣

Recall that according to our previous assumptions, all non-dead cells c ∈ C(ρ) satisfy E(M ) ∩

E(σ(c)) ̸ = ∅. Thus, repeatedly applying Claim 6.5.7 for every non-dead cell that is left, and using the fact that being a minor is a transitive relation we derive the existence of a k-annotated graph (G′, T ) admitting a vital T -linkage L′ with τ (L′) = τ (L) and an m-locus (ρ′, M ) of (G′, T )

in Σ such that ρ′ is a Σ-skeleton and (G′, T ), L′, (ρ′, M ) satisfies (⋆⋆ ).If M = ⟨C1, . . . , C m⟩ is not tight, then Proposition 4.3 implies the existence of a set of m-concentric cycles M ∗ = ⟨C∗ 

> 1

, . . . , C ∗

> m

⟩ such that M ∗ is still a set of concentric cycles in ρ where the trace of each C∗ 

> i

lies in ∆Cm , in particular the cycles are grounded, their discs are vortex-free and E(⋃mi=1 C∗ 

> i

) ∩ ⋃ 

> c∈C∗

σ(c) = ∅. In particular (ρ′, M ∗) is an m-locus of (G′, T ) in Σ by Definition 6.1. Now (G′, T ), L′, (ρ′, M ∗) satisfies (⋆⋆ ) and M ∗ is tight. 

Claim 6.5.8 . Let (G, T ), L, (ρ, M ) satisfy (⋆⋆ ) and such that M is tight. Then there exists a minor G′ of G and an m-locus (ρ′, M ′) of (G′, T ) in Σ together with a vital T -linkage L′ with 

τ (L′) = τ (L), such that the set C∗ of vortex cells of ρ is the set of vortex cells of ρ′, and ρ′

agrees with ρ on C∗. Further ρ′ is a Σ-skeleton, properly d-linked rendition with gap at most ℓ, 

and (G′, T ), L′, (ρ′, M ′) is exhausted. 

Proof of claim. The proof is by iteratively contracting edges e ∈ E(⋃ L) ∩ E(⋃mi=1 Ci); let e

be such an edge and e ∈ E(Ci) for some i ∈ [m], contract the edge e to a single vertex and adapt the rendition accordingly in the obvious way since each edge corresponds to a single cell for ρ is a Σ-skeleton. Let C′ 

> i

be the respective cycle obtained from Ci by contracting e. Then 

ρ′ is still a Σ-skeleton, M ′ = ⟨C1, . . . , C i−1, C ′

> i

, C i+1 , . . . , C m⟩ is still a set of concentric cycles in ρ′, the resulting graph is by construction a minor of G and L′ is still a vital linkage with the same pattern. Finally M ′ is tight, for otherwise M was not—simply reroute the cycles of M accordingly by “decontracting” the edge if necessary—as a contradiction to the above assumption. Since the resulting instance satisfies (⋆⋆ ), by repeating the above iteratively reducing the amount of edges in E(⋃ L) ∩ E(⋃mi=1 Ci) with each iteration concludes the proof of the claim. ⊣

Applying Claim 6.5.8 to (G′, T ), L′, (ρ′, M ∗) we conclude the proof. Note that C∗ is still the set of vortices of ρ′ and Nρ′ (c) = Nρ(c) for all c ∈ C∗ by construction. 

6.2 Taming the instance 

In this subsection, we gather various technical lemmas that leverage Lemma 4.4 on dry wells, in order to tame the behaviour of the vital linkage L inside the Cm-disc ∆Cm of the outer cycle Cm

of M, given that (G, T ), L, (ρ, M ) is exhausted. Let the segments of L be the maximal subpaths with ends in vortex boundaries that are otherwise disjoint from the graphs in vortices. We will adapt several ideas of [CKK24] to our setting, in order to lift the derived structure of the paths “inside” ∆Cm to the segments of L, which requires a non-trivial amount of work: Note that while 62 Figure 11: A schematic representation of the interaction of segments of a vital linkage with a large set of concentric cycles in a disc. The four segments are highlighted in different colours, and the vortices are marked by red regions. The restriction of the paths to the cycles is highlighted by red paths exhibiting a tamed behaviour. The four segments however exhibit “untamed” behaviour, where a single segment produces many “stacked” paths in the disc. the paths inside of ∆Cm may exhibit tamed behaviour, this is a priori not guaranteed for the segments of L; see Figure 11. To this extent, we define the following, which is essentially the restriction of the linkage L to a vortex-free ρ-aligned disc. 

Definition 6.6. Let Σ be a surface, and let ρ be a Σ-rendition of some annotated graph G. Let 

∆ ⊆ Σ be a vortex-free ρ-aligned disc. Let L be a linkage in G such that every endpoint of a path in L is contained in the graph of some cell c not contained in ∆. Let (G∆, Ω∆) be the 

∆-society in ρ. We define L(∆) as the set of paths obtained from L as follows. For every L ∈ L 

let P ⊆ L be a maximal subpath such that P has its endpoints in V (Ω ∆), the trace γP of P is contained in ∆, and no interior point of P is part of V (Ω ∆), then P ∈ L (∆) . We call L(∆) the 

restriction of L to ∆.Note that the above is not the same as L ∩ G∆ where G∆ denotes the crop of G by ∆, since 

L ∩ G∆ may contain paths with internal vertices on the boundary of ∆.One easily verifies that L(∆) is a set of pairwise internally disjoint paths; see the red paths in Figure 11 for an illustration. We extend the definition of patterns of linkages to sets of pairwise in-ternally disjoint paths P in the obvious way, i.e., τ (P) := {{ s, t } | P ∈ P has endpoints s and t}.Note that by definition, every path P ∈ L (∆) has all its vertices in graphs of cells of the rendition ρ′ obtained by restricting ρ to ∆. The following is an easy observation following from the definition of L(∆) (using the notation of Definition 6.6). 

Observation 6.7. Let P1, P 2 ∈ L (∆) be distinct such that V (P1) ∩ V (P2)̸ = ∅, then they intersect in a single vertex x with x ∈ V (Ω ∆) and P1, P 2 ⊊ L for some common L ∈ L . Further, 63 x is an endpoint of both, say that P1 ends in x and P2 starts in x, and the concatenation P1 ◦ P2

is a subpath of P ∈ L .

Proof. This is clear by construction: There exist L1, L 2 ∈ L (possibly equal) such that P1 ⊆ L1

and P2 ⊆ L2. If L1 = L2 we derive that |V (P1) ∩ V (P2)| ≤ 1 and if V (P1) ∩ V (P2)̸ = ∅ then their concatenation is clearly a subpath of L1. By definition of L(∆) , if they intersect they must do so in a vertex of V (Ω ∆). If L1̸ = L2 then V (P1) ∩ V (P2) = ∅ since L is a linkage. This concludes the proof. By definition of wells and exhausted instances, one can easily extract the former from the latter as follows. Given an exhausted instance (G, T ), L, (ρ, M ) with outer cycle Cm of M and let ∆Cm

be the respective Cm-disc. Recall Definition 5.4 and define G(M, L) := G[ρ, C m] as the extended crop of G by Cm and let ΩCm be a cyclic orientation of V (Cm) respecting the cycle, i.e., two consecutive vertices with respect to Ωcm share an edge in Cm. Then (G(M, L), ΩCm ) is a society and it admits a ∆Cm -rendition ρ∆m . By construction ⋃ M ⊆ G(M, L) and ⋃ L(∆ Cm ) ⊆ G(M, L)

where L(∆ Cm ) is a set of internally disjoint paths with its endpoints in V (Ω Cm ); the resulting graph and L(∆ Cm ) are essentially given as in Figure 11, where the thick cycle highlights the outer cycle Cm and the red paths illustrate L(∆ Cm ).

Observation 6.8. Let Σ be a surface. Let m ≥ 1. Let (G, T ), L, (ρ, M ) be exhausted where 

(G, T ) is an annotated graph, L is some vital T -linkage in G and (ρ, M ) is an m-locus of (G, T )

in Σ. Then W := ( G(M, L), Ω∆Cm , ρ ∆m , M, L(∆ Cm )) is an m-well. And if M is tight, then W

is tight. Note that the reason we add back Cm in the construction of G(L, M ) is purely for aesthetic reasons: Otherwise, we could only guarantee an (m − 1) -well obtained from M by additionally deleting the outer cycle, for it may not be part of the initial ∆Cm -society. Thus, given an annotated graph (G, T ) with m-locus (ρ, M ) and a vital T -linkage L, we write (

G(M, L), Ω∆Cm , ρ ∆Cm , M, L(∆ Cm )

> )

to mean the m-well obtained by Observation 6.8. Note that it is uniquely defined up to reversing Ω∆Cm . It is not difficult to see that if (G, T ), L, (ρ, M )

is exhausted and M is tight, then (G(M, L), Ω∆Cm , ρ ∆Cm , M, L(∆ Cm )) is dry. 

Lemma 6.9. Let Σ be a surface. Let m ≥ 1 and let (G, T ) be an annotated graph admitting a vital T -linkage L. Let (ρ, M ) be an m-locus of (G, T ). If (G, T ), L, (ρ, M ) is exhausted and M

is tight, then 

> (

G(M, L), Ω∆Cm , ρ ∆Cm , M, L(∆ Cm )

> )

is dry. 

Proof. Towards a contradiction assume the contrary. By assumption of the theorem, in particular 

M is tight, Lemma 4.4 implies the existence of an m-well (G′, Ω∆m , ρ ′, C, L′) where G′ ⊆ G(M, L)

with G′ = ⋃ C ∪ ⋃ L′ and ρ′ is the rendition of G′ induced by ρ. Further τ (L′) = τ (L(∆ Cm )) 

but L′̸ = L(∆ Cm ) as we assumed that the well was not dry. Since their patterns agree, there is a bijection α : L(∆ Cm ) → L ′ such that for P ∈ L (∆ Cm ), the path P and α(P ) have agreeing endpoints, each of which are nodes of V (Ω ∆m ), and their traces are otherwise disjoint from cl (Σ \ ∆Cm ).Let L = {L1, . . . , L t}, say, and for every i ∈ [t] let {P 1 

> Li

, . . . , P ki 

> Li

} ⊆ L (∆ Cm ) for some k ≥ 0 be maximal such that P pLi ⊆ L for every p ∈ [ki] and every i ∈ [t]. By definition of L(∆ Cm ) and Observation 6.7 we derive the following. 64 Claim 6.9.1 . For every i ∈ [t], {P 1 

> Li

, . . . , P kLi } is a set of internally disjoint paths where each path has its endpoints in V (Ω ∆Cm ). Further, for every j ∈ [t] \ { i} and any (p, q ) ∈ [ki] × [kj ], the paths P pLi and P qLj are disjoint. For every i ∈ [t] define the following. Let Li, 0∗ := Li. For p ∈ [ki], let L∗ 

> i,p

be obtained from 

L∗

> i,p −1

, by replacing P pLi by α(P pLi ). Since P pLi and α(P pLi ) have the same endpoints, we derive that L∗ 

> i,p

is a path in G with the same endpoints as Li (assuming by induction that L∗

> i,p −1

satisfied the same). Similarly, using Claim 6.9.1 one maintains that L∗ 

> i,p

and L∗ 

> j,q

are vertex disjoint for every iteration where q ∈ [kj ] for some j ∈ [t]. Finally, let L∗ := {L∗ 

> i,k i

| 1 ≤ i ≤ t}.Then L∗ is a linkage in G with τ (L∗) = τ (L) but L∗̸ = L since L(∆ Cm )̸ = L′ by assumption. This is a contradiction to L being vital, concluding the proof. Lemma 6.9 brings to light a clear pattern for how a vital linkage interacts with a sequence of concentric cycles M inside the disc bounded by its outer cycle. It turns out that we can leverage the above, to tame the behaviour of L “outside” of the cycles of M as we discuss next. To this extent, we introduce segments of a linkage given a blank rendition, which we define as follows; see Figure 11 for a schematic illustration. 

Definition 6.10. Let Σ be a surface and ρ a blank Σ-rendition of an annotated graph (G, T ).Let P be a path in G. A segment of P (in ρ) is a grounded subpath P ′ ⊆ P with both endpoints in vortex-boundaries such that no internal vertex of P ′ is part of a vortex-boundary. Note that by definition, every segment is a loop or a link; recall Definition 6.3. The following is an easy observation. 

Observation 6.11. Let Σ be a surface and ρ a blank Σ-rendition of some annotated graph (G, T ).Let L be a T -linkage and S the set consisting of all segments of paths in L. Then S is a set of internally disjoint paths and every endpoint of a path in S is part of at most two paths in S.Recall that, given a disc ∆, a sequence of concentric cycles ⟨C1, . . . , C m⟩ in some ∆-rendition ρ

and a grounded path P whose trace γP is contained in ∆ with its endpoints on the boundary of 

∆ but internally disjoint from the boundary of ∆, we denote by ∆P the unique disc of ∆ − γP ,

after taking the topological closure of the component, that does not contain the trace of C1.We refine on this definition as follows. 

Definition 6.12. Let Σ be a surface. Let m ≥ 1. Let (ρ, M ) be an m-locus of some annotated graph (G, T ) such that ρ is a Σ-skeleton and M = ⟨C1, . . . , C m⟩. Let L be a vital T -linkage. Let 

P ∈ L (∆ m) with trace γP . Then we define ∆MP to be the unique disc of ∆Cm − γP , after taking the topological closure of the component, that does not contain the trace of C1. We write ∆P

for simplicity if M is clear from context. Note that ∆P is ρ-aligned by construction. The following is an easy observation. 

Observation 6.13. Let Σ be a surface. Let m ≥ 1. Let (ρ, M ) be an m-locus of some annotated graph (G, T ) such that ρ is a Σ-skeleton and M = ⟨C1, . . . , C m⟩. Let L be a vital T -linkage. Let P, P ′ ∈ L (∆ Cm ). Then either ∆P and ∆P ′ are internally disjoint or one is contained in the other. 65 Proof. By Observation 6.7, P and P ′ are internally disjoint. Since ρ is a Σ-rendition, if the trace γP of P is not internally disjoint from ∆P ′ then γP ⊊ ∆P ′ . To see this note that γP is internally disjoint from the trace of Cm as well as from the trace of P ′. One easily verifies that 

∆P ⊆ ∆P ′ . Switching the roles of P and P ′ concludes the proof. The following lemma proves that, given an exhausted instance (G, T ), L, (ρ, M ) such that M is tight, no subpath of L ∈ L whose trace is contained in ∆Cm may intersect Cm in more than two components, i.e., the traces of the paths do not “bounce off” the outer cycle while staying inside the disc. In particular, together with Observation 6.7 this implies that L(∆ Cm ) is a linkage (as opposed to internally disjoint). 

Lemma 6.14. Let Σ be a surface. Let m ≥ 2. Let (ρ, M ) be an m-locus of some annotated graph (G, T ) such that M = ⟨C1, . . . , C m⟩ is tight and ρ is a Σ-skeleton. Let L be a vital 

T -linkage. Let L ∈ L and let S ⊆ L be a segment. Let P ⊆ S be a subpath such that its trace is contained in ∆Cm and its endpoints lie on the boundary of ∆Cm . Then P ∩ Cm consists of at most 2 components, each of which is a single vertex of Cm.In particular, there is a unique path P∆m ∈ L (∆ m) that is a subpath of P and L(∆ m) is a linkage. 

Proof. Note that the first part of the lemma implies the second, i.e., if P ∩ Cm consists of at most two components then, since P was arbitrary, we derive that L(∆ m) is a linkage, since, a priori, if two paths of L(∆ m) intersect, then they belong to a common segment and intersect at a common endpoint by Observation 6.7. Since P ∩ Cm consists of at most two components this is impossible; we are left to prove the former. 

x

y1 y2

x1 x2

w1 w2

us ut

P ′

P

Cm

Cm−1

Figure 12: A schematic illustration of the proof of Lemma 6.14. The path P with intersections 

x1, u s, x, u t, x 2 is drawn in yellow, each of the intersection points are highlighted. The path P ts is marked by a purple dashed line, whereas Cs,t m−1 is highlighted with a pink dashed line, with the disc ∆∗ marked in yellow. Further, the path P ′ is highlighted in dark orange. Towards a contradiction assume the lemma is wrong and let P ⊆ S be subpath as in the theorem such that its intersection with Cm results in more than two components in particular |V (P )| ≥ 3; 

note that since the instance is exhausted, P shares no edge with Cm whence P ∩ Cm consists of 66 isolated vertices. Further assume that P is as short as possible satisfying the above. Since ρ is a 

Σ-skeleton, every edge that is not part of the graph of a vortex is grounded. In particular, P

is grounded and we derive that P starts in a vertex of V (Cm), say x1, and ends in a vertex of 

V (Cm), say x2. Let p ≥ 2 be the length of P – it cannot be 1 by the previous assumption – and let ⟨x1, u 1, . . . , u p−1, x 2⟩ be the vertices of P as they appear in P . Since we chose P as short as possible, we derive that x1u1, u p−1x2 /∈ E(Cm) for otherwise, ⟨u1, . . . , x 2⟩ or ⟨x1, . . . , u p−1⟩

would be the vertices of subpaths of P that are shorter than P, contradicting the lemma and hence our assumption. By Definition 6.6 of L(∆ Cm ) and the assumptions on P, we derive that P is the concatenation of paths P1, . . . , P ℓ ∈ L (∆ Cm ) for some ℓ ≥ 1, i.e., P = P1 ◦ . . . ◦ Pℓ. Note that for all i ∈ [ℓ], P i

has its endpoints on V (Cm), since ρ is a Σ-skeleton and the trace of Pi has its endpoints on the trace of Cm.

Claim 6.14.1 . It holds ℓ = 2 and |V (P )∩V (Cm)| = 3 . Further |V (Pi)| ≥ 2 and E(Pi)∩E(Cm) = ∅

for i = 1 , 2.

Proof of claim. Clearly ℓ > 1, since otherwise P would be internally disjoint from V (Cm) and thus P ∩ Cm = {x1, x 2}. Next note that for i ∈ [ℓ − 1] , no Pi consists of a single vertex by Definition 6.6 of L(∆ m), since otherwise Pi ◦ Pi+1 would be a longer path with both endpoints on the boundary of ∆Cm−1 that is otherwise disjoint from it refuting maximality of Pi. Similarly, 

Pℓ is not a single vertex for else Pℓ−1 would be longer again contradicting its existence. This implies that ℓ ≤ 2 since otherwise the concatenation P ′ = P1 ◦ P2 ⊆ P would be a shorter path satisfying the assumptions of the lemma and P ′ ∩ Cm consists of at least 3 components by Observation 6.7. To see that |V (Pm) ∩ V (Cm)| = 3 , note that we already established that P1, P 2 have their endpoints on V (Cm). Since neither of the two paths consist of a single vertex, and neither has an edge in common with E(Cm), we derive that |V (P1)∩V (Cm)| = 2 as well as |V (P2)∩V (Cm)| = 2 .Finally, since they share exactly one common endpoint we derive that |V (P ) ∩ V (Cm)| = 3 . ⊣

Thus let x ∈ V (P ) ∩ V (Cm) \ { x1, x 2}. Let Ω∆Cm = ⟨v1, . . . , v m⟩ be a linear order on V (Cm)

such that v1 = x1 and such that vivi+1 ∈ E(Cm) for every i ∈ [m − 1] and vmv1 ∈ E(Cm).Without loss of generality assume that x1, x, x 2 appear in that order in Ω∆Cm , else reverse the order, i.e., choose Ω∆Cm = ⟨v1, v m, . . . , v 2⟩ which is possible since Cm is a cycle. By Lemma 6.9 and the assumption of the theorem, we derive that W :=(G(M, L), Ω∆Cm , ρ ∆Cm , M, L(∆ Cm )) is dry. 

Claim 6.14.2 . Let i = 1 , 2, then 1 ≤ | V (Pi) ∩ V (Cm−1)| ≤ 2.

Proof of claim. Let i = 1 , 2 be arbitrary. Since W is dry and since Pi ∩ Cm consists of two components, none of which is a single vertex or subpath of Cm as given by Claim 6.14.1, we derive by ii ) of the definition of dryness that there exists j ∈ [m − 1] such that Pi ∩ Cj is a single path, in particular a single vertex since our instance is exhausted. By iv ) of the definition of dryness we derive the claim, again noting that since the instance is exhausted each intersection with Cm−1 is a single vertex. ⊣

By Claim 6.14.2 we may choose us ∈ V (P1) ∩ V (Cm−1) for s ∈ [p − 1] maximal. Similarly, we may choose ut ∈ V (P2) ∩ V (Cm−1) for t ∈ [p − 1] minimal. Since P = P1 ◦ P2 and since 67 V (P1) ∩ V (P2) = {x} with x / ∈ V (Cm−1) we derive that s < t and in particular us, x, u t appear in that order when traversing P from x1 to x2. Let Cs,t m−1 ⊊ Cm−1 be the unique subpath with endpoints us, u t and let P ts ⊆ P be the unique subpath whose vertices are ordered via ⟨us, . . . , u t⟩.Let C∗ = P ts ∪ Cs,t m−1; see Figure 12 for a schematic illustration of the above defined objects. 

Claim 6.14.3 . C∗ = P ts ∪ Cs,t m−1 is a cycle satisfying V (C∗) ∩ V (Cm) = {x}. Further, the trace of 

C∗ bounds a vortex-free disc ∆∗ satisfying ∆∗ ⊊ ∆Cm .

Proof of claim. Clearly C∗ is a cycle since P ts and Cs,t m−1 are internally disjoint by construction. Further, by construction of C∗ we have V (C∗) ∩ V (Cm) = {x}. Since both the traces of P ts and 

Cs,t m−1 are contained in ∆Cm we derive that the trace of C∗ is and hence the claim. ⊣

Let ∆∗ be the “ C∗-disc” as given by Claim 6.14.3; see the yellow region in Figure 12. 

Claim 6.14.4 . There exists P ′ ∈ L (∆ m) with V (P ′) ∩ V (Cs,t m−1)̸ = ∅.

Proof of claim. Since L is vital the above is true unless Cs,t m−1 = (us, u t) is a single edge usut ∈ E(Cm−1). In that case there is a path P ∗ whose vertices are ordered via 

⟨x1, u 1, . . . , u s, u t, . . . , u p−1, x 2⟩ with the same endpoints as P but P ∗̸ = P for x /∈ V (P ∗).Finally replacing P with P ∗ in L results in a new linkage L∗ in G with τ (L∗) = τ (L) but L∗̸ = L;

this contradicts the vitality of L. ⊣

Let P ′ be as in the claim. We claim that P ′ violates iv ) in the definition of dryness of W; see the orange path in Figure 12. 

Claim 6.14.5 . P ′ ∩ Cm−1 consists of at least 3 components. 

Proof of claim. To see this, note that since ρ is a Σ-skeleton, we derive that P ′ has both its endpoints on V (Cm) since its trace does and every vertex of P ′ is a node of the rendition; call them w1 and w2 respectively. Let y1, y 2 ∈ V (P ′) ∩ V (Cs,t m−1) – possibly equal – be such that 

P ∗ 

> 1

, P ∗ 

> 2

⊆ P ′ start in y1, y 2, respectively, and end in w1, w 2 respectively, and such that both are internally disjoint from each other as well as internally disjoint from Cs,t m−1. Clearly, these paths exist by choosing y1, y 2 as the closest vertices to us and ut along Cs,t m−1 in V (P ′) ∩ V (Cm−1),

respectively. Let i = 1 , 2 be arbitrary. We claim that P ∗ 

> i

and Cm−1 are not internally disjoint. To see this, assume the contrary towards a contradiction and recall that ∆∗ is a disc. Let γi be the trace of P ∗ 

> i

. We are to show that γi has an interior point on the boundary of ∆Cm−1 which is essentially the trace of Cm−1. If not, this implies that γi is internally disjoint from ∆Cm−1 , since it has one endpoint in V (Cm). This in turn means that the trace of γi is contained in cl (∆ Cm \ ∆Cm−1 ).Since one end of γi lies on the trace of Cs,t m−1 we derive that γi has one end on the boundary of ∆∗ and since further ∆∗ ⊆ cl (∆ Cm \ ∆Cm−1 ) but also γi ⊆ cl (∆ Cm \ ∆Cm−1 ) we derive that 

γi ⊆ ∆∗. To see this, note that we assumed that P ∗ 

> i

is internally disjoint from Cm−1 and hence its trace is internally disjoint from the trace of Cm−1. Since further L(∆ m) is a set of internally disjoint paths by Observation 6.7 we have that P ∗ 

> i

is internally disjoint from P ts and combining both with Claim 6.14.3 we derive that γi is internally disjoint from the boundary of ∆∗ but also from ∆Cm−1 . Since yi is an interior point of the trace of Cs,t m−1, we derive that γi has an interior point in cl (∆ Cm \ ∆Cm−1 ) and thus we derive that it is contained in cl (∆ Cm \ ∆Cm−1 ) as claimed. 68 Finally, again applying Claim 6.14.3 we derive that V (C∗) ∩ V (Cm) = {x}. But γi ⊆ ∆∗

together with the fact that P ∗ 

> i

ends in wi ∈ V (Cm) imply that wi = x; this is a contradiction to Observation 6.7 since then three distinct paths of L(∆ m), namely P ∗ 

> i

, P 1, and P2 share a common end. Thus, our initial assumption was wrong whence P ∗ 

> i

and Cm−1 are not internally disjoint. Since i = 1 , 2 was arbitrary, P ′ ∩ Cm−1 consists of at least three components, one of which contains y1 (possibly = y2). ⊣

Claim 6.14.5 is a contradiction to the fact that W is dry. In particular, our assumption that P

intersects Cm in more than two components was wrong, concluding the proof. While Lemma 6.14 tames the behaviour of segments inside ∆Cm , the next lemma tames their behaviour outside of ∆Cm . Intuitively speaking, the following lemma proves that given an exhausted instance (G, T ), L, (ρ, M ) such that M is tight, the trace of a subpath of L ∈ L that lies outside of ∆Cm with both endpoints on its boundary has to be an essential curve. That is, paths do not “jump” on the outer cycle Cm without really “using” the surface Σ.

Definition 6.15. Let Σ be a surface and m ≥ 1. Let (ρ, M ) be an m-locus of some annotated graph (G, T ) with M = ⟨C1, . . . , C m⟩ such that ρ is a Σ-skeleton. Let P ⊆ G be a path with at least one edge and both endpoints u, v in V (Cm) and such that its trace is contained in 

cl (Σ \ ∆Cm ). If there exists a ρ-aligned vortex-free disc ∆ ⊆ Σ such that ∆Cm ⊊ ∆ and such that the trace of P is contained in ∆, we call P a Cm-boundary jump . Let C1

> m

, C 2 

> m

⊊ Cm be internally disjoint subpaths such that they intersect exactly in {u, v } and satisfy C1 

> m

∪ C2 

> m

= Cm.Then for i = 1 , 2, C ′ 

> i

:= Cim ∪ P is a cycle whose trace is contained in ∆ and for exactly one 

i ∈ { 1, 2} it holds that the trace of C′ 

> i

bounds a vortex-free disc ∆′ ⊆ ∆ that is internally disjoint from ∆Cm . We define ∆P to be ∆′, if it exists, and we call ∆P the ∆Cm -bump by P .Note that ∆P is ρ-aligned by construction. See the pink and orange highlighted regions in Figure 13 for an illustration of ∆Cm -bumps. 

Lemma 6.16. Let Σ be a surface. Let m ≥ 2. Let (ρ, M ) be an m-locus of some annotated graph (G, T ) such that M = ⟨C1, . . . , C m⟩ is tight and ρ is a Σ-skeleton. Let L be a vital 

T -linkage and let (G, T ), L, (ρ, M ) be exhausted. Let P ⊆ G be a path on at least one edge with both its endpoints on V (Cm). Then P is not a Cm-boundary jump. 

Proof. Towards a contradiction assume that there exist Cm-boundary jumps. Let P be the set of all Cm-boundary jumps and let {∆P | P ∈ P} be the set of ∆cm -bumps by P for each P ∈ P .

Claim 6.16.1 . Let P, P ′ ∈ P be distinct, then either ∆P and ∆P ′

are internally disjoint or one is contained in the other. 

Proof of claim. Since ρ is a Σ-skeleton, and in particular a Σ-rendition, the traces of P and 

P ′ are internally disjoint whence P and P ′ are internally disjoint. Let CP , C P ′ ⊊ Cm be the unique subpaths of Cm such that the trace of CP ∪ P bounds ∆P and the trace of CP ′ ∪ P ′

bounds ∆P ′

. Then either CP and C′ 

> P

are internally disjoint or one is a subpath of the other, say 

CP ⊊ CP ′ in that case. Finally by definition of Cm-boundary jump, the traces of P and P ′ are both internally disjoint from the traces of CP and CP ′ . Thus, combining all of the above, if ∆P

69 x

u v

S S′

P ′

P

Figure 13: A schematic illustration of the proof of Lemma 6.16. The ∆Cm -bumps are highlighted by pink and orange regions. The path P with vertices u, v is highlighted in red with corresponding disc ∆P highlighted in yellow. Furthermore, the vertex x of the segment S′ on CP ∩ Cm is highlighted in purple. and ∆P ′

are not internally disjoint, then this means that two paths of {P, P ′, C P , C P ′ } are not 

internally disjoint. Since this is only possible for CP and CP ′ we derive that CP ⊊ CP ′ . Finally, we derive that ∆P ⊊ ∆P ′

, concluding the proof; see Figure 13 for a schematic illustration of possible arrangements of ∆Cm -bumps. ⊣

Applying Claim 6.16.1 we derive the existence of a Cm-boundary jump P ∈ P such that for all 

P ′ ∈ P we derive that either ∆P and ∆P ′

are internally disjoint, or ∆P ⊆ ∆P ′

.Let u, v be the distinct endpoints of P in V (Cm); they exist since P has at least one edge. Let PCm be the subpath of Cm with ends u, v such that the trace of the cycle C∗ = P ∪ PCm

bounds ∆P . Note that PCm contains at least one edge. By our choice of P, and the fact that 

ρ is a Σ-skeleton, ∆P only intersects or contains cells that correspond to edges of E(C∗). Let 

S(L) be the segments of L.

Claim 6.16.2 . There is a segment S ∈ S (L) such that P ⊆ S. In addition, there is a segment 

S′ ∈ S (L) such that V (S′) ∩ (V (PCm ) \ { u, v })̸ = ∅.

Proof of claim. Since P is a Cm-boundary jump we derive that the trace of P is internally disjoint from all vortices of ρ and from ∆Cm . In particular E(P ) ∩ E(⋃mi=1 Ci) = ∅. Since 

(G, T ), L, (ρ, M ) is exhausted we derive that E(P ) ⊆ E(⋃ L) and since its trace is disjoint from the vortices of ρ there is S ∈ S (L) with P ⊆ S as desired. Furthermore, since L is vital, we derive that PCm contains at least three vertices. To see this, note that otherwise PCm consists solely of the edge uv ∈ E(Cm), but then we could reroute S by replacing P with uv . This results in a new T -linkage L∗ with the same pattern as L but L̸ = L∗ as a contradiction to the vitality of L. Let x ∈ V (PCm ) \ { u, v }. Again, since L is vital, there exists L ∈ L such that x ∈ V (L).Thus there exists S′ ∈ S (L) – possibly S′ = S – with x ∈ V (S′) whence V (S′) ∩ V (PCm )̸ = ∅

concluding the proof. ⊣

70 Let S′ ∈ S (L) with V (S′) ∩ (V (PCm ) \ { u, v })̸ = ∅ as in the previous claim, and let x ∈

V (S′) ∩ (V (PCm ) \ { u, v }); see the purple path in Figure 13 for an illustration. We claim that S′ witnesses a contradiction to Lemma 6.14. To see this, let P ∗ ⊆ S′ be a maximal subpath such that x ∈ V (P ∗), the endpoints u′, v ′ (possibly equal) of P ∗ are part of V (Cm) and such that the trace of P ∗ is contained in ∆Cm .

Claim 6.16.3 . |{ u′, x, v ′}| ≥ 3, in particular P ∗ ∩ Cm consists of at least 3 components. 

Proof of claim. If u′ = v′ then u′ = x and v′ = x and P ∗ consists of a single vertex. Thus it suffices to prove that u′̸ = x and v′̸ = x. Towards a contradiction assume that u′ = x: the case 

x = v′ is analogous. Let S′

> 1

, S ′ 

> 2

⊆ S′ be the two internally disjoint subpaths agreeing in x such that S′ 

> 1

∪ S′ 

> 2

= S′. By our choice of P ∗ – the maximality assumptions – this implies that the traces γS′ 

> 1

, γ S′ 

> 2

of S′

> 1

, S ′ 

> 2

must be internally disjoint from ∆Cm . In particular we derive that the trace γS′ of S′ is contained in cl (Σ \ ∆Cm ) with both endpoints on vortex boundaries. Recall that for C∗ = CPm ∪ P we established that ∆P only contains cells that correspond to edges of 

E(C∗). Thus γS′ 

> 1

, γ S′ 

> 2

can intersect ∆P only in the trace of C∗. Since x ∈ V (S′

> 1

) ∩ V (S′

> 2

) and since V (PCm ) ≥ 3 we derive that there is at least one edge e∗ ∈ E(Cm) that is adjacent to x;

one easily verifies that there are actually two such edges using Lemma 6.14 but this is irrelevant. Thus e∗ ∈ E(S′

> 1

) ∪ E(S′

> 2

). This is a contradiction to the fact that E(⋃ L) ∩ E(Cm) = ∅; thus our assumption was wrong and u′̸ = x concluding the proof. ⊣

Finally, P ∗ satisfies the assumptions of Lemma 6.14 whence we derive that P ∗ ∩ Cm consists of at most 2 components each of which is a single point on Cm. In particular |V (P ∗) ∩ V (Cm)| ≤ 2.This contradicts Claim 6.16.3, concluding the proof. With Lemmas 6.14 and 6.16 at hand, we finally derive that, given a ρ-aligned disc ∆ containing some segment S of a path L ∈ L , the segment does not “interact” with the concentric cycles in a “nested” way, essentially proving a version of “dryness” for segments; compare to the original setting in Figure 11. This marks the main result of this section. 

Theorem 6.17. Let Σ be a surface and m ≥ 2. Let (ρ, M ) be an m-locus of some annotated graph (G, T ) in Σ such that M = ⟨C1, . . . , C m⟩ is tight and ρ is a Σ-skeleton. Let L be a vital 

T -linkage in G and let (G, T ), L, (ρ, M ) be exhausted. Let S(L) be the set of segments of L.Let ∆ ⊆ Σ be a vortex-free ρ-aligned disc such that for each segment S ∈ S (L) its trace is either contained in ∆ or is internally disjoint from ∆. Let S ∈ S (L) be such that its trace is contained in ∆. Let L(∆ Cm ) be the restriction of L to ∆Cm . Let P1, P 2 ∈ L (∆ m) be distinct such that 

P1, P 2 ⊊ S and both contain at least one edge each. Then ∆P1 ∩ ∆P2 = ∅.

Proof. Recall that since ρ is a Σ-skeleton, all paths in L(∆ m) are grounded, and every cell represents a single edge of the graph. Since (G, T ), L, (ρ, M ) is exhausted and M is dry, Lemma 6.9 implies that 

W := 

> (

G(M, L), Ω∆Cm , ρ ∆Cm , M, L(∆ Cm )

> )

is dry. 71 u1

u2

v1

v2

P1

P2

P ∗ = P

S

Figure 14: A schematic illustration of the proof of Theorem 6.17 in the case that P ∗ = P and 

γP ⊆ cl (Σ \ ∆Cm ). The segment S is drawn in orange with the path P1 drawn in dark orange and P2 drawn in purple. The path P ∗ = P is highlighted in green. Towards a contradiction, assume the lemma to be wrong. Henceforth, let P1, P 2 ∈ L (∆ m) be distinct with P1, P 2 ⊊ S as in the lemma and assume that ∆P1 ∩ ∆P2̸ = ∅. Further, let ∆ be as in the theorem, in particular it is vortex-free. Note that since the trace of S is contained in ∆

we derive that the traces of P1 and P2 are contained in ∆. By Observation 6.7 we derive that 

P1, P 2 are internally disjoint, and combined with Lemma 6.14 we derive that they are in fact completely disjoint. In particular, ∆P and ∆P ′ are not internally disjoint. 

Claim 6.17.1 . It holds ∆P1 ⊊ ∆P2 or ∆P2 ⊊ ∆P1 .

Proof of claim. This follows immediately from Observation 6.13 together with the fact that they are not internally disjoint. ⊣

By Claim 6.17.1 we may assume without loss of generality that ∆P1 ⊊ ∆P2 ; otherwise rename 

P1 and P2 accordingly. Denote the ends of Pi by ui, v i for i = 1 , 2; by assumption of the lemma 

Pi contains at least one edge thus its endpoints are distinct. Since P1, P 2 are disjoint paths, we derive that u1, u 2, v 1, v 2 are pairwise distinct. Fix an orientation of S such that P1 is visited prior to P2. Then, there exists a subpath P ∗ with endpoints x1, x 2 where xi ∈ { ui, v i} such that the concatenation P1 ◦ P ∗ ◦ P2 is a subpath of S. In particular, the trace of P ∗ is contained in 

∆; see Figure 14 for a schematic illustration. We claim that P ∗ witnesses the existence of a path violating either Lemma 6.14 or Lemma 6.16, in either case contradicting the assumption that the theorem does not hold. To this extent, let P ⊆ P ∗ with one endpoint x1, and the other endpoint x ∈ V (Cm) \ { x1} such that P is otherwise internally disjoint from V (Cm). To see that this exists, note that E(P ∗) ∩ E(Cm) = ∅

by our assumption that (G, T ), L, (ρ, M ) is exhausted and further |V (P ∗) ∩ V (Cm)| ≥ 2. By construction, the trace γP of P satisfies the following: 

(⋆) either γP ⊆ ∆Cm or γP ⊆ cl (Σ \ ∆Cm ).

Claim 6.17.2 . γP is not contained in ∆Cm .72 Proof of claim. Assume the contrary. Let Q = P1 ∪ P ⊆ S, then Q is a path and its trace is contained in ∆Cm with both its endpoints on the boundary of ∆Cm . But u1, u 2, x are pairwise distinct, and {u1, u 2, x } ⊆ V (Q) ∩ V (Cm). In particular |V (Q) ∩ V (Cm)| ≥ 3 as a contradiction to Lemma 6.14. ⊣

Claim 6.17.3 . γP is not contained in cl (Σ \ ∆Cm ).

Proof of claim. Assume the contrary. Then by Definition 6.15 together with the fact that γP ⊆ ∆

with ∆ vortex-free, we derive that P is a Cm-boundary jump; note that it admits at least one edge by construction. This is a contradiction to Lemma 6.16. ⊣

Combining both claims we derive a contradiction to (⋆), concluding the proof. 

6.3 Controlling vortices 

This subsection is devoted to the proof of technical lemmas needed to show that, given an exhausted instance (G, T ), L, (ρ, M ) in some surface Σ with a “large enough” locus with respect to the depth of the vortices, the number of non-simple loops and links in S(L) is bounded in d

and the genus of the surface Σ, whereas simple loops are guaranteed to not penetrate “deep” into M . The main result consists of a rather technical analysis on the interaction of L with vortices, combining Proposition 3.7 and Theorems 5.8 and 6.17; recall the relevant definitions. We will need T -normal linear decompositions which we define as follows. 

Definition 6.18. Let (G, T ) be an annotated graph and let α = (⟨u1, . . . , u n⟩, ⟨U1, . . . , U n⟩) be a linear decomposition (possibly with gap) of some society (H, Ω) with H ⊆ G. Let 1 ≤ i < j ≤ n

and let α′ be the [i, j ]-restriction of α. We call α′ T -normal if for every t ∈ T either t ∈ ⋂jp=i Up

or t / ∈ ⋃jp=i Ui.For ease of notation we define what we mean by “strips” bounded by segments of vortices; see Figure 15 for an illustration. 

Figure 15: Two examples of (F1, F 2)-strips, highlighted in orange, one between two vortices, drawn in red, and one on a single vortex. 

Definition 6.19. Let Σ be a surface and let ρ be a Σ-rendition of some graph G. Let c1, c 2 ∈ C(ρ)

be vortices (possibly equal) with respective vortex societies (σ(c1), Ωc1 ) and (σ(c2), Ωc2 ). For 

i = 1 , 2, let Fi be a segment of Ωci with endpoints si, t i such that F1 ∩ F2 = ∅. Let γ1, γ 2 be 

ρ-aligned curves such that for i = 1 , 2 the curve γi has endpoints si, t i and such that γ1 ∪ γ2

together with the boundary segments η1, η w of c1, c 2 that contain exactly the nodes of F1, F 2,

respectively, bound a vortex-free disc ∆. Then we call ∆ an (F1, F 2)-strip (guarded by γ1, γ 2).73 Note that the (F1, F 2)-strip is ρ-aligned as the boundary of every cell is ρ-aligned by definition. The following is a folklore topological fact transcribed to our setting. 

Observation 6.20. Let Σ be a surface and let ρ be a Σ-rendition of some graph G. Let 

c1, c 2 ∈ C(ρ) be vortices (possibly equal) with respective vortex societies (σ(c1), Ωc1 ) and 

(σ(c2), Ωc2 ). Let S(c1, c 2) be a set of at least two ρ-homotopic paths, each with one endpoint in 

N (c1) and the other in N (c2). For i = 1 , 2 let Fi be segments of Ω( ci) such that S(c1, c 2) is an 

F1-F2-linkage. Then there exist S, S ′ ∈ S (c1, c 2) with traces γ, γ ′ and disjoint segments F ∗ 

> i

⊆ Fi

such that γ, γ ′ guard an (F ∗ 

> 1

, F ∗ 

> 2

)-strip ∆, and such that S(c1, c 2) is an F ∗ 

> 1

-F ∗ 

> 2

-linkage, and the trace of each path in S(c1, c 2) is contained in ∆.

The following is the main technical lemma of this section. It is a powerful tool that, given a vital linkage L, leverages Proposition 3.7 in order to “control” the number of homotopic non-simple loops and homotopic links of L, as well as to quantify “how much” simple loops can interact with the concentric cycles of some large locus given that the vortices of the instance are properly 

d-linked; recall Definitions 5.1 and 6.10 and the fact that if a linear decomposition is properly 

d-linked, then the adhesion is (d + 1) and it admits a linkage of order (d + 1) between the bags. This “off-by-one” definition is the reason why the following lemma is stated as is. 

(a) The segments and ∆. (b) The graph G∗ and T ∗.

P ∆

P∆

Uℓ iℓ

> iℓ−1
> iℓ−2
> i5
> i4
> i3
> i2
> i1

Wℓ

> jℓ
> jℓ−1
> jℓ−2
> j5
> j4
> j3
> j2
> j1

P ∆

P∆

Wℓ

> jw
> j4
> j3
> j2
> j1
> j0

Wℓ

> iw
> i4
> i3
> i2
> i1
> i0

Figure 16: A schematic illustration of the proof of Lemma 6.21. The left hand figure highlights the setting of the proof, where the segments S are drawn in orange, F1 is drawn in blue and F2 is drawn in red with respective schematic representations of linear decompositions. The right hand figure depicts the remaining set S∗ after sorting the segments, where G∗ is given by combining the orange, blue, and red highlighted regions, whereas T ∗ is schematically highlighted in green. The set of paths ˜P is highlighted in light blue and light purple. 

Lemma 6.21. Let ℓ′, k ′, d 1, d 2 ≥ 1. Let Σ be a surface. There exists a function g6.21 : N → N

such that the following holds. Let ρ be a blank and stretched Σ-rendition of some annotated 74 graph (G, T ). Let c1, c 2 ∈ C(ρ) be vortices (possibly equal). Let α1 = (⟨u1, . . . , u ℓ′ ⟩, ⟨U1, . . . , U ℓ′ ⟩)

be a linear decomposition of the vortex society (σ(c1), Ωc1 ) of adhesion at most d1, and let 

α2 = ( ⟨w1, . . . , w k′ ⟩, ⟨W1, . . . , W k′ ⟩) be a linear decomposition of the vortex society (σ(c2), Ωc2 )

of adhesion at most d2. Let 1 ≤ ℓ1 < ℓ 2 ≤ ℓ′ and 1 ≤ k1 < k 2 ≤ k′ be such that the [ℓ1, ℓ 2]-restriction of α1 is T -normal and properly (d1 − 1) -linked and the [k1, k 2]-restriction of α2 is 

T -normal and properly (d2 − 1) -linked. Further assume that for every i ∈ [k1, k 2] and every 

j ∈ [ℓ1, ℓ 2] it holds Ui ∩ Wj = ∅.Let L be a vital T -linkage such that G = ⋃ L ∪ σ(c1) ∪ σ(c2). Let S be a set of ρ-homotopic segments of L such that every P ∈ S has one endpoint in {uℓ1 , . . . , u ℓ2 } and the other in 

{wk1 , . . . , w k2 }. Then |S| < g 6.21 (d1 + d2).Furthermore, g6.21 (d) ∈ 2poly (d).

Proof. Let f := f3.7 and let d := d1 + d2. Finally fix g(d) := 12 f (d, d ) + 14; we claim that 

g satisfies the theorem; g(d) ∈ 2poly (d) by definition. Note that if c1 = c2 we may still have 

Ωc1̸ = Ω c2 ; then the second is the “reverse” order of the first. Towards a contradiction, assume that for our choice of g the theorem is wrong, and let S be as in the theorem with |S| ≥ 12 f (d, d ) + 14 . Let S(L) be the set of all segments of L; in particular S ⊆ S (L).Without loss of generality, by renaming the vertices accordingly with respect to the cyclic order Ωci for i = 1 , 2, respectively, we may assume that ℓ1 = 1 and let ℓ := ℓ2 as well as k1 = 1 

and let k := k2. Note that if c1 = c2 then d1 = d2, but it may still be true that α1̸ = α2, in particular the linear decompositions are allowed to have differing bags. Furthermore, note that since ρ is stretched, the additional assumption {ui | i ∈ [ℓ1, ℓ 2]} ∩ { wi | i ∈ [k1, k 2]} = ∅ is only relevant if c1 = c2. It turns out that the additional assumption makes the proof in the single vortex case analogous to the one with two vortices. This is intuitively easy to see, since there is no tangible way to differentiate between both: If the graph σ(c) were to consist of two disjoint components one could easily split the single vortex into two vortices. In addition, without loss of generality, we may assume that u1, w 1, u ℓ, w k are endpoints of some paths in S since otherwise we may restrict the segments of Ωc1 and Ωc2 accordingly. Let 

U := {u1, . . . , u ℓ} and W := {w1, . . . , w k}.Since L is a linkage, S is a set of pairwise internally disjoint paths. And since the paths in S

are grounded and pairwise ρ-homotopic, there exists a ρ-aligned vortex-free disc ∆ ⊆ Σ that intersects N (ρ) exactly in all of U ∪ W such that for every P ∈ S its trace is contained in ∆. This follows from Observation 6.20, but we provide an exemplary construction for completion. To see this note that the traces of any two ρ-homotopic paths P, P ′ ∈ S bound a disc ∆P,P ′ together with the respective segments of vortex boundaries between them by definition of homotopy, call these segments F1, F 2 for c1, c 2 respectively. That is, given the traces γP , γ P ′ of P, P ′,

there exists an (F1, F 2)-strip ∆P,P ′ guarded by γP , γ P ′ ; in particular that disc is ρ-aligned by construction. Call two paths P, P ′ ∈ P consecutive if the trace of no other path P ∈ S is contained in ∆P,P ′ . Note here that there may still be P ∗ ∈ S (L) \ S such that the trace of 

P is contained in ∆P,P ′ but then P ∗ needs to be a simple loop with both ends either in U or both in W ; if c1 = c2 then P and P ′ may also be (simple) loops, but they still have endpoints in the different segments. Finally, one can construct ∆ by gluing the discs ∆P,P ′ of pairwise 75 consecutive paths carefully – possibly omitting one such disc if the resulting surface would be no disc – until the resulting disc contains the traces of all paths in S.Note that since ∆ is a disc and all the paths in S have their traces in ∆ with both endpoints on its boundary, we derive that – after possibly reversing the order of ⟨w1, . . . , w k⟩ and renaming – for any two paths P1, P 2 ∈ S with ends ui1 , w j1 and ui2 , w j2 we have 

(⋆) if 1 ≤ i1 ≤ i2 ≤ ℓ then 1 ≤ j1 ≤ j2 ≤ k and vice versa. Let P∆, P ∆ be the paths in S with endpoints u1, w 1 and uℓ, w k, respectively, and let ˜P ⊊ S be the at most six paths with endpoints in u1, w 1, u ℓ, w k including P ∆, P ∆11 . Let S′ := S \ ˜P, in particular |S ′| ≥ 12 f (d, d ) + 8 , then for every path in S′ its trace is contained in the interior of 

∆, in particular ⋃ S′ is contained in the crop of G by ∆; see the left hand figure in Figure 16, where the paths ˜P are highlighted by purple and blue tubes in the right hand figure. Since L is a linkage and every path in S is a segment of some path in L, an endpoint of any segment in S is part of at most 2 paths in S. By the pigeonhole principle, there is a set S′′ ⊆ S ′

of size ≥ 6f (d, d ) + 4 such that no two paths in S′′ end in the same vertex of U . Applying the pigeonhole principle again, we derive that there exists a set S∗ ⊆ S ′′ of size ≥ 3f (d, d ) + 2 

such that S∗ is a U -W -linkage; see the paths highlighted by an orange tube in the right hand Figure 16. Without loss of generality, assume that ℓ ≤ k: the other case is analogous. Let 1 ≤ i0 < . . . < i|S ∗|− 1 ≤ ℓ be such that U ∗ = {uij | 0 ≤ j ≤ |S ∗|− 1} ⊆ U is the set of vertices that are endpoints of paths in S∗. Let 1 ≤ j0 < . . . < j |S ∗|− 1 ≤ k be such that W ∗ = {wji | 0 ≤ i ≤ |S ∗| − 1} ⊆ W

is the set of vertices that are endpoints of paths in S∗. Since S∗ is a U -W -linkage, (⋆) implies that for every P ∈ S there is p ∈ [0 , |S ∗| − 1] such that P has uip , w ip as its endpoints. Fix 

ω = 3 f (d, d ) and let {P0, P 1 . . . , P ω, P ω+1 } ⊆ S ∗ be such that Pp has uip , w ip as its endpoints which exists since |S ∗| ≥ ω + 2; let P := {P1, . . . , P ω}. For every i ∈ [ω] let γi be the trace of Pi. Let ∆∗ be the closure of the component of ∆ after deleting the trace of P0 and Pω+1 that contains the traces of P1, . . . , P ω. By construction ∆∗ is ρ-aligned; we derive the following. 

Claim 6.21.1 . Let i ∈ [ω] and let γi be the trace of Pi. Then γi ⊆ ∆∗, it has both its endpoints on the boundary of ∆∗ and is otherwise disjoint from the boundary of ∆∗. The traces of P0

and Pω+1 are both contained in the boundary of ∆∗ and the crop G∆∗ of G by ∆∗ contains all paths P1, . . . , P ω.Next let G′ := G∆∗ ∪ ⋃iω+1  

> j=0

Uj ∪ ⋃jω+1  

> i=0

Wi and finally let G∗ be obtained from G′ by deleting all the internal vertices of P0 and Pω+1 ; see the right hand Figure 16. Note that by our choice of S∗ ⊆ S ′ we have ˜P ∩ S ∗ = ∅, in particular i0 − 1 ≥ 1 and iω+1 + 1 ≤ k

as well as j0 − 1 ≥ 1 and jω+1 + 1 ≤ ℓ. Therefore, the following is well-defined 

T ∗ := ( Ui0 ∩ Ui0−1) ∪ (Uiω+1 ∩ Uiω+1 +1 ) ∪ (Wj0 ∩ Wj0−1) ∪ (Wjω+1 ∩ Wjω+1 +1 )

and satisfies |T ∗| ≤ 2d1 + 2 d2 = 2 d; see the green highlighted regions in the right hand Figure 16. We have the following. 

Claim 6.21.2 . Let ¯V := ( V (G) \ V (G∗)) ∪ T ∗. Then (V (G∗), ¯V ) is a separation of G of order 2d

satisfying V (G∗) ∩ ¯V = T ∗.  

> 11 Due to topological restrictions these are actually at most 4paths.

76 Proof of claim. By definition V (G∗) ∪ ¯V = V (G) and V (G∗) ∩ ¯V = T ∗. As derived above 

|T ∗| = 2 d. We are left to prove that it is indeed a separation of G∗. To this extent, let 

uv ∈ E(G) be an edge: We need to prove that either {u, v } ⊆ V (G∗) \ ¯V or {u, v } ⊆ ¯V \ V (G∗)

or {u, v } ∩ T ∗̸ = ∅.Since G = ⋃ L ∪ σ(c1) ∪ σ(c2) and, since either V (σ(c1)) ∩ V (σ(c2)) = ∅, for ρ is stretched, or 

V (σ(c1)) = V (σ(c2)) if c1 = c2, we derive that either {u, v } ⊆ V (σ(c1)) or {u, v } ⊆ V (σ(c2)) or 

e ∈ E(L) for some L ∈ L . Let i ∈ [i0, i ω+1 ] and i′ ∈ [k′] \ [i0, i ω+1 ] as well as j ∈ [j0, j ω+1 ] and 

j′ ∈ [ℓ′] \ [j0, j ω+1 ]. Since α1 and α2 are linear decompositions, we derive that if u ∈ Ui and 

v ∈ Ui′ or u ∈ Wj and v ∈ Wj′ , then {u, v } ∩ T ∗̸ = ∅ which we wanted to prove. In particular we may assume that {u, v }̸ ⊆ V (σ(ci)) for i = 1 , 2.Thus, let e ∈ E(L), hence e ∈ E(P ) for some P ∈ S (L), or {u, v } ⊆ V (σ(ci)) for some i = 1 , 2; 

the latter we already excluded, therefore, let e ∈ E(P ). Let C∆∗ ⊆ C(ρ) denote all the cells that are contained in ∆ and let C ¯∆∗ ⊆ C(ρ) be all the cells that are contained in cl (Σ \ ∆∗); by definition of ∆∗, the sets C∆∗ , C ¯∆∗ form a partition of C(ρ). Let now ce ∈ C(ρ) be such that 

e ∈ E(σ(ce)) , in particular u, v ∈ V (σ(ce)) . By the above analysis we know that ce /∈ { c1, c 2}.If none of u, v are nodes of ce, then, since C∆∗ , C ¯∆∗ partitions C(ρ) and since ce /∈ { c1, c 2}, we either derive {u, v } ⊆ V (G∗) \ ¯V or {u, v } ⊆ ¯V \ V (G∗); in both cases we are done. Thus at least one of u, v is a node of ce. Furthermore, note that ce must have at least one node on the boundary of ∆∗ since, otherwise, either {u, v } ⊆ V (G∗) \ ¯V or {u, v } ⊆ ¯V \ V (G∗) by the definition of crop by ∆∗; in particular, we are done. We are left to prove that if e = uv ∈ E(P ) where u or v lie on the boundary of ∆∗ with 

u ∈ V (G∗), say, and w ∈ ¯V say, then {u, w } ∩ T ∗̸ = ∅. To see this, note that by the construction of ∆∗ and the fact that S is a U -W -linkage we derive that either P ∈ { P0, P ω+1 }, or its trace 

γP is internally disjoint from the traces of P0, P ω+1 and satisfies γP ⊆ ∆∗ or γP ⊆ cl (Σ \ ∆∗).If P = P0, then by construction the only vertices of V (G∗) in common with P0 are ui0 , w j0 ∈ T ∗;

an analogous argument works for P = Pω+1 . Hence we may assume P /∈ { P0, P ω+1 } which implies that either γu ⊆ ∆∗ or γP ⊆ Σ \ ∆∗.Assume for now that γP ⊆ ∆∗. Then again, since S(L) is a set of internally disjoint paths by Observation 6.11 and since it has its ends in U ∪ W, we derive that γP is disjoint from the traces of all others paths in S except for possibly their endpoints, i.e., except for possibly nodes in 

{ui0 , u i0+1 , . . . , u iω+1 −1, u iω +1 } ∪ { wj0 , w j0+1 , . . . , w jω+1 −1, w jω +1 }.

Thus γP is disjoint from Σ \ ∆∗ except for possibly nodes in ui0 , u iω+1 , w j0 , w jω+1 since the remaining nodes are not part of ¯V ∗. Thus, we derive that {u, v } ∩ T ∗̸ = ∅ as desired. An analogous argument works if γP ⊆ Σ \ ∆∗ since its trace is disjoint from the traces of P0 and 

Pω+1 we derive that it must be disjoint from all of the interior of ∆∗ and hence from ∆∗ – its boundary consists of segments of the vortex cell and the trace of P0 and Pω+1 – except for possibly nodes in 

{ui0 , u i0+1 , . . . , u iω+1 −1, u iω +1 } ∪ { wj0 , w j0+1 , . . . , w jω+1 −1, w jω +1 }

on its boundary. Then again we derive that γP is disjoint from ∆∗ except for possibly nodes in 

ui0 , u iω+1 , w j0 , w jω+1 ⊆ T ∗ as desired, concluding the proof. ⊣

77 We derive the following. 

Claim 6.21.3 . (G∗, T ∗) is an annotated graph admitting a vital T ∗-linkage L∗ of order ≤ d such that every path in L∗ is a subpath of a path in L.

Proof of claim. Note that by the assumption of the theorem that α1 and α2 are T -normal, we derive that every v ∈ T ∩ (⋃k′ 

> p=1

Up ∪ ⋃ℓ′ 

> q=1

Wq) satisfies v ∈ T ∗. Thus the claim follows at once by combining Claim 6.21.2 with Proposition 3.4, noting that |T ∗| ≤ 2d is easily seen to imply that L∗ is of order at most d: Note that L ∈ L ∗ may consist of a single terminal, but then 

|T ∗| < 2d. ⊣

Next we define a sequence of laminar separations of equal order in G∗; recall that ω = 3 f (d, d ).Towards this, note that by Claim 6.21.1 for every i ∈ [ω] and trace γi of Pi ∈ P we derive that 

∆∗ \ γi consists of exactly two non-empty components, one containing the trace of P0 and the other that of Pω+1 . With this in mind, we define the following; let p ∈ [ω].

∆p: Let ∆p ⊆ ∆∗ be the closure of the component of ∆∗ \ γp that contains the traces of 

P0, P 1, . . . , P p and let ¯∆p be the closure of the other component. If p = ω +1 fix ∆ω+1 = ∆ ∗.By construction ∆p is ρ-aligned. 

Gp: Let G∆p be the crop of G by ∆p in ρ and let G′ 

> p

:= G∆p ∪ ⋃ip 

> j=0

Uj ∪ ⋃jp 

> i=0

Wi and finally let Gp be obtained from G′ 

> p

by adding all the edges and vertices of Pp if they were not already part of the crop. For every 1 ≤ 3t ≤ ω let 

At := V (Gi3t )

Bt := ( V (G∗) \ V (Gi3t )) ∪ Ui3t+1 ∪ Wj3t+1 .

We have the following. 

Claim 6.21.4 . ⟨(At, B t)⟩1≤t≤f (d,d ) is a sequence of laminar separations of G∗, each of order d and for each 1 < t ≤ f (d, d ) there is a linkage Mt in G∗[Bt−1] ∩ G∗[At] of order d that is edge-disjoint from P and such that each path in Mt has one end in At−1 ∩ Bt−1 and the other in At ∩ Bt.

Proof of claim. Notice that for every 1 ≤ t ≤ f (d, d ), V (At) ∪ V (Bt) = V (G∗). By construction we derive that 

At ∩ Bt = ( Ui3t ∩ Ui3t+1 ) ∪ (Wj3t ∩ Wj3t+1 ). (1) Using similar arguments as in Claim 6.21.2 one easily verifies that (At, B t) is indeed a separation of G∗: note again that since G = L ∪ σ(c1) ∪ σ(c2), every edge adjacent to a vertex in some path in S(L) must be contained in said path. Thus, any edge with one end in At and the other in Bt

that is not contained in one of the bags of the linear decompositions, must be contained in a cell with at least one node on the boundary of ∆i. In particular, it must be part of a path in S(L)

whose trace intersects the boundary of ∆i. Therefore it is either contained in E(Pi) or in E(P0)

or it is part of some path that intersects them at their endpoints – S(L) is a set of internally disjoint paths – which are in At ∩ Bt by construction. Recall that by assumption of the theorem we have that for every i ∈ [k] and j ∈ [ℓ] it holds that 

Ui ∩ Wj = ∅. Further, by assumption of the theorem the, respective [k]- and [ℓ]-restrictions of 78 the linear decompositions are properly (d1 − 1) - and (d2 − 1) -linked. Combining both we derive that |At ∩ Bt| = |Ui3t ∩ Ui3t+1 ∪ Wj3t ∩ Wj3t+1 | = |Ui3t ∩ Ui3t+1 | + |Wj3t ∩ Wj3t+1 | = d1 + d2 = d.Since (⟨u1, . . . , u ℓ⟩, ⟨U1, . . . , U ℓ⟩) is properly (d1 − 1) -linked, the Definition 5.1 of properly linked segments of linear decompositions implies that for every 1 < p < p ′ < ℓ there is a d1-linkage – recall the “off-by-one” error – LUp,p ′ ⊆ G[Up ∪ . . . ∪ Up′ ] such that each path in LUp,p ′ has exactly one end in Up−1 ∩ Up and the other in Up′ ∩ Up′+1 . Analogously, for the properly (d2 − 1) -linked linear decomposition (⟨w1, . . . , w k⟩, ⟨W1, . . . , W k⟩) and every 1 < q < q ′ < k there is a d2-linkage 

LWq,q ′ ⊆ G[Wq ∪ . . . ∪ Wq′ ] such that each path in LWq,q ′ has exactly one end in Wq−1 ∩ Wq and the other in Wq′ ∩ Wq′+1 . Again since for every i ∈ [k] and j ∈ [ℓ] it holds that Ui ∩ Wj = ∅,

both linkages are disjoint whence Lq,q ′ 

> p,p ′

:= LUp,p ′ ∪ L Wq,q ′ is a d-linkage in G∗.Finally, let 1 < t ≤ f (d, d ). By definition of (At−1, B t−1), (At, B t) and the above analysis, we derive that Ui3( t−1)+1 , U i3( t−1)+2 , U i3t ⊆ Bt−1 ∩At as well as Wj3( t−1)+1 , W j3( t−1)+2 , W j3t ⊆ Bt−1 ∩At.Thus we derive that Mt := Lj3( t−1)+1 ,j 3t 

> i3( t−1)+1 ,i 3t

⊆ G[Bt−1] ∩ G[At]. Now Mt is by the above observation a d-linkage such that each path has exactly one end in (Ui3( t−1)+1 ∩ Ui3( t−1)+2 ) ∪ (Wj3( t−1)+1 ∩

Wj3( t−1)+2 ) and the other in (Ui3( t−1)+2 ∩ Ui3t ) ∪ (Wj3( t−1)+2 ∩ Wj3t ). Thus, using Equation (1), we derive that Mt has one end in At−1 ∩ Bt−1 and the other in At+1 ∩ Bt+1 as desired. Note that it has no edge in E(⋃ S(L)) ∩ E(G∗) and in particular no edge in E(⋃ P) by construction. ⊣

Let ⟨(At, B t)⟩1≤t≤f (d,d ) be as in Claim 6.21.4. We have the following. 

Claim 6.21.5 . Let 1 ≤ t < f (d, d ). Then V (Pi3t−1) is contained in Bt−1 ∩ At.

Proof of claim. This is immediate by construction of the sequence ⟨(At, B t)⟩1≤t≤f (d,d ). In partic-ular, since G[At] contains the crop of G∗ by ∆i3t , it contains Pi3t−1 and since ∆i3( t−1) is disjoint from the trace of Pi3t−1 we derive that V (Pi3t−1) ⊆ Bt. ⊣

By Claim 6.21.3 L∗ is a vital T ∗-linkage of order ≤ d in G∗. By our choice of f (d, d ) = f3.7(d, d ),

and Claim 6.21.4, Proposition 3.7 implies that there is 1 ≤ i < ω such that ⋃ L∗ ∩ G∗[Bi] ∩

G∗[Ai+1 ] = ⋃ Mi. But L∗ satisfies Pi3t−1 ⊆ L for some L ∈ L ∗, whereas Mi is edge-disjoint from 

P; this is a contradiction concluding the proof. It is a small but crucial observation that the function f6.21 does not depend on the size |T | but solely on the depth of the vortices. Our main goal is to generalise Lemma 6.21 to a more general setting. The first step in that direction is an easy combinatorial result that guarantees the existence of T -normal segments in linear decompositions of sufficient length. 

Lemma 6.22. Let ℓ∗, ℓ, k ≥ 1 and t ≥ 2. Let Σ be a surface. Let ρ be a Σ-rendition of some 

k-annotated graph (G, T ). Let c1 ∈ C(ρ) be a vortex. Let α = ( ⟨u1, . . . , u ℓ∗ ⟩, ⟨U1, . . . , U ℓ∗ ⟩) be a linear decomposition of c. Let J ⊆ [ℓ∗] be a set of indices such that |J| = ℓ. If ℓ > (2 k + 1)( t + 1) ,

then there exist j1, j 2 ∈ J with |[j1, j 2] ∩ J| ≥ t, and such that the [j1, j 2]-segment of α is 

T -normal. 

Proof. Let T = {t1, . . . , t k} be non-empty for some k ≥ 1. For every t ∈ [k] let 1 ≤ st ≤ ft ≤ ℓ∗

be such that t ∈ ⋂ft 

> p=st

Up and t / ∈ Uq for all q / ∈ [st, f t]; this exists since α is a linear decomposition. Let X = {st, f t | t ∈ [k]}. Then |X| ≤ 2k. Let X = {x1, . . . , x m} for some m ∈ [2 k] such that 79 x1 ≤ . . . , ≤ xm. We derive the existence of (m + 1) intervals I0, . . . , I m of [ℓ∗] satisfying the following i) |I0 ∩ X| = 1 as well as |Im ∩ X| = 1 and I0 = [0 , x 1] (where x1 = 0 is possible) as well as 

Im = [ xm, ℓ ] (where xm = ℓ is possible) ii) for every i ∈ [1 , m − 1] it holds |Ii ∩ X| = 2 and Ii = [ xi, x i+1 ].In particular, note that for 0 ≤ i < j ≤ m and every x ∈ Ii and y ∈ Ij it holds x ≤ y and if 

Ii ∩ Ij̸ = ∅, then j = i + 1 and Ii ∩ Ii+1 = {xi+1 }.Note that ℓ > (2 k + 1)( t + 1) implies ℓ > (m + 1)( t + 1) . By the pigeonhole principle, there is p ∈ [0 , m ] such that Ip is an interval of length at least (t + 2) containing at least (t + 2) 

elements of J. In particular since Ip = [ xp, x p+1 ] we derive the xp+1 ≥ xp + t + 2 . Hence 

I := [ xp + 1 , x p+1 − 1] is a non-empty interval containing at least t elements of J. Thus, there exist xp + 1 ≤ j1 < j 2 ≤ xp+1 with and j1, j 2 ∈ J and |[j1, j 2] ∩ J| ≥ t.

Claim 6.22.1 . Let i ∈ I and t ∈ T ∩ Ui, then t ∈ ⋂ 

> j∈I

Uj .

Proof of claim. First note that by i) and ii ), we derive I ∩ X = ∅. In particular st, f t /∈ I. By construction of st, f t we derive that t ∈ Uj if and only if j ∈ [st, f t]. Since t ∈ Ui we derive that 

st ≤ i ≤ ft and in particular since I ∩ X = ∅ we derive st ≤ xp + 1 ≤ xp+1 − 1 ≤ ft and finally 

t ∈ Uj for all j ∈ I. This concludes the proof. ⊣

By the above claim, the [j1, j 2]-segment of α is T -normal, concluding the proof. As a second step, in order to generalise Lemma 6.21, we want to guarantee that the respective 

[k1, k 2]-segment and [ℓ1, ℓ 2]-segment, as given by the lemma, are indeed disjoint. This is a given if ρ is stretched and c1̸ = c2, but it is not if c1 = c2. As briefly discussed in the proof of Lemma 6.21, this is the only relevant distinction between these two cases: Note that if c1 = c2,

then there may be a single vertex that is part of all the bags of its linear decomposition. We define the following. 

Definition 6.23. Let ℓ ≥ 1. Let Σ be a surface. Let ρ be a Σ-rendition of some graph G.Let c ∈ C(ρ) be a vortex. Let α = ( ⟨u1, . . . , u ℓ⟩, ⟨U1, . . . , U ℓ⟩) be a linear decomposition of the vortex society (σ(c), Ωc) (possibly with some gap). Let F = [ i, j ] for some 1 ≤ i ≤ j. We define Gα[F ] := ⋃ 

> ui∈F

Ui, omitting the subscript α if clear from context. 

Lemma 6.24. Let d, m ≥ 1. Let Σ be a surface. Let ρ be a blank and stretched Σ-rendition of some k-annotated graph (G, T ). Let L be a vital T -linkage. Let c ∈ C(ρ) be a vortex. Let α be a linear decomposition with gap d′ + 1 ≤ d of the respective vortex society (σ(c), Ωc) where the vertices u−d′ , . . . , u m of V (Ω c) appear in this order in Ωc. Let F1, F 2 ⊊ [m] be proper disjoint intervals such that the Fi-restriction of α is properly (d − 1) -linked and such that Gα[F1] ∩ Gα[F2]

is disjoint from V (Ω c). Let S(L) be the set of segments of L and let S(F1, F 2) ⊆ S (L) be a set of ρ-homotopic paths with one endpoint in {ui | i ∈ F1} and the other in {uj | j ∈ F2} and let ω := |S (F1, F 2)|.Then there exists a (k + 2 d)-annotated graph (G′, T ′) and a blank and stretched rendition ρ′ of 

G′ together with a vital T ′-linkage L′ such that i) C(ρ′) = C(ρ) and further ρ′ agrees with ρ away from c. In particular G′ − V (σρ′ (c)) = 

G − V (σρ(c)) , and 80 (a) Splitting a vertex in I. (b) The vital linkage after splitting. 

x x x

F1 F2

x1

x1

x2

x2

F1 F2

x

L

x1

Lx

x2

L∗

x

L

x1

L′

> 1

x2

L′

> 2

Figure 17: A schematic illustration of the proof of Lemma 6.24. Figure (a) highlights the operation of splitting x, and the resulting αx. Light purple regions are the bags indexed by F1 and light blue regions are the bags indexed by F2. Dark blue regions highlight vertices in bags that are neighbors of x. Figure (b) depicts two exemplary constructions of the vital linkage after splitting x (from left to right), where black lines are edges in G.ii) Let S(L′) denote the segments of L′. There exists a vortex society (σρ′ (c), Ω′

> c

) of c such that Ω′ 

> c

= Ω c, together with a linear decomposition α′ with gap d′ + 1 ≤ d such that the vertices u−d′ , . . . , u m appear in this order in Ω′

> c

. Further, the Fi-restriction of α′

is properly (d − 1) -linked and Gα′ [F1] ∩ Gα′ [F2] = ∅ and S(F1, F 2) ⊆ S (L′) is a set of 

ρ′-homotopic paths with one endpoint in {vi | i ∈ F1} and the other in {uj | j ∈ F2}.

Proof. Let G = (( G, T ), ρ, L, α, F 1, F 2, S(L)) , each entry of the tuple of G being as in the theorem. Let (σ(c), Ωc) be a c-society. Let α = (⟨u−d′ , . . . , u m⟩, ⟨U−d′ , . . . , U m⟩) as in the theorem: note that m ≥ 3 since the segments are disjoint. Since F1 ∩ F2 = ∅ and the Fi-restriction of α is d-linear for i = 1 , 2 we derive that I := Gα[F1] ∩ Gα[F2] ⊆ V (G). Further, by assumption of the lemma we have 

(⋆) I ∩ V (Ω c) = ∅.Assume without loss of generality that F1 = [ ℓ1, ℓ 2] and F2 = [ k1, k 2] for some 1 ≤ ℓ1 < ℓ 2 <k1 < k 2 ≤ m by possibly reversing the order of Ωc. For every i ∈ [ℓ1, ℓ 2 − 1] ∪ [k1, k 2 − 1] let 

Zi := Ui ∩ Ui+1 . By Definition 5.1 of properly (d − 1) -linkedness we have the following: 

• for every i ∈ [ℓ1, ℓ 2] ∪ [k1, k 2], u i ∈ Ui and Ui ∩ V (Ω c) ⊆ { ui−1, u i}, if ℓ1 = 1 let ui−1 = uℓ1

• for every i ∈ [ℓ1, ℓ 2 − 1] ∪ [k1, k 2 − 1] it holds |Zi| = d, and 

• there is a Uℓ1 -Uℓ2 -linkage M1 in G[F1] \ V (Ω c) of order d and a Uk1 -Uk2 -linkage M2 in 

G[F2] \ V (Ω c) of order d.Let x ∈ I. We define the split of G at x to be the tuple Gx = (( Gx, T x), ρ x, Lx, α x, F 1, F 2, S(Lx)) 

obtained as follows. 81 Gx: Define Gx to be the graph obtained from G by adding two fresh vertices x1, x 2 /∈ V (G).Then for i = 1 , 2 and every edge xv ∈ Gα[Fi] add the edge xiv to G. Finally delete x

from G. Let Vc := V (σρ(c)) \ { x}, then Vc ⊆ V (Gx); see Figure 17 (a) for a schematic illustration of the operation where I is highlighted in red. 

ρx: Let C(ρx) = C(ρ) and let ρx agree with ρ on all cells away from c. Note that by (⋆) we derive x / ∈ N (c). Finally fix σρx (c) := Gx[Vc ∪ { x1, x 2}]. Then ρx is a Σ-rendition of Gx as we did not alter the nodes on the boundary of c.

Lx and Tx: Since L is vital in G, there is a unique path L ∈ L with x ∈ V (L). Let L− = L \ { L}.Let ux, xw ∈ E(L) be the edges adjacent to x; possibly x is a terminal of L, in that case there is only one such edge and the arguments are analogous. There are four cases to consider. If ux 1, x 1w ∈ E(Gx) then let Lx be obtained from L by replacing ux and xw with ux 1

and x2w; clearly Lx is a path in Gx with the same endpoints as L. In that case add a path L∗ consisting solely of the vertex x2. By construction Lx := L− ∪ { Lx, L ∗} is a vital linkage in Gx and Tx := {v | v is an endpoint of L ∈ L x} with Tx = T ∪ { x2} whence 

|Tx| ≤ | T | + 1 . See the top two illustrations in Figure 17 (b), giving a schematic illustration of the construction of Lx and L∗ in which the path L uses an edge between vertices of I

highlighting the construction in said “corner case”. If the first case is not true but ux 2, x 2w ∈ E(Gx) then construct Lx as above by symmetry. Thus we are left with ux 1 ∈ E(Gx) and x2w ∈ E(Gx) or ux 2 ∈ E(Gx) and x1w ∈ E(Gx); 

assume the former since the cases are symmetrical. Note that in that case x is not a terminal, hence at least to edges ux, xw ∈ E(G) exist. With this in mind let L1, L 2 ⊊ L

be subpaths on at least one edge such that L1 ∪ L2 = L and V (L1 ∩ L2) = {x}. Without loss of generality let ux ∈ E(L1) and xw ∈ E(L2). Finally let L′ 

> 1

⊊ Gx be obtained from 

L1 by replacing ux with ux 1 and let L′ 

> 2

⊊ Gx be obtained from L2 by replacing xw with 

x2w. Then Lx := L− ∪ { L′

> 1

, L ′

> 2

} is a linkage in Gx by construction. Further it is vital in Gx for else L was not vital in G; note that all the newly introduced edges cannot be used by paths different from L′

> 1

, L ′ 

> 2

since they are all incident with {x1, x 2}. Finally let 

Tx = {v | v is an endpoint of L ∈ L x}, then Tx = T ∪ { x1, x 2} whence |Tx| ≤ | T | + 2 .See the bottom two illustrations in Figure 17 (b), giving a schematic illustration of the construction of L′ 

> 1

and L′

> 2

, in which the path L uses two edges between vertices of I, 

highlighting the construction in said “corner case”. 

αx : We define αx =

> (

⟨u−d′ , . . . , u m⟩, ⟨U ′−d′ , . . . , U ′

> m

⟩

> )

as follows. For i ∈ [ℓ1, ℓ 2] with x ∈ Ui

define U ′ 

> i

:= ( Ui \ { x}) ∪ { x1} and if x / ∈ Ui define U ′ 

> i

:= Ui. For i ∈ [k1, k 2] with x ∈ Ui

let U ′ 

> i

:= Ui \ { x} ∪ { x2} and if x / ∈ Ui define U ′ 

> i

:= Ui. For all i / ∈ [ℓ1, ℓ 2] ∪ [k1, k 2] let 

U ′ 

> i

:= Ui \ { x}. By construction αx is a linear decomposition with gap d′ + 1 ≤ d. To see this note that Gx[Fi] ∼= Gα[Fi] for i = 1 , 2 by construction and every edge adjacent to xi

is by construction part of Gx[Fi]; see Figure 17 for a schematic representation, where the neighbors of x and x1, x 2 are highlighted by dark blue regions. Let S(Lx) be the segments of Lx in ρ. By construction of ρx and the fact that every terminal of Tx \ T is contained in σ(c) \ V (Ω c) by construction, we derive that S(Lx) = S(L); recall Definition 6.10. In particular S(F1, F 2) ⊆ S (Lx) and the paths in S(F1, F 2) are ρx-homotopic, since ρx agrees with ρ on cl (Σ \ c).82 Finally, for i = 1 , 2 the Fi-restriction of αx is still properly (d − 1) -linked. To see this note again that by construction Gx[Fi] ∼= Gα[Fi] and for every j ∈ Fi the bags U ′ 

> j

and Uj agree up to renaming x to xi. In particular, we have 

• for every i ∈ [ℓ1, ℓ 2] ∪ [k1, k 2], u i ∈ U ′ 

> i

and U ′ 

> i

∩ V (Ω c) ⊆ { ui−1, u i}; if ℓ1 = 1 let ui−1 = uℓ1 ,

• for every i ∈ [ℓ1, ℓ 2 − 1] ∪ [k1, k 2 − 1] it holds U ′ 

> i

∩ U ′ 

> i+1

and Ui ∩ Ui+1 agree up to renaming 

x to x1 if i ∈ [ℓ1, ℓ 2 − 1] and x2 if i ∈ [k1, k 2], thus |U ′ 

> i

∩ U ′

> i+1

| = |Ui ∩ Ui+1 | = d, 

• there is a U ′ 

> ℓ1

-U ′ 

> ℓ2

-linkage M ′ 

> 1

in Gx[F1] \ V (Ω c) of order d and a U ′ 

> k1

-U ′ 

> k2

-linkage M ′ 

> 2

in 

Gx[F2] \ V (Ω c) of order d using that Gx[Fi] ∼= G[Fi] and the construction of αx.Repeating the above construction inductively splitting G at all x ∈ I, we conclude the proof. Finally, we combine Lemmas 6.21, 6.22 and 6.24, proving the main technical theorem of this subsection. 

Theorem 6.25. Let Σ be a surface and k∗, p, ℓ, d 1, d 2 ≥ 1. There exists a function f6.25 : N2 → N

such that the following holds. Let ρ be a blank and stretched Σ-rendition of some k∗-annotated graph (G, T ). Let L be a vital T -linkage in G.Let c1, c 2 ∈ C(ρ) be vortices and α1 = (⟨u−d′ , . . . , u ℓ⟩, ⟨U−d′ , . . . , U ℓ⟩) a linear decom-position of the vortex society (σ(c1), Ωc1 ) with gap at most d′ + 1 ≤ d1, and α2 =(⟨w−d′′ , . . . , w p⟩, ⟨W−d′′ , . . . , W p⟩) with gap at most d′′ + 1 ≤ d2 (if c1 = c2 let α1 = α2). Further, let F1 ⊆ [ℓ] and F2 ⊆ [p] be intervals such that {ui | i ∈ F1} ∩ { uj | j ∈ F2} = ∅ and such that the Fi-restriction of αi is properly (di − 1) -linked. Let S(L) be the segments of L and let S(F1, F 2) = {S1, . . . , S ω∗ } ⊆ S (L) be a linkage of ρ-homotopic segments with one endpoint in 

{ui | i ∈ F1} and one in {uj | j ∈ F2} for some ω∗ ≥ 1. Then |S (F1, F 2)| ≤ f6.25 (k∗, max (d1, d 2)) .Moreover f6.25 (k∗, d ) ∈ poly (k∗) · 2poly (d).

Proof. Fix d := max (d1, d 2). Let f (k∗, d ) = (2( k∗ + 2 d) + 1) 2(g6.21 (2 d) + 1) + 8; we claim that f satisfies the theorem. Clearly f (k∗, d ) ∈ poly (k∗) · 2poly (d) by definition. Towards a contradiction, assume that ω∗ ≥ f (k∗, d ). By assumption on S(F1, F 2) and the fact that d ≥ 1

we derive that |F1|, |F2| ≥ 4.12 

Let α1, α 2 as well as F1, F 2 and S(F1, F 2) be as in the theorem. Note that if c1̸ = c2, since 

ρ is stretched, we derive that Gα1 [F1] ∩ Gα2 [F2] = ∅. However, if c1 = c2, this may not be true a priori; we deal with that first. In that case, by assumption of the theorem, α1 = α2

whence d1 = d2; let F1 = [ ℓ1, ℓ 2] and F2 = [ k1, k 2] be the respective segments where ℓi, k i ≥ 1 for 

i = 1 , 2. Since {ui | i ∈ F1} ∩ { uj | j ∈ F2} = ∅ we may assume without loss of generality that 

ℓ1 < ℓ 2 < k 1 < k 2. Let ˜F1 = [ ℓ1 + 1 , ℓ 2 − 1] be obtained from F1 by discarding its endpoints and similarly ˜F2 = [ k1 + 1 , k 2 − 1] . Since the Fi-restriction of αi is properly (di − 1) -linked, we derive by Definition 5.1 that (Uℓ2−1 ∩ Uk1+1 ) ∩ V (Ω c1 ) = ∅ as well as (Uℓ1+1 ∩ Uk2−1) ∩ V (Ω c1 ) = ∅.In particular Gα1 [ ˜F1] ∩ Gα1 [ ˜F2] is disjoint from V (Ω c1 ) = V (Ω c2 ) by construction. Note that 

S( ˜F1, ˜F2) ⊆ S (F1, F 2), defined in the obvious way, satisfies 

|S ( ˜F1, ˜F2)| ≥ |S (F1, F 2)| − 8 ≥ (2( k∗ + 2 d) + 1) 2 · (g6.21 (2 d) + 1) ,

> 12 This is a technical detail, note that the segments can indeed be assumed to be huge for otherwise there is nothing to show.

83 since S(F1, F 2) is a set of internally disjoint paths by Observation 6.11, and thus at most 2 paths in S(F1, F 2) may use ui for every i ∈ { ℓ1, ℓ 2, k 1, k 2}.Lemma 6.24 implies the existence of a (k∗ + 2 d)-annotated graph (G′, T ′) with a vital linkage 

L′ together with a Σ-rendition ρ′ and a linear decomposition α′ with gap at most d′ ≤ d1 of the vortex c ∈ C(ρ′) = C(ρ) and disjoint proper segments F ′

> 1

, F ′

> 2

, such that the F ′ 

> i

-restriction to α′ is properly (d1 − 1) -linked for i = 1 , 2. Further Gα′ [F ′

> 1

] ∩ Gα′ [F ′

> 2

] = ∅ and there is a set of ρ′-homotopic segments of S(F ′

> 1

, F ′

> 2

) satisfying |S (F ′

> 1

, F ′

> 2

)| ≥ (2( k∗ + 2 d) + 1) 2 · (g6.21 (2 d) + 1) . In particular it suffices to prove that |S (F ′

> 1

, F ′

> 2

)| ≥ (2( k∗ + 2 d) + 1) 2 · (g6.21 (2 d) + 1) is impossible, which in turn contradicts the assumption that ω∗ ≥ f (k∗, d ) as desired. Since 

(G′, T ′), L′, ρ ′, α ′, F ′

> 1

, F ′

> 2

, S(F ′

> 1

, F ′

> 2

) still satisfy the assumptions of the lemma, we may set 

k := k∗ + 2 d, ω := (2( k∗ + 2 d) + 1) 2(g6.21 (2 d) + 1) ,

and, for notational simplicity, continue with the instance (G, T ), ρ, α 1, α 2, c 1, c 2, F 1, F 2, S(F1, F 2)

by renaming, with the additional assumption that 

(∩) Gα1 [F1] ∩ Gα2 [F2] = ∅.Due to the identification k = k∗ + 2 d, and the choice ω = (2( k∗ + 2 d) + 1) 2(g6.21 (2 d) + 1) we are left to refute the assumption that ω ≥ f (k, d ).From here on, the proofs for c1 = c2 and c1̸ = c2 are analogous. Let i ∈ { 1, 2}.Since S(F1, F 2) is a set of ρ-homotopic paths, Observation 6.20 implies that there exist S1, S ω ∈S(F1, F 2) with traces γ1, γ ω such that γ1, γ ω guard an (F1, F 2)-strip ∆( F1, F 2) that is vortex-free, and for every S ∈ S (F1, F 2) its trace is contained in ∆( F1, F 2). Further, by Definition 6.10 of segments, the paths in S(F1, F 2) are disjoint from vortices other than c1, c 2, hence the boundary of ∆( F1, F 2) is disjoint from the boundary of all vortices that are not c1, c 2. Note that given the disc ∆( F1, F 2), the four endpoints of S1 and S2 agree with {uℓ1 , u ℓ2 , w k1 , w k2 }.Let S∗ = {S1, . . . , S ω} be an enumeration of the paths in S(F1, F 2) such that the following holds: Let the endpoints of Si be {uiu , w jw } for respective iu ∈ [ℓ1, ℓ 2] and jw ∈ [k1, k 2],

then 1u ≤ . . . ≤ ωu.Since the paths in S∗ are ρ-homotopic and each trace of a path in S∗ is contained in the disc 

∆( F1, F 2), we derive that either 1w ≤ . . . ≤ ωw appear in this order or in reverse order, i.e., 

ωw ≤ . . . ≤ 1w; by reversing the cyclic order of Ωc2 we may assume without loss of generality that 1w ≤ . . . ≤ ωw appear in this order. Note here that if c1 = c2 this results in possibly fixing 

Ωc1̸ = Ω c2 , for they may have reversed orders. In particular now α1̸ = α2 is possible (but the bags still agree up to bijection). For simplicity, let us assume that α1 = (⟨u−d′ , . . . , u ℓ⟩, ⟨U−d′ , . . . , U ℓ⟩) and α2 =(⟨w−d′′ , . . . , w p⟩, ⟨W−d′ , . . . , W p⟩) be the resulting decompositions after the previous possi-ble reversing of the orders. By the above analysis we derive the following: 

(⋆) Let Sj ∈ S ∗, then Sj has endpoints uju , w jw for respective ju ∈ [ℓ], j w ∈ [p] and 1u ≤ . . . ≤

ωu as well as 1w ≤ . . . ≤ ωw.Furthermore, 

⊠ if c1 = c2, then d′ = d′′ and k = p. Further, given u ∈ N (c1) and i ∈ [ℓ + d′] and j ∈ [p + d′′ ]

with u = ui and w = wj we derive that Ui = Wj .Fix d := max ( d1, d 2). Let Iu := {1u, . . . , ω u} and Iw := {1w, . . . , ω w}.84 Let α∗ 

> u

be the [1 u, ω u]-restriction of α1 and let α∗ 

> w

be the [1 w, ω w]-restriction of α2 respectively. Recall that ω ≥ (2 k + 1) 2(g6.21 (2 d) + 1) . Since 1u ≤ . . . ≤ ωu by construction, applying Lemma 6.22 to α∗ 

> u

and Iu, we derive the existence of i, j ∈ [k] such that |[iu, j u] ∩ Iu| ≥ (2 k +1) g6.21 (2 d) and such that the [iu, j u]-segment of α∗ 

> u

is T -normal. Let Su := {Sj ∈ S ∗ | j ∈ [iu, j u]},

then |S u| ≥ (2 k + 1)( g6.21 (2 d) + 1) .Since Sm has endpoints {umu , w mw } and since for Sm, S m′ it holds mu ≤ m′ 

> u

⇐⇒ mw ≤ m′

> w

we derive that |Iw ∩ [iw, j w]| ≥ (2 k + 1)( g6.21 (2 d) + 1) . Again, applying Lemma 6.22 to 

Jw := Iw ∩ [iw, j w] we derive the existence of s, t ∈ [i, j ] such that |[sw, t w] ∩ Jw| ≥ g6.21 (2 d) + 1 

and such that the [sw, t w]-segment of α∗ 

> w

is T -normal. Finally fix Ju := [ su, t u].Summarizing we derive that for S := {Sj ∈ S ∗ | j ∈ [s, t ]}, it holds 

(⋆⋆ ) |S| ≥ g6.21 (2 d) + 1 ,

and the [su, t u]-restriction αu of α1 as well as the [sw, t w]-restriction αw of α2 are by construction 

T -normal as well as properly (d1 − 1) -linked and properly (d2 − 1) -linked, respectively. Let U := 

> tu

⋃

> j=su

Uj and let W := 

> tw

⋃

> j=sw

Wj .

By construction U ∪ W ⊆ V (σ(c)) and S is a U -W -linkage. Let L∗ ⊆ L be maximal such that for every path L ∈ L ∗ it holds V (L) ∩ (U ∪ W )̸ = ∅.

Claim 6.25.1 . Every path in S is a subpath of some path in L∗. Further every path in L∗ has at least one vertex in two of {Usu , U tu , W sw , W tw }.

Proof of claim. Since ρ is a blank rendition, all terminals of paths in L∗ are part of the graph of some vortex. If an endpoint of L ∈ L ∗ is contained in U then it is contained in ⋂tu 

> j=su

Uj

since αu is T -normal, and similarly if an endpoint of L is contained in W then it is contained in 

⋂tw 

> j=sw

Wj since αw is T -normal. If a path L ∈ L ∗ has no endpoint in U but intersects U then this implies that V (L) ∩ (Usu ∪ Utu )̸ = ∅ for αu is a linear decomposition, and an analogous result holds if it has no endpoint in W but intersects W . Summarising the above, every path 

L ∈ L ∗ admits at least one vertex in two of {Usu , U tu , W sw , W tw }; note that the path may have the same vertex in Usu ∩ Utu but no vertex in Wsw ∪ Wtw if it is disjoint from S for example. Finally, let P ∈ S . P has one endpoint in U and the other in W . Since S ⊆ S (L) by construction we derive that P ⊆ L for some L ∈ L . In particular L ∈ L ∗ by definition of the latter. This concludes the proof. ⊣

Recall that S = {Ss, . . . , S t} with t − s ≥ g6.21 (2 d) + 1 such that Sj has endpoints uju , w jw and 

su ≤ . . . ≤ tu as well as sw ≤ . . . ≤ tw by (⋆) for every j ∈ [s, t ]. Furthermore, recall that the paths in S are ρ-homotopic. Let γs, γ t be the traces of Ss and St. Let ∆ := ∆([ su, t u], [sw, t w]) be the ([ su, t u], [sw, t w]) -strip guarded by γ1, γ t as given by Observation 6.20. Then by construction ∆ contains the traces of all paths in S.

G1: Let G1 ⊊ G be obtained from G by deleting all edges E(⋃mi=1 Ci) \ E(⋃ L), then (G1, T )

is still an annotated graph and L is a vital linkage in G1. Let ρ1 be the restriction of ρ

to G1. Since we did not alter the graphs of vortices, every vortex cell of ρ is one of ρ1

85 and their societies agree – up to a choice of ordering – in particular αu and αw are still 

T -normal and properly (d1 − 1) -linked and properly (d2 − 1) -linked respectively. 

G2: Let G2 ⊆ G1 be obtained from G1 by deleting all the paths in L− := L \ L ∗. Let T2 be the set of endpoints of paths in L∗ then (G2, T 2) is still an annotated graph. One easily verifies that L2 := L∗ is a vital T2-linkage in G2 by construction; otherwise L was not vital for (G1, T ). Let ρ2 be the restriction of ρ1 to G2. Then c1, c 2 are still vortices in ρ2. Note that V (⋃ L−) ∩ (U ∪ W ) = ∅. In particular, αu and αw remain both T2-normal as well as properly (d1 − 1) -linked and properly (d2 − 1) -linked given the c1-society and c2-society in ρ2, respectively. Note that every vortex of ρ2 is a vortex of ρ1, but it may have fewer vortices. 

G3 : Let C∗ ⊆ C(ρ2) \ { c1, c 2} be the set of vortex cells distinct from c1, c 2. Let G3 ⊆ G2 be obtained from G2 by deleting all vertices in ⋃ 

> c∈C∗

V (σ(c)) and let L3 = L2 ∩ G3 be the resulting linkage. Then L3 is vital by construction and Proposition 3.5. Note that the set of endpoints T3 of paths in L3 are part of cells that are outside of ∆ since the boundary of 

∆ is disjoint from the boundary of vortex cells in C∗. Furthermore, by construction it holds that G3 = V (σ(c1)) ∪ V (σ(c2)) ∪ L ∗. Let ρ3 be the restriction of ρ2 to G3. Since we did not alter V (σρ2 (c1)) ∪ V (σρ2 (c2)) , and since the rendition ρ was stretched – in particular 

ρ2 is – we derive that αu and αw are still T3-normal as well as properly (d1 − 1) -linked and properly (d2 − 1) -linked, respectively. 

G∗: Let G∗ be obtained from G3 by deleting every vertex that is part of a non-vortex cell contained in cl (Σ \ ∆) . Let P∗ = L3 ∩ G∗, then again P∗ is vital by Proposition 3.5. Let 

ρ∗ be the restriction of ρ3 to G∗. Let T ∗ be the endpoints of paths in P∗, then T ∗ ⊆

V (σρ∗ (c1)) ∪V (σρ∗ (c2)) . Further by construction T ∗ ∩(U ∪W ) ⊆ T . In particular αu, α w are 

T ∗-normal and since we did not delete any vertices that are part of V (σρ3 (c1)) ∪ V (σρ3 (c2)) ,

they are both still properly (d1 −1) -linked and properly (d2 −1) -linked respectively. Further 

G∗ = σρ∗ (c1) ∪ σρ∗ (c2) ∪ ⋃ P∗ by construction. Finally let Ku = [ su, t u] and Kw = [ sw, t w]. Then these are still segments of the c1- and 

c2-societies in ρ∗ (choosing the respective cyclic orientation) and by the above the Ku- and Kw-restrictions of the respective linear decompositions are still properly (d1 − 1) -linked and properly 

(d2 − 1) -linked as well as T ∗-normal, respectively. Note that we did not alter Gαx [Kx] throughout the above construction for x ∈ { u, w }. In particular, by (∩) we derive that G∗ 

> αu

[Ku]∩G∗ 

> α2

[Kw] = ∅.Let now α∗

> 1

, α ∗ 

> 2

be linear decompositions of the vortex societies (σρ∗ (c1), Ω∗ 

> c1

) and (σρ∗ (c2), Ω∗ 

> c2

)

respectively, such that αu is the Ku-restriction of α∗ 

> 1

and α2 is the Kw-restriction of α∗

> 2

; these clearly exist. Note that we may have α∗

> 1

̸ = α∗ 

> 2

in the case that c1 = c2, simply because they need to respect the inherent order given by αu, α w13 .Finally, (G∗, T ∗), ρ ∗, P∗, S, c 1, c 2, d 1, d 2, α ∗

> 1

, α ∗

> 2

, α u, α w satisfy the assumptions of Lemma 6.21; note here that the size of T ∗ is irrelevant and may be very large regarding the above construction. By Lemma 6.21 we conclude that |S ∗| ≤ g6.21 (2 d) as a contradiction to (⋆⋆ ), concluding the proof. In a final iteration, we combine Lemmas 6.9 and 6.22 and Theorem 6.17 and Lemma 6.21 to derive iii ) and iv ) of Theorem 6.4.       

> 13 Although not needed, one may guarantee that they satisfy (⊠),i.e., their bags agree, but α∗
> 1and α∗
> 2may be defined with respect to different orderings.

86 6.4 Taming simple loops 

In a first instance, we prove the main ingredient to prove iii ) of Theorem 6.4, i.e., given an exhausted tuple (G, T ), L, (ρ, M ) in some surface Σ, such that the locus is “large enough”, simple loops cannot intersect cycles “deeply nested” in M, whence we will be able to remove them completely from the instance. We outsource the following lemma, as we will use the same technique to tame non-simple loops and links. The lemma is an easy combinatorial filtering result. 

Lemma 6.26. Let (G, Ω) be a society and d, ℓ ≥ 1. Let S1, S 2 ⊊ V (Ω) be disjoint non-empty segments. Let gap 1, gap 2 ⊆ V (Ω) be segments (not necessarily disjoint) with |gap i| ≤ ℓ for 

i = 1 , 2 and such that either gap 1 = gap 2 or Si ∩ gap j = ∅ for {i, j } = {1, 2}. Let u1, . . . , u m be a labelling of V (Ω) such that they appear in that order in Ω for m := |V (Ω) |. Let S be a set of 

16 d + 4 ℓ internally disjoint paths in G such that every path in S has one endpoint in S1 and the other in S2, and no vertex in S1 ∪ S2 is part of more than two paths in S.Then there exist disjoint non-empty intervals F1, F 2 ⊊ [m] such that i) for i = 1 , 2 it holds {uj | j ∈ Fi} ⊆ Si and |Fi| ≥ d, 

ii) {ui | i ∈ F1 ∪ F2} ∩ (gap 1 ∪ gap 2) = ∅, and iii) there is S′ ⊆ S of size d such that every path in S′ has one endpoint in {ui | i ∈ F1} and the other in {ui | i ∈ F2}.

Proof. We start by defining linear orders on S1, S 2 “induced” by Ω.

⪯i: Note first that |S| ≥ 16 d + 4 ℓ implies that |Si| ≥ 2, and further since the segments are proper (for they are disjoint), there exist two distinct endpoints si, t i ∈ Si for i = 1 , 2. Let 

i = 1 , 2, then since Si is a proper segment we derive the existence of x ∈ V (Ω) \ V (Si) such that either si, x, t i or ti, x, s i appear in the order listed in Ω. Without loss of generality assume the latter and call si the start of Si and ti the end of Si. Then, again since Si is a segment, we may define a linear order x ⪯i y on Si by saying x ⪯i y ⇐⇒ si, x, y, t i

appear in the order listed in Ω. In particular si ⪯i ti.Next we filter S by removing all the paths that have an endpoint in one of gap 1, gap 2

S∗: By assumption of the lemma S is a set of internally disjoint paths, such that at most 2

paths of S may use the same vertex x ∈ gap 1 ∪ gap 2, i.e., a total of at most 4ℓ paths use a vertex in gap 1 ∪ gap 2. Let S∗ ⊆ S be the set of those paths that do not end in a vertex of 

gap 1 ∪ gap 2, then |S ∗| ≥ |S| − 4ℓ = 16 d.Since Si and gap i are both segments of Ω, we derive that Si \ gap i is the union of at most two segments S1 

> i

∪ S2 

> i

for i = 1 , 2.By construction and assumption of the lemma we further derive that Spi ∩ gap j = ∅ for all 

i, j, p ∈ { 1, 2}, since either Fi ∩ gap j = ∅ by assumption or Spi ∩ gap j = ∅ by construction, for 

gap 1 = gap 2. Let S∗ 

> 1

, S∗ 

> 2

⊆ S ∗ form a partition of S∗ such that every path in S∗ 

> i

has an endpoint in Si 

> 1

for i = 1 , 2. By the pigeonhole principle there is i ∈ { 1, 2} such that |S ∗ 

> i

| ≥ 8d; without loss of generality let it be i = 1 for the other case is analogous. Similarly there is a partition S′

> 1

, S′ 

> 2

⊆ S ∗ 

> 1

such that every path in S′ 

> i

has an endpoint in Si 

> 2

for 

i = 1 , 2. By the pigeonhole principle there is i ∈ { 1, 2} such that |S ′

> i

| ≥ 4d; without loss of generality let it be i = 1 for the other case is analogous. 87 Finally since S1 

> i

is a segment of Ω, we derive that there are at most two disjoint intervals 

F 1 

> i

, F 2 

> i

⊆ [m] – one may be empty – such that S1 

> i

= {uj | j ∈ F 1 

> i

∪ F 2 

> i

} for i = 1 , 2. By two more repeated applications of the pigeonhole principle, there exist i, j ∈ { 1, 2} such that 

Pji := {S ∈ S ′ 

> 1

| S has one endpoint in F i 

> 1

and the other in F j 

> 2

} satisfies |P ji | ≥ d.Then S′ := Pji and F1 := F i 

> 1

as well as F2 = F i 

> 2

are as desired concluding the proof. The following is the main result of this section. 

Theorem 6.27. Let Σ be a surface and k, d ≥ 1. There exists a function f6.27 : N2 → N such that the following holds. Let m > f 6.27 (k, d ) and (G, T ) be a k-annotated graph with an m-locus 

(ρ, M ) of (G, T ) in Σ such that ρ is a Σ-skeleton and  

> •

M is tight,  

> •

every vortex of C(ρ) is properly (d − 1) -linked with gap at most d,  

> •

there exists a vital T -linkage L in G, and  

> •

(G, T ), L, (ρ, M ) is exhausted. Let M = ⟨C1, . . . , C m⟩ and let S(L) be the segments of L. Then for every simple loop S ∈ S (L)

and every i ∈ [m − f6.27 (k, d )] it holds V (S) ∩ V (Ci) = ∅.Moreover f6.27 (k, d ) ∈ poly (k) · 2poly (d).

Proof. We claim that f (k, d ) = 16( f6.25 (k, d )+1)+4 d satisfies the theorem. Let m > f (k, d ). For notational simplicity, let ω∗ := f (k, d ). Let (G, T ), L, (ρ, M ) be as in the theorem, in particular it is exhausted and M = ⟨C1, . . . , C m⟩ is tight. Recall Definition 6.6 as well as Observation 6.8 and the respective definition of the respective m-well 

W := 

> (

G(M, L), Ω∆Cm , ρ ∆Cm , M, L(∆ Cm )

> )

.

Since by assumption of the theorem (G, T ), L, (ρ, M ) is exhausted and M is tight, Lemma 6.9 implies that W is dry. Let S ∈ S (L) be a simple loop. Let c ∈ C(ρ) be the unique vortex cell such that S is a simple loop at c. Let ∆( S) denote the unique disc bounded by S and a segment of c such that ∆( S) is vortex-free and disjoint from the closure of each of vortex distinct from c; this exists by Definition 6.3 and it is ρ-aligned by construction. Towards a contradiction, assume that V (S) ∩ V (Ci)̸ = ∅ for some 1 ≤ i ≤ m − ω∗; note that 1 < m − ω∗ by assumption. Since V (S) ∩ V (Ci) is not empty, there is a path P ∈ L (∆ Cm ) such that P is a subpath of 

S and V (P ) ∩ V (Ci)̸ = ∅. Recall Definition 6.12. Then, since W is dry – in particular it is drained – Observation 4.1 implies that there exist m − i + 1 distinct paths Pm, . . . , P i ∈ L (∆ Cm )

such that i) V (Pj ) ∩ V (Cj )̸ = ∅ for all j ∈ [i, m ], and ii) ∆Pm ⊊ . . . ⊊ ∆Pi .By Observation 6.11, S(L) is a set of internally disjoint paths. In particular for every S′ ∈ S (L)

its trace is either contained in ∆( S) or disjoint from it. Hence, since ∆( S) is vortex-free and 

ρ-aligned by the above construction, and further ∆Pt ⊆ ∆Pj ⊆ ∆( S) for every j ≥ t ≥ i, 

Theorem 6.17 implies that there is an injection β : {Pi, . . . , P m} → S such that for every 

j ∈ [i, m ] it holds Pj ⊆ β(Pj ). Let Sj := β(Pj ) for every j ∈ [i, m ].88 Claim 6.27.1 . For every j ∈ [i, m ] the segment Sj is a simple loop at c with corresponding vortex-free disc ∆( Sj ) and ∆( Sm) ⊊ . . . ⊊ ∆( Si) ⊆ ∆( S).

Proof of claim. Let j ∈ [i, m ] be arbitrary, then since Sj ∈ S (L) it is either a link or a loop. Since 

∆( S) is a disc, and Sj and S are either internally disjoint or equal by Observation 6.11 – they may only be equal for j = m – we derive that the trace of Sj is either contained in the interior of ∆( S) or it is disjoint from it. Since Pj ⊆ Sj and ∆Pj ⊆ ∆( S) we derive that the trace of Sj is either equal to that of S if j = i and Si = S, or contained in the interior of ∆( S). Since Sj is a segment of L its trace has both its endpoints on vortex boundaries. Since for every vortex 

c′̸ = c, ∆( S) is disjoint from the boundary of c′, we derive that the trace of Sj has both its endpoints in c. Finally Sj is a simple loop at c by Definition 6.3. Similarly to Observation 6.13 one easily verifies that ∆( Sm) ⊊ . . . ⊊ ∆( Si) ⊆ ∆( S) leveraging the fact that ∆Pm ⊊ . . . ⊊ ∆Pi ⊆ ∆( S) where ∆Pj ⊆ ∆( Sj ) for all j ∈ [i, m − 1] . ⊣

Let S := {Si, . . . , S m} be as in Claim 6.27.1. By our previous assumption i < m − ω∗ whence 

(⋆) |S| = m − i + 1 ≥ ω∗ + 1 > 16( f6.25 (k, d ) + 1) + 4 d.Since c is properly (d − 1) -linked with gap at most d, Definition 5.2 implies the existence of a linear decomposition α = (⟨u−d′ , . . . , u 0, u 1, . . . , u ℓ⟩, ⟨U−d′ , . . . , U 0, U 1, . . . , U ℓ⟩) of (σ(c), Ωc),

with gap d′ for some d′ < d, such that the [ℓ]-restriction of α is properly (d − 1) -linked. Note that by Observation 6.11 S is a set of internally disjoint paths with endpoints in V (Ω c) and every vertex of V (Ω c) is part of at most two paths of S. Let gap := {ui | i ∈ [−d′, 0] }. By Claim 6.27.1 we have ∆( Sm) ⊊ . . . ⊊ ∆( Si), hence by “planarity” – recall that ρ is a Σ-skeleton – there exist disjoint segments T1, T 2 ⊊ V (Ω c) of Ωc such that every path in S has one endpoint in T1 and the other in T2, and the endpoints of the segments are part of such paths. Let ∆( T1, T 2) be a 

(T1, T 2)-strip guarded by the traces of Si and Sm which contains all the traces of S; see also Observation 6.20. Let Ω∗ be the cyclic order of Ωc restricted to T1 ∪ T2. Let G∗ be the crop of 

G by ∆( T1, T 2).By applying Lemma 6.26 to (G∗, Ω∗), S, gap , S 1, S 2 together with (⋆) we derive the existence of disjoint intervals F1, F 2 ⊊ [ℓ] and a subset S∗ ⊆ S with one endpoint in {uj | j ∈ F1} and the other endpoint in {uj | j ∈ F2} such that 

(⋆⋆ ) |S ∗| ≥ f6.25 (k, d ) + 1 .Without loss of generality assume that for every i ∈ F1 and j ∈ F2 it holds i < j ; otherwise rename the intervals accordingly. Let S1, . . . , S p be an enumeration of S∗ such that ∆( S1) ⊊ . . . ⊊ ∆( Sp). Further, for every 

j ∈ [p] denote the endpoints of Sj by uiu , w iw where iu ∈ F1 and iw ∈ F2.Again, since ∆( S1) ⊊ . . . ⊊ ∆( Sp), each of the paths being a simple loop, we derive that 

1u ≤ . . . ≤ pu < p w ≤ . . . ≤ 1w.By construction the Fi-restriction of α is properly (d − 1) -linked. Let c1, c 2 := c. Then 

G, ρ, c 1, c 2, S∗, α, F 1, F 2 satisfy the assumptions of Theorem 6.25. Thus, said lemma implies that 

|S| ≤ f6.25 (k, d ) as a contradiction to (⋆⋆ ), concluding the proof. Note that while Theorem 6.27 bounds how “deep” simple loops may interact with a locus, it does not bound the overall number of homotopic simple loops, simply because ρ-homotopic 89 simple loops at some common vortex c may bound disjoint discs. There is no way to “efficiently” bound the number of such simple loops, but fortunately we will not have too. 

6.5 Controlling homotopic links and non-simple loops 

In a second instance, we prove iv ) of Theorem 6.4, i.e., given an exhausted tuple (G, T ), L, (ρ, M )

in some surface Σ, such that the locus is “large enough”, there are not “too many” links or non-simple loops of the same homotopy type. The proof is easier than that of Theorem 6.27 as it does not rely and is independent of the size of the locus. 

Theorem 6.28. Let Σ be a surface and k, d, m ≥ 1. There exists a function f6.28 : N2 → N such that the following holds. Let (G, T ) be a k-annotated graph with a blank and stretched Σ-skeleton 

ρ. Let C∗ ⊆ C(ρ) be the set of vortices such that  

> •

every vortex of C(ρ) is properly (d − 1) -linked with gap at most d,  

> •

there exists a vital T -linkage L in G.Let S be a segment of L that is not a simple loop. Let S(S) be the set of all segments of L that are ρ-homotopic to S. Then |S (s)| < f 6.28 (k, d ).Moreover, f6.28 (k, d ) ∈ poly (k) · 2poly (d).

Proof. Choose f (k, d ) = 16( f6.25 (k, d ) + 1) + 4 d; we claim that f satisfies the theorem. Let S be as in the theorem, i.e., for some L ∈ L the path S ⊆ L is a segment of L that is not a simple loop. Let c1, c 2 ∈ C(ρ) be vortices (possibly equal if S is a non-simple loop) such that S

has its endpoints on the nodes of these vortices. Let S(L) be the set of segments of L and let 

S(S) ⊆ S (L) be as in the theorem. Towards a contradiction, assume that |S (S)| ≥ f (k, d ).Now let 

α1 := ( ⟨u−d′ , . . . , u 0, u 1, . . . , u ℓ⟩, ⟨U−d′ , . . . , U 0, U 1, . . . , U ℓ⟩)

be a properly (d − 1) -linked linear decomposition of the c1-society (σ(c1), Ωc1 ) with gap d′ ≤ d

and let 

α2 := ( ⟨w−d′′ , . . . , w 0, w 1, . . . , w p⟩, ⟨W−d′′ , . . . , W 0, W 1, . . . , W p⟩)

be a properly (d − 1) -linked linear decomposition of the c2-society (σ(c1), Ωc1 ) with gap d′′ ≤ d;

if c1 = c2 let α1 = α2.Since S(s) is a set of ρ-homotopic paths, Observation 6.20 implies the existence of disjoint non-empty segments Ti ⊊ V (Ω ci ) and two paths S1, S ω with respective traces γ1, γ ω such that S(s)

is a T1-T2-linkage and the trace of each path of S(s) is contained in the (T1, T 2)-strip ∆( T1, T 2); 

let |T1| = s and |T2| = t

Let gap ∗ 

> 1

:= {ui | i ∈ [−d′, 0] } and let gap ∗ 

> 2

:= {wi | i ∈ [−d′′ , 0] }, and if c1 = c2 then 

gap 1 = gap 2. Choose an orientation of the boundary of the disc ∆( T1, T 2) and let Ω∗ be a cyclic order of T1 ∪ T2 – they are part of the boundary of ∆( T1, T 2) – such that it agrees with said orientation. By construction there exist 1u, . . . , s u ∈ [−d′, ℓ ] and 1w, . . . , t w ∈ [−d′′ , p ] such that 

u1u , . . . , u tu , w 1w , . . . , w sw appear in the order listed in Ω∗.Let G∗ be the crop of G by ∆( T1, T 2) and let gap i := gap ∗ 

> i

∩ (T1 ∪ T2) for i = 1 , 2. Then (G∗, Ω∗),T1, T 2, gap 1, gap 2, and S(s) satisfy Lemma 6.26. Thus we derive the existence of disjoint intervals 

F1 ⊆ [1 u, s u] and F2 ⊆ [1 w, t w] – note that T1 = {u1u , . . . , u tu } and T2 = {w1w , . . . , w sw } – of size at least f6.25 (k, d ) + 1 such that 90 i) {ui | i ∈ F1 ∪ F2} ∩ (gap 1 ∪ gap 2) = ∅, and ii) there is S′ ⊆ S (S) of size f6.25 (k, d ) + 1 such that every path in S′ has one endpoint in {ui | i ∈ F1} and the other in {ui | i ∈ F2}.Finally, i) implies that F1 ⊆ [ℓ] and ii ) implies that F2 ⊆ [p]

Thus (G, T ), L, c 1, c 2, S′, α 1, α 2, F 1, F 2 satisfy the assumptions of Theorem 6.25, and hence |S ′| ≤ 

f6.25 (k, d ) as a contradiction to ii ). This concludes the proof. 

6.6 Embedding the instance 

We are ready to prove Theorem 6.4 by combining Theorems 6.5, 6.27 and 6.28. For simplicity we extend the definition of vitality of linkages to sets of internally disjoint paths as follows. Let G be a graph and S a set of internally disjoint paths in G. Recall that 

τ (S) := {(u, v ) | a path in S had endpoints u and v} is a multiset. Then we call S vital in G if for every set of internally disjoint paths S∗ with τ (S∗) = τ (S) it holds S∗ = S.

Proof of Theorem 6.4. Let t, ξ, g, k ∈ N and d ≥ 1. Let Σ be a surface of genus g. Let 

cycles (k, d, t ) := f6.27 (k, d + 1) + t + 2 , then cycles (k, d, t ) ∈ poly (k + t) · 2poly (d) by definition 14 .Let (G, T ) be a k-annotated graph such that (i) there exists a cycles (k, d, t)-locus (ρ, M ) of (G, T ) in Σ such that ρ has at most ξ vortices, and is d-stuffed with gap at most d, and (ii) there exists a vital T -linkage L in G.In a first step we “exhaust the instance” using Theorem 6.5, in particular we derive the existence of a k-annotated graph (G′, T ) such that G′ is a minor of G together with (1) a vital T -linkage L′ with τ (L′) = τ (L),

(2) a (cycles (k, d, t) − 1) -locus (ρ′, M ′) of (G′, T ) in Σ where M ′ is tight and ρ′ is a Σ-skeleton of G′,

(3) Let C∗ ⊆ C(ρ) be the set of vortices of ρ, then C∗ is also the set vortices of ρ′ satisfying 

Nρ′ (c) = Nρ(c) for all c ∈ C∗, ρ ′ is properly d-linked with gap at most d, ⋃ 

> c∈C∗

σρ′ (c) ∩ 

> ⋃

M ′ = ∅, and (4) (G′, T ), L′, (ρ′, M ′) is exhausted. Let ω := cycles (k, d, t)−1 and let M ′ := ⟨C1, . . . , C ω⟩ be the respective concentric cycles. Let S(L′)

denote the segments of L′. Combining (1) − (4) and ω > f 6.27 (k, d + 1) + t, Theorem 6.27 implies that 

(⋆) for every simple loop S of S(L′) and for every i ∈ [t] it holds V (S) ∩ V (Ci) = ∅.Let fat (k, d ) := f6.28 (k, d + 1) , then fat (k, d ) ∈ poly (k) · 2poly (d). Let S be a segment of L′ that is not a simple loop, then we define S(S) ⊆ S (L′) to be the set of all segments of L′ that are 

ρ′-homotopic to S. Combining (1) − (4) – the size of the locus is not needed – and the definition of fat (k, d ) we derive that |S (S)| < fat (k, d ) by Theorem 6.28. Summarizing the above we derive 

(⋆⋆ ) Let S ∈ S (L′) be a segment of L′ that is not a simple loop, then |S (S)| < fat (k, d ).By Lemma 3.2 we derive that there are at most δ(ξ, g ) := max (4 ξ + 6 g − 6, 3) different ρ′-homotopy types for segments of L′; cap all boundary components of Σ (if they exist) then delete  

> 14 In fact it is linear in t.

91 the vortices to produce the respective boundary components, then this follows by definition of 

ρ′-homotopy. In particular together with (⋆⋆ ) we conclude the following: Let S∗ ⊆ S (L′) be maximal such that every segment in S∗ is not a simple loop. 

(⋆ ⋆ ⋆ ) There are at most δ(ξ, g )·fat (k, d ) segments of S(L′) that are not simple loops. In particular 

|S ∗| ≤ δ(ξ, g ) · fat (k, d ).Note that every path in S∗ is a link or a non-simple loop. Let E′ := E(⋃ S∗) ∪ E(⋃ti=1 Ci).Let G∗ be obtained from G by deleting all edges in E(G) \ E′ and subsequently deleting all isolated vertices. We derive the following; recall that C∗ are the vortices of ρ′.

Claim 6.28.1 . Let v ∈ V (G∗) ∩ V (⋃ 

> c∈C∗

σρ′ (c)) , Then v ∈ V (⋃ S∗) ∩ ⋃ 

> c∈C∗

N (c). Furthermore, 

E(⋃ 

> c∈C∗

σρ′ (c)) = ∅.

Proof of claim. To see this note that ⋃ti=1 Ci is disjoint from V (⋃ 

> c∈C∗

σρ(c)) by (3), we derive that v must be adjacent to some edge in E(⋃ S∗). Since S∗ ⊆ S (L′) are segments, Definition 6.10 implies that only their endpoints may be part of ⋃ 

> c∈C∗

σρ(c) and if so they are nodes of the vortex cells. This concludes the proof of the first part; the second part follows immediately by construction and the fact that no edge of a graph of a vortex cell is part of E′. ⊣

Let T ∗ be the set of endpoints of paths in S∗, then T ∗ ⊆ ⋃ 

> c∈C∗

N (c) by the previous claim. Since ρ′ is a Σ-skeleton the graph of every non-vortex cell of ρ′ is isomorphic to K2. Let ρ∗

be the rendition of G∗ obtained by deleting all the cells corresponding to edges of E(G) that were deleted in the construction of G∗. Let M ∗ := ⟨C1, . . . , C t⟩. We derive the following by construction. 

Claim 6.28.2 . (ρ∗, M ∗) is a t-locus of G∗ in Σ and ρ∗ is a Σ-skeleton. By Observation 6.11 S∗ is a set of internally disjoint paths and every endpoint of S∗ is part of at most two paths in S∗. We have the following. 

Claim 6.28.3 . S∗ is vital in G∗ and no path of S∗ is a simple loop. 

Proof of claim. If not, then there exists a set P of internally disjoint paths such that τ (S∗) = τ (P)

but P̸ = S∗, in particular we have |S ∗| = |P| since their “patterns” are multisets. Let β : S∗ → P 

be a bijection such that S ∈ S ∗ and β(S) have the same endpoints. Let ˜L′ be obtained from L′ by replacing for each L ∈ L ′ and S ∈ S ∗ with S ⊆ L, the subpath S

of L by β(S). By construction this is a linkage and it verifies τ ( ˜L′) = τ (L′) but ˜L′̸ = L′ refuting the vitality of L′.Finally no path of S∗ is a simple loop by construction. ⊣

Let bad (S∗) ⊆ T ∗ be the maximum set consisting of all those vertices in T ∗ that are adjacent to two paths in S∗. Let x ∈ bad (S∗). By construction of G∗, deg (x) = 2; let ux, xv ∈ E(G∗) be the two edges. We construct the split of G∗, S∗ and ρ∗ at x denoted by G∗

> x

, S∗

> x

, ρ ∗ 

> x

as follows. 

G∗

> x

: Let G∗ 

> x

be obtained from G∗ by introducing two fresh vertices x1, x 2 /∈ V (G∗), deleting x

from G∗ and adding the edges ux 1 and x2v.

S∗ 

> x

Let S1, S 2 ∈ S ∗ be the two paths that have x as an endpoint; without loss of generality let 

ux ∈ E(S1) and xv ∈ E(S2). Let ˜S1 be obtained from S1 by replacing the edge ux with 92 ux 1 and let ˜S2 be obtained from S2 by replacing the edge xv with vx 2. Clearly ˜S1 and ˜S2

are paths in G∗

> x

. Moreover they are disjoint, for otherwise S1 ∪ S2 is a cycle in G∗ and hence in G′, as opposed to L′ being a linkage. In particular S∗ 

> x

is an internally disjoint linkage. 

ρ∗

> x

: Since x ∈ T ∗, it is a node of some vortex cell c ∈ C∗. Let cu, c v ∈ C(ρ∗) be the cells whose graphs contain ux and xv respectively; they are distinct since ρ∗ is a Σ-skeleton, and they are not vortices by Claim 6.28.1. Define ρ∗ 

> x

to agree with ρ∗ on cells C(ρ∗) \ { cu, c v, c },

and subsequently drawing x1, x 2 on the boundary of c – thus changing the vortex cell 

c to a new cell cx with one more node – and slightly shift the cells cu, c v so that they are disjoint, the first containing x1 and the second x2 as a node. This is clearly feasible: One way to see this is by taking a small disc ∆ϵ ⊊ Σ centred at the node x, such that the disc contains no other node of ρ∗. Let ζ1, ζ 2 be the two intersection points of the boundary of ∆ϵ and the boundary of c. Finally define πρ∗ 

> x

(ζi) = xi – possibly renaming 

ζ1, ζ 2 – such that the curve γux between u and x1 on Σ and the curve γxv between v

and x2 do not intersect. Then let ˜c′

> u

, ˜c′ 

> v

be disjoint discs, internally disjoint from all cells 

C(ρ∗) \ { cu, c v}, the first containing γux and intersecting it exactly at its endpoints u, ζ 1,

the second containing γxv and intersecting it exactly at its endpoints v, ζ 2. Finally delete 

cu, c v and let c′ 

> u

:= ˜c′ 

> u

\ { u, ζ 1} and c′ 

> v

:= ˜c′ 

> v

\ { v, ζ 2}. Define σρx (c′

> u

) as the graph consisting solely of the edge ux 1 and σρx (c′

> v

) as the graph consisting solely of the edge x2v. This concludes the construction. By construction of G∗

> x

, S∗

> x

, and ρ∗ 

> x

we derive the following. 

Claim 6.28.4 . Let T ∗ 

> x

be the set of endpoints of S∗

> x

. Then (ρ∗

> x

, M ∗) is a t-locus of (G∗

> x

, T ∗ 

> x

) in Σ

such that ρ∗ 

> x

is a Σ-skeleton. Furthermore |T ∗ 

> x

| = |T ∗| + 1 , |bad (S∗

> x

)| < bad (S∗) and S∗ 

> x

is vital in G∗ 

> x

admitting no simple loop. Let P1, P 2 ∈ S ∗ then there exist ˜P1, ˜P2 ∈ S ∗ 

> x

where ˜Pi = Pi if Pi /∈ { S1, S 2} and ˜Pi = ˜Sj if 

Pi = Sj for i, j ∈ { 1, 2} (and vice versa). Furthermore, P1, P 2 are ρ∗-homotopic if and only if 

˜P1, ˜P2 are ρ∗

> x

-homotopic. 

Proof of claim. By construction ρ∗ 

> x

is a blank and stretched Σ-skeleton of (G∗

> x

, T ∗ 

> x

). Clearly 

⋃ti=1 Ci ⊆ G∗ 

> x

since T ∗ ∩ V (⋃ti=1 Ci) = ∅. Together with Claim 6.28.2 we derive that (ρ∗

> x

, M ∗) is a t-locus of (G∗, T ∗) in Σ.The claims |T ∗ 

> x

| = |T ∗| + 1 and |bad (S∗

> x

)| < bad (S∗) follow by construction of S∗

> x

, since T ∗ 

> x

=(T ∗ ∪ { x1, x 2}) \ { x}. Further x1, x 2 /∈ bad (S∗

> x

) whence bad (S∗

> x

) ⊊ bad (S∗) deriving said claim. To see that S∗ 

> x

is vital in G∗

> x

, note that S∗ is vital in G∗ by Claim 6.28.3. Using analogous arguments as usual we derive that if S∗ 

> x

is not vital, then S∗ was not via “gluing” the unique paths of S∗ 

> x

containing x1, x 2 by identifying both with x in G∗.Furthermore note that if S∗ 

> x

contains a simple loop S, then β−1(S) must be a simple loop. And finally note that the trace of ˜Si is homotopic to the trace of Si by construction, deriving the last part of the claim (the first half of which follows by construction). This concludes the proof. ⊣

Define terminals (k, ξ, d, g ) := 4 δ(ξ, g ) · fat (k, d ), then by definition we have terminals (k, ξ, d, g ) ∈

poly (k + ξ + g) · 2poly (d)15 .    

> 15 The dependency on ξand gis actually linear.

93 Iteratively splitting G∗, S∗ and ρ∗ for every vertex in bad (S∗) and applying Claim 6.28.4 we derive the following. 

Claim 6.28.5 . There exists an annotated graph ( ˜G∗, ˜T ∗) and t-locus ( ˜ρ∗, M ∗) of ( ˜G∗, ˜T ∗) in Σ

with a vital ˜T ∗-linkage ˜S∗ such that 

(a) ˜ ρ∗ is a Σ-skeleton, and (G∗, ˜T ∗), ˜S∗, (˜ ρ∗, M ∗) is exhausted, 

(b) all vortices c ∈ C(˜ ρ∗) satisfy σ(C) = ( N (c), ∅),

(c) let L ∈ ˜S∗, then L is either a non-simple loop or a link, 

(d) let P ∈ ˜S∗ be a non-simple loop or a link in G∗, and let ˜S∗(P ) ⊆ ˜S∗ be the maximum size linkage of paths ρ-homotopic to P . Then | ˜S∗(P )| ≤ fat (k, d ).

(e) | ˜T ∗| ≤ terminals (k, ξ, d, g )

Proof of claim. Let ˜G∗, ˜S∗, ˜ρ∗ be obtained by iteratively splitting G∗, S∗, ρ ∗ at the vertices 

bad (S∗). Then (b) is clear by construction, since there are no edges left in the graphs of vortices, and we deleted all isolated vertices when constructing G∗.By Claim 6.28.4 we derive that ˜S∗ is a vital linkage in ˜G∗ (note that there are no “bad” vertices left, i.e., bad ( ˜S∗) = ∅). Since there were no simple loops in S∗, and splitting never produced new simple loops by Claim 6.28.4, we derive that ˜S∗ admits no simple loop, in particular we derive (c).Let ˜T ∗ be the set of endpoints of paths in ˜S∗, again by repeated application of Claim 6.28.4 we derive that ( ˜ρ∗, M ∗) is a t-locus of ( ˜G∗, ˜T ∗) in Σ and ˜ρ∗ is a Σ-skeleton. Altogether we derive 

(a), where exhaustedness follows by construction. To see (d) note that Claim 6.28.4 implies that if two paths of S∗ are ρ∗-homotopic, then the unique resulting paths following the splitting construction remain ˜ρ∗ homotopic. Finally | ˜T ∗| ≤ 2|T ∗| and |T ∗| ≤ 2|S ∗| which by (⋆ ⋆ ⋆ ) implies 

| ˜T ∗| ≤ 4δ(ξ, g ) · fat (k, d ).

In particular | ˜T ∗| ≤ terminals (k, ξ, d, g ) concluding (e).Altogether this concludes the proof of the claim. ⊣

Finally the instance resulting from Claim 6.28.5 is as desired, concluding the proof. We have the following corollary; given a surface Σ possibly with boundary we define ˆΣ to be the surface without boundary obtained from Σ by capping all the holes of Σ with discs. 

Corollary 6.29. There exist two functions terminals 6.29 : N4 → N and cycles 6.29 : N3 → N such that the following holds. Let t, ξ, g, k ∈ N and d ≥ 1. Let Σ be a surface of genus g and let (G, T ) be a k-annotated graph such that  

> •

there exists a cycles 6.29 (k, d, t )-locus (ρ, M ) of (G, T ) in Σ such that ρ is d-stuffed with gap at most d and has at most ξ vortices, and  

> •

there exists a vital T -linkage in G.Then there exists a surface Σ∗, a terminals 6.29 (k, ξ, d, g )-annotated graph (G′, T ′), a vital T ′-linkage L′, a disc ∆ ⊆ Σ∗ disjoint from bd (Σ ∗), a sequence of cycles C = ⟨C1, . . . , C t⟩ and an 94 embedding ψ : V (G) ∪ E(G) → Σ∗ with ψ(Ci) ⊆ ∆ for every i ∈ [t] such that the cycles C are concentric with respect to ψ, satisfying the following: i) ˆΣ∗ ∼= ˆΣ and Σ∗ has at most ξ boundary components, ii) G′ = ⋃ C ∪ L ′,

iii) ψ(T ′) is contained in bd (Σ ∗), and iv) let L ∈ L ′, then L is internally disjoint from bd (Σ ∗).Moreover, terminals 6.29 (k, ξ, d, g ) ∈ poly (k + ξ + g)·2poly (d) and cycles 6.29 (k, d, t ) ∈ poly (k + t)·

2poly (d).

# 7 Eliminating apices and building nests 

While Proposition 3.8 already guarantees both a large wall grounded in the rendition together with private nests for each vortex, those nests are not large enough for us to apply Theorem 5.8. This is fundamentally a consequence of the way Proposition 3.8 – and more generally the main results in [GSW25] – is proven and how the vortex nests are created. The goal of this section is to show that we are able to surround the vortices with disjoint nests of essentially arbitrary size, with the depth of their vortices being our goal size. The main tools in this section are inspired by results due to Diestel, Kawarabayashi, Müller, and Wollan [DKMW12]. Since their results produce several annoying problems for us, which we will explain in detail in a moment, we have to do quite a bit of work to fix them up for our purposes. 

Representativity and distance in a rendition. We start by generalising the notion of represen-tativity to renditions in a natural way and introduce a measure for distance between nodes of a rendition. Let Σ be a surface and let ρ be a Σ-rendition of a graph G. Then we let Gρ be the graph on the vertex set N (ρ) and with the following edges  

> •

for each non-vortex cell c ∈ C(ρ), add all edges between distinct vertices in N (c), and  

> •

for each vortex, with (H, Ω) being its society and with Ω = ⟨v1, . . . , v k⟩, we introduce the edges vivi+1 for all i ∈ [k − 1] and the edge vkv1.16 

We then define an embedding ψρ of Gρ on Σ by drawing N (ρ) onto Σ exactly as ρ does and for each edge uv ∈ E(Gρ) choosing a cell c ∈ C(ρ) such that c ∈ N (c), letting T be the closure of a component of bd (c) − { u, v } for which T is disjoint from N (c) \ { u, v } but contains both u and 

v, and setting ψ(uv ) = T . The representativity of ρ is then simply the representativity of ψρ.Furthermore, given two distinct vertices u, v ∈ N (ρ), the distance between u and v in ρ is the minimum number of nodes of ρ that a ρ-aligned curve ending in u and v contains. Given two vortices c1, c 2 with vortex societies (H1, Ω1), (H2, Ω2), the distance between c1 and c2 in ρ is the minimum distance between a vertex in V (Ω 1) and a vertex in V (Ω 2) in ρ.Given an embedding ψρ derived from a rendition ρ of a graph G in a surface Σ, we want to translate a curve T in Σ that meets ψρ only in the vertices of G into what should be a ρ-aligned curve. It is easy to see that T can be shifted in Σ such that it meets none of the cells of ρ.However, if T passes through the interior of a vortex c of ρ, there may be no way to simply shift 

T to avoid c. Nonetheless, we want to use such a curve T to cut apart our surface in this section.   

> 16 We delete all parallel edges after this process to turn Gρinto a simple graph.

95 We call a curve in Σ that meets ρ only in nodes and the interior of vortices of ρ a ρ-conformal curve . The following is immediate from our discussion. 

Observation 7.1. Given an embedding ψρ of G with representativity at most r derived from a rendition ρ of G in a surface Σ, then for any curve T that meets ψρ only in V (G) there exists a ρ-conformal curve T ′ such that T ∩ V (G) = T ′ ∩ V (G), the curve T ′ intersects none of the non-vortex cells of ρ, and T ′ intersects a vortex of ρ if and only if T intersects said vortex. We will need a small technical result on curves witnessing low representativity from [DKMW12]. For a graph G with an embedding ψ in a surface Σ, a face f of ψ, and a closed curve C, let 

comp (C, f ) denote the number of components of C ∩ f .

Proposition 7.2 (Diestel et al. [DKMW12]) . Let G be a graph with an embedding ψ in a surface Σ of positive genus and let F be the set of faces of ψ. For a positive integer r, consider all genus-reducing curves C that meet ψ only in ψ(V (G)) and such that |ψ(V (G)) ∩ C| < r . Let 

C be chosen such that ∑  

> f∈F

comp (C, f ) is minimal. Then comp (C, f ) ≤ 1 for all f ∈ F .What we would love to do at this point is to simply import the Lemmas 14 and 16 from [DKMW12] which first fuse together vortices that are close together and then increase the representativity of the surface our rendition is working in. However, both of their lemmas introduce vertices that must be deleted – commonly called apices – which have neighbours outside of the vortices of the established rendition. Such apices are called major apices .17 This causes immense problems for us, because we desperately need all newly introduced apices to only have neighbours in vortices. As such, we will have to go through a much more considerable effort than Diestel et al. to establish our versions of their lemmas. In particular, we make the following adjustments: We will only work on graphs which already host a linkage whose vitality we are trying to preserve. In the course of both of our modifications, we will actually change the graph, the rendition, and the linkage we are working on to produce a new instance with more convenient properties for us. The vortices we create throughout will be more complicated than what Diestel et al. find, but in exchange we will have more control over the apices that get created. 

7.1 Joining close vortices 

Our first goal will be to join together vortices in a rendition which are not very far apart. This is dealt with in Lemma 14 of [DKMW12], where the nodes on the curve that shows that the two vortices are not far from each other are simply taken to be apices. For us this is not an option and we will have to make some more involved modifications to our graph. 

Lemma 7.3. Let b, d, r be positive integers. Let Σ be a surface, let ρ be a Σ-rendition with depth d and breadth b of a graph G, let L be a linkage in G, and let c1, c 2 be two distinct   

> 17 Notably we are being a bit vague here by what we mean by “neighbours outside of vortices”. Our requirements are actually slightly more lax than what is usually required. In the broader context of Graph Minor Structure Theory an apex is considered major if it sees any node of the rendition or has a neighbour in a non-vortex cell of said rendition. In our case, we will actually allow apices that have neighbours on the boundary of vortices, which are nodes of the rendition.

96 vortices in ρ such that there exists a ρ-aligned bd (c1)-bd (c2)-curve T that is otherwise disjoint from all vortices of ρ such that |T ∩ N (ρ)| ≤ r.Then there exists a set A ⊆ V (G) with |A| ≤ 2d, a set B with |B| = 2 |T ∩ N (ρ)|, a graph G′, alinkage L′ in G′, a Σ-rendition ρ′ of G′ with breadth b − 1, and a ρ′-aligned disc ∆ such that i) V (G′) = ( V (G) ∪ B) \ (A ∪ (T ∩ N (ρ))) ,

ii) c1 ∪ c2 ⊆ ∆,

iii) ρ and ρ′ agree on G−(A∪(T ∩N (ρ)) ∪{ σρ(c)−Nρ(c) : c ∈ C(ρ) and (c\bd (c)) ∩∆̸ = ∅} ),

iv) ∆ is a vortex of ρ′ with the vortex society (H, Ω) of depth at most 2 plus the sum of the depths of the vortex societies of c1 and c2,

v) |L ′| ≤ |L| + r, 

vi) if S are the endpoints of L, then the endpoints of L′ lie in S ∪ V (H), and vii) if L is vital in G, then L′ is vital in G′.

Proof. We let (G1, Ω1) be the c1-society and (G2, Ω2) be the c2-society both with depth at most 

d, where Ω1 = ⟨v1, . . . , v n⟩ and Ω2 = ⟨w1, . . . , w m⟩. By slightly adjusting T we may assume that the endpoints of T are vertices vh and wℓ, so that T ∩ c1 = {vh} and T ∩ c2 = {wℓ} for some indices k ∈ [n] and ℓ ∈ [m]. Let T ′ = N (ρ) ∩ T and let ψ = ⟨vh = x1, x 2, . . . , x r′ = wℓ⟩ be the linear ordering of the vertices in T ′ obtained by traversing T starting from vh towards wℓ.We now fatten T slightly to a disc D such that we maintain that c̸ ⊆ D for all c ∈ C(ρ) and 

bd (D)\(c1∪c2) has exactly two components Y1, Y 2. Then we obtain a closed disc ∆ := cl (D∪c1∪c2)

such that ∆ ∩ N (ρ) \ T ′ = ( V (Ω 1) ∪ V (Ω 2)) \ { vk, w ℓ}. By reindexing if necessary, we may assume that the orientations of bd (∆) induced by V (Ω 1) \ { vk} and V (Ω 2) \ { wℓ} agree. At this point we must deviate from the proof of Lemma 14 in [DKMW12] as they now use 

∆ as the new vortex and T ′ as part of the apices. This however will mean that T ′ has many neighbours outside of vortices, namely all neighbouring nodes. To avoid this, we will now copy 

T ′ twice and place the copies onto Y1 and Y2, adjusting ρ mildly to fit this new graph. Let T1, T 2 be two disjoint copies of T ′, let πi : Ti → T ′ be a bijection identifying these copies for each i ∈ [2] , and let B = T1 ∪ T2 for later reference. Further, let Γ be the painting in ρ. We adjust Γ and G as follows for both i ∈ [2] . The nodes corresponding to T ′ are removed from 

Γ and replaced by T1 ∪ T2. Similarly, to define G∗ we first remove T ′ and then add T1 ∪ T2,

with additional edges to be determined. We then place Ti onto Yi according to πi in the order prescribed by ψ. For each c ∈ C(ρ) \ { c1, c 2} and i ∈ [2] such that c ∩ Ti̸ = ∅ we note that 

c ∩ T3−i = ∅ and accordingly, we may deform c slightly such that its closure intersects Ti only in π−1 

> i

(Nρ(c)) . Furthermore, for each v ∈ σρ(c) such that there exists a u ∈ Nρ(c) ∩ T ′, we introduce the edge vπ −1 

> i

(u) to G∗. This finalises our definition of G∗ and we can now also add 

∆ as a new vortex to Γ. The resulting painting lets us derive a rendition ρ∗ of G∗ in Σ for which V (σρ∗ (∆)) = V (σρ(c1) ∪ σρ(c2)) ∪ T1 ∪ T2. In particular, we make our choices such that 

vh−1, v h, π −11 (x2) (where we let vh−1 be vh if h = 1 ) are seen in this order on bd (∆) without interruptions by other nodes in N (ρ∗).We then modify the linkage L in G into a linkage L∗ in G∗ as follows (see Figure 18 for an illustration): If V (P ) ∩ T ′ = ∅, we add P to L∗. Suppose instead that P contains a vertex v ∈ T ′.Then let Pv be the component of P [T ′] that contains v. 

> •

If Pv = P we remove P from L and add the paths P1, P 2 derived by replacing each 

x ∈ V (P ) with π−1 

> i

(x) for each i ∈ [2] .97 • Should we have Pv̸ = P, but Pv still contains an endpoint of P, let u be the other endpoint of 

Pv with uu ′ ∈ E(P ) \ E(Pv). Then there exists a unique i ∈ [2] such that π−1 

> i

(u)u′ ∈ E(G∗)

and given this i, we replace all vertices in Pv with their copies from Ti and repeat the process we are outlining here on the new path until it is disjoint from T ′. Furthermore, we add the path derived from Pv by replacing all vertices in Pv with their copies from T3−i to 

L∗.

• Finally, let u and w be the endpoints of Pv with uu ′, ww ′ ∈ E(P ) \ E(Pv). If there exists an i ∈ [2] such that π−1 

> i

(u)u′, π −1 

> i

(w)w′ ∈ E(G∗), replace all vertices in Pv with their copies from Ti and repeat this process on the resulting path, and add the path derived from Pv by replacing all of its vertices with their copies from T3−i to L∗.Otherwise, let i, j ∈ [2] be distinct such that π−1 

> i

(u)u′, π −1 

> j

(w)w′ ∈ E(G∗). We then split 

P into two paths Pu, P w with Pu ∩ Pw = Pv such that u is an endpoint of Pu and w is an endpoint of Pw. Afterwards, we replace all vertices of Pv in Pu by their copies from Ti and proceed analogously from Pw. The process is then repeated on Pu and Pw.Though the definition is somewhat involved, it is not hard to see that if L was vital in G, then 

L∗ is vital in G∗. In particular, this increases the order of L∗ by at most r compared to L.               

> T
> vh
> P
> u
> u′
> wℓ
> a) b)
> T1
> T2
> P1
> P2
> π−11(vh)
> π−12(vh)
> u′
> π−11(u)
> π−11(wℓ)
> π−12(wℓ)a) b)
> u
> u′
> w
> w′
> u
> u′w
> w′
> c) d) π−11(u)
> u′
> π−11(w)
> w′
> π−11(u)
> u′
> π−12(w)
> w′
> c) d)

Figure 18: An illustration of how to split paths of a vital linkage at a curve. Following our arguments in the proof of Lemma 7.3, the part of the figure labelled a) shows how to proceed if Pv = P . The construction shown with the label b) corresponds to the case in which exactly one endpoint of P is found in Pv. The remaining two cases on the bottom show how to proceed if neither endpoint of P is found in Pv. Note that P

may intersect T in several disjoint segments, which is not depicted here and is the cause for us having to repeat the splitting process. 98 To check the depth of ρ∗ we first note that for all vortices that ρ and ρ∗ share, which is every vortex of ρ∗ except for ∆, the depth cannot have changed since we did not modify that part of the graph. Thus we now must describe how to derive an appropriate society for ∆ from the information we have and explain with it has bounded depth. The graph σρ∗ (∆) is derived by taking σρ(c1) ∪ σρ(c2), replacing vh, v ℓ with its two copies from T1 ∪ T2 whilst retaining the original neighbourhood of vh and vℓ, and then adding (T1 ∪

T2) \ { π−11 (vh), π −12 (vh), π −11 (vℓ), π −12 (vℓ)} as isolated vertices. The cyclic ordering defining the corresponding society is then simply 

Ω′ := ⟨vh+1 , . . . , v n, v 1, . . . , v h−1, π −11 (vh), x 12, . . . , x 1

> r′−1

, π −11 (wℓ),wℓ+1 , . . . , w m, w 1, . . . , w ℓ−1, π −12 (wℓ), x 2

> r′−1

, . . . , x 22, π −12 (vh)⟩.

Since we effectively only added a single vertex to both σρ(c1) and σρ(c2) it is easy to see that the depth of (σρ(∆) , Ω′) is at most the sum of the depths of c1 and c2 plus 2, as the largest transaction in (σρ(∆) , Ω′) at worst consists of a large transaction in (G1, Ω1), another large transaction in (G2, Ω2), and two extra paths that may appear due to us copying vh and vℓ.The first four items of our lemma are now easy to confirm according to our construction with G∗

being the final graph we return together with the rendition ρ∗. Note that our construction also immediately shows that the breadth of ρ∗ is one less than the breadth of ρ. The fact that all new endpoints that L∗ added lie in V (σρ∗ (∆)) is also an easy consequence of our construction. Finally, the last point was already explicitly guaranteed earlier during the construction of L∗.

7.2 Pumping up the representativity 

Our second goal of this section is to pump up the representativity of the rendition we are dealing with. This process is taken care of by Lemma 16 in [DKMW12]. As noted earlier, we will also have to modify this lemma and its proof quite a bit to make it work for our purposes. In the statement we discuss the existence of two surfaces independent of what kind of genus-reducing curve we find, but we will only need more than one surface if the genus-reducing curve is separating. For the other cases we will let the pairs of objects be equal. 

Lemma 7.4. Let k, t, r, r ′, b, d, w with r′ ≥ r and w ≥ 2r be positive integers. Let Σ be a surface of positive genus, let G be a graph with a Σ-rendition ρ with depth d, breadth b, and the property that any two vortices have distance at least r′, and let L be a linkage in G. Furthermore, there exists a closed, ρ-aligned disc ∆M ⊆ Σ and a flat w-mesh M in G such that the trace of M is found in ∆M and ∆M is disjoint from all vortices in ρ.If the representativity of ρ is less than r, then there exist graphs G1, G 2, surfaces Σ1, Σ2, linkages 

L1, L2, a Σ1-rendition ρ1 of G1, and a Σ2-rendition ρ2 of G2, such that for both i ∈ [2] :i) the genus of Σi is less than the genus of Σ,

ii) the breadth of ρi is at most b + 2 ,

iii) the depth of ρi is at most d + 2 ,

iv) |L i| ≤ |L| + r + 6 d, 

v) if L is vital, then Li is vital, and 99 vi) there exists a j ∈ [2] , a (w − 2r)-mesh M ′ ⊆ M, and a closed, ρj -aligned disc ∆′ ⊆ Σj ,

such that M ′ is a flat mesh in ρj , the trace of M ′ in ρj is contained in ∆′, and all vortices of ρj are disjoint from ∆′.

Proof. As ρ has representativity less than r, we may let T be a closed, ρ-conformal, genus-reducing curve such that |T ∩ N (ρ)| is minimal. Note that thanks to Proposition 7.2, we know that T intersects each vortex of ρ in at most one component. Furthermore, since r′ ≥ r, we know that T intersects at most one vortex c of ρ and if T intersects Nρ(c), then either |Nρ(c) ∩ T | = 1 

and T does not intersect c itself – it thus just “grazes” c – or |Nρ(c) ∩ T | = 2 and T ∩ c consists of a single component. We note that for the sake of this proof, we can ignore the first option. We now have a few cases to distinguish: First of all, we are interested in whether T is a separating curve or a non-separating curve. If T is non-separating, we distinguish further between the cases in which Σ − T has two open holes and the case in which it has only one open hole. 

T is separating. We first suppose that there exists a vortex c in ρ such that T ∩ c is non-empty and thus consists of a single component. The other case in which T intersects no vortices essentially just uses a subset of the arguments we will now present and thus we will not discuss it explicitly. Let ⟨X1, . . . , X k⟩ be a linear decomposition of the vortex society (H, Ψ) of c with at most d, with Ψ = ⟨v1, . . . , v k⟩. Furthermore, let Nρ(c) ∩ T = {vℓ, v h}, chosen such that ℓ < h .Let Y ℓ = Xℓ ∩ Xℓ+1 and, if h̸ = k we let Y h = Yh ∩ Yh+1 and otherwise Y h = {vh}. Then there exists a separation (A1, A 2) in G such that  

> •

A1 ∩ A2 = ( T ∩ N (ρ)) ∪ Y ℓ ∪ Y h, 

> •

for all cells c′ ∈ C(ρ) \ { c}, we have σρ(c′) ⊆ G[A1] or σρ(c′) ⊆ G[A2], 

> •

for i ∈ [ℓ + 1 , h ], we have Xi ⊆ Ai, and  

> •

for i ∈ [ℓ] ∪ [h + 1 , k ], we have Xi ⊆ A2.Let Σ1, Σ2 be the result of capping the boundaries of the two components of Σ − T with closed discs D1, D 2, chosen such that the restriction ρ′ 

> i

of ρ to G[Ai] − (V (H) \ Nρ(c)) is a Σi-rendition for both i ∈ [2] . We then let ∆i = Di ∪ (c ∩ Σi) be a new vortex we introduce to ρ′ 

> i

to create 

ρi for each i ∈ [2] . Further, let ⟨u1 = vh, . . . , u l = vℓ⟩ be an ordering of the nodes on T by traversing T from vh to vℓ.The vortex society of ∆1 is then simply (H1 := H[⋃hi=ℓ+1 Xi] ∪ (T ∩ N (ρ), ∅), Ω1), where 

Ω1 := ⟨vℓ, v ℓ+1 , . . . , v h, u 2, . . . , u l−1⟩.

Similarly, the vortex society of ∆2 is (H2 := H[⋃ 

> i∈[ℓ]∪[h+1 ,k ]

Xi] ∪ (T ∩ N (ρ), ∅), Ω2), where 

Ω2 := ⟨vℓ, v ℓ−1, . . . , v 1, v k, v k−1, . . . , v h, u 2, . . . , u l−1⟩.

For both of our new vortices, we observe that their depth is at most the depth of (H, Ψ) .We have therefore already guaranteed the first, second, and third points of our statement. The last point is then easily verified by noting that T cannot see more than the outermost r vertical and horizontal paths of the mesh M and thus we can choose a (w − 2r)-submesh M ′ ⊆ M that has the appropriate properties and will necessarily be found either in ρ1 or ρ2.100 Finally, we let L1 = L ∩ G[A1] and let L2 = L ∩ G[A2]. Accordingly, due to (A1, A 2) being a separation in G, |L 1| ≤ |L| + r + 2 d and |L 2| ≤ |L| + r + 2 d, since |S| ≤ 2d. By Proposition 3.6, we can therefore also ensure the fourth and fifth item of our statement. 

T is non-separating and creates two open holes. We let c, ⟨X1, . . . , X k⟩, (H, Ψ) , Ψ = 

⟨v1, . . . , v k⟩, and Nρ(c) ∩ T = {vℓ, v h}, with ℓ < h, be defined as above. Choose some ϵ such that the ϵ-region rϵ(p),Σ ⊆ Σ around each point p ∈ T is a disc. Let B1, B 2

be the two boundaries of Σ − T . We create two disjoint copies T1, T 2 of T and glue Ti onto Bi

for both i ∈ [2] to define the new surface Σ′ such that for both i ∈ [2] there exists a bijection 

πi : T → Ti with rϵ, Σ′ (p) \ Ti ⊆ rϵ, Σ(π−1 

> i

(p)) for all p ∈ Ti. (See Figure 19 for an illustration of this procedure.) Note that the genus of Σ′ is less than the genus of Σ. Since T is ρ-aligned and the cells of ρ explicitly do not contain the nodes of ρ, we know that T does not touch the cells of 

ρ and thus all cells of the painting Γ in ρ are found in Σ′. Let N = T ∩ N (ρ) be the nodes of ρ

found in T and let N1, N 2 be two disjoint copies of N such that Ni ⊆ Ti and v = π−1 

> i

(v) for all 

v ∈ N and i ∈ [2] . We then extend the drawing Γ′ by replacing N with N1 ∪ N2 in the natural way according to π1 and π2. This also gives a natural definition of a graph G′ associated with this modification. 

T T1 T2

Figure 19: An illustration of the modification of Σ made to build two new boundaries when T is a non-separating curve that creates two new boundaries upon being removed. We now need to discuss how to modify ρ into a rendition ρ′ of G′ on the surface Σ′′ we get from 

Σ′ by capping the two holes bounded by T1 and T2 in Σ′ with disjoint open discs ∆′

> 1

, ∆′

> 2

. For both i ∈ [2] , let the closure ∆i of ∆′ 

> i

∪ c be the two new vortices which we wish to introduce. For all cells in ρ other than c, we can retain their placement and the definition of what part of the graph is assigned to them (up to the modifications π1 and π2 prescribe) to define ρ′. Note in particular that such cells are by definition disjoint from N and thus are still found within Σ′.This only leaves us to define what should be placed into ∆1 and ∆2.We can now proceed quite similarly to the construction in our previous case and in the proof of Lemma 7.3. There exists a separation (A1, A 2) in H such that A1 = ⋃hi=ℓ+1 Xi and A2 = 

> ⋃ℓi=1

Xi ∪ ⋃ki=h+1 Xi, with the set A1 ∩ A2 consisting of the sets Y ℓ = Xℓ ∩ Xℓ+1 and if h̸ = k, Y h = Xh ∩ Xh+1 and Y h = {vh} otherwise. Further, we let 

S1 := ( Y ℓ ∪ Y h) \ { vi : i ∈ [ℓ+, h − 1] },

let 

S2 := ( Y ℓ ∪ Y h) \ { vi : i ∈ [ℓ − 1] ∪ [h + 1 , k ]},

and let 

S := ( Y ℓ ∪ Y h) \ N (ρ).

101 We then let F be the set of edges in H with at least one edge incident to a vertex in Y ℓ ∪ Y h,

together with their counterparts translated through π1 and π2 if vh and vℓ are found in Y ℓ ∪ Y h.This allows us to define the graph H1 as the graph derived from (H[A1 \ S1] − F ) ∪ (π−11 (N ) \{π−11 (vℓ), π −11 (vh)}, ∅) by replacing vh by π−11 (vh) and replacing vℓ by π−11 (vℓ). Analogously, we define H2 by taking 

(H[A2 \ S2] − F ) ∪ (π−12 (N ) \ { π−12 (vℓ), π −12 (vh)}, ∅)

and replacing vh by π−12 (vh) and replacing vℓ by π−12 (vℓ).Let ⟨u1 = vh, u 2, . . . , u l = vℓ⟩ be an ordering of the nodes on T by traversing T from vh to vℓ

whilst avoiding the interior of c. Then we thus have 

Ω1 = ⟨π−11 (vℓ), v ℓ+1 , . . . , v h−1, π −11 (vh), π −11 (u2), . . . , π −11 (ul−1)⟩ and 

Ω2 = ⟨π−12 (vℓ), v ℓ−1, . . . , v 1, v k, v k−1, . . . , π −12 (vh), π −12 (u2), . . . , π −12 (ul1 )⟩.

Thus the appropriate vortex societies are (H1, Ω1) and (H2, Ω2). This leads to us ultimately defining a Σ′′ -rendition ρ′ of the graph (G′ − S) − F . As before the depth of these new societies is at most the depth of (H, Ψ) plus 1 due to the copied vertex. The first three points of our statement and the last one hold by construction for similar reasons as in our last case, where we set the pair of objects asked for in the statement to simply be two copies of what we defined here. We now want to split up L along N to derive a new linkage appropriate for G′. For this sake we perform the exact same modifications presented in the proof of Lemma 7.3, which we therefore do not repeat here, to derive a linkage L∗ from L that lives in G′, is vital in G′ if L was vital in G and has at most r more paths than L. This confirms the remaining two points of our statement. Furthermore, taking L′ := L∗ ∩ (( G′ − S) − F ), we quickly note that |L ′| ≤ |L| + r + 6 d. Thus, using Proposition 3.6, we can easily confirm the remaining two points of our statement. 

T is non-separating and creates a single open hole. The last remaining case is largely analogous to the previous one once we have appropriately split apart our surface. Once again assuming that T intersects some vortex c in a non-trivial component, we let (H, Ψ) , Ψ = ⟨v1, . . . , v k⟩, and 

Nρ(c) ∩ T = {vℓ, v h}, with ℓ < h, be defined as above. Let B be the unique boundary of Σ − T . We again choose ϵ as above and now define Σ′ by first splitting T at vℓ to create a curve L with endpoints s, t, with s = vℓ such that the immediate successor of s in L lies in c, creating two copies L1, L 2 of L, gluing these together at their endpoints to form the closed curve T ′′ , and attaching T ′′ onto B to form a new surface Σ′′ such that for both i ∈ [2] there exist a bijection πi : L → Li with rϵ, Σ′ (p) \ (L1 ∪ L2) ⊆ rϵ, Σ(π−1 

> i

(p)) 

for all p ∈ Li. Once again the genus of Σ′ is less than the genus of Σ. We then define the new graph G′ analogously to what we discussed above. Following this, we cap Σ′ with a disc ∆′ bounded by T ′′ , which yields the surface Σ′′ , and let 

∆ = ∆ ′ ∪ c be the new vortex we want to introduce. Again for all cells in ρ other than c, we can retain their placement and what σ assigns to them (up to the modifications π1 and π2 prescribe) to define ρ′, leaving only the contents of ∆ up in the air. 102 We can now follow the construction of the vortex society from our previous case quite closely. We define H∗ by taking H, replacing vℓ with its copies π−11 (vℓ), π −12 (vℓ) and vh with its copies 

π−11 (vh), π −12 (vh).Now the appropriate vortex society is (H∗ ∪ (π−11 (N ) ∪ π−12 (N ), ∅), Ψ′), where Ψ′ is derived from 

Ψ and L1 and L2, as follows: If the order of N according to L is ⟨u1 = vh, u 2, . . . , u l = vℓ⟩, then we have 

Ψ′ = ⟨π−11 (vℓ), v ℓ+1 , v ℓ+2 , . . . , v h−1, π −11 (vh) = π−11 (w2), π −11 (w3), . . . , π −11 (wl),π−12 (vℓ), v ℓ−1, v ℓ−2, . . . , v 1, v k, v k−1, . . . , v h+1 , π −12 (vh) = π−12 (w2), . . . , π −12 (wl)⟩.

Note that the depth of the vortex society of ∆ is at most the depth of the vortex society of c

plus 2. This ultimately defines ρ′ as a Σ′-rendition of G′ and the first four points as well as the last point of our statement holds for reasons analogous to our previous arguments. To capture the fourth and fifth points of the statement, we then modify L as in the previous cases and thus arrive at the conclusion of our proof. 

7.3 Building nests in renditions with large distances and high representativity 

Now that we can ensure that the representativity of our renditions is high and that any two vortices in them are at large distance with respect to each other, we need some tools to build nests around each of these vortices that will end up being stacked with respect to each other. We start with what can be considered the base case in which we have a rendition in the sphere. 

Lemma 7.5. Let d, k, s be positive integers with s being even. Let G be a graph with a sphere-rendition ρ such that any two vortices of ρ lie at distance at least sd + 3 and let c1, . . . , c k

be the vortices of ρ. Further, let there exists a disc ∆0 such that there exists a flat (2 sd )-wall W

in ρ whose trace is contained in ∆0 and ∆0 is disjoint from all vortices of ρ.Then there exist k sets of sd /2 tight, concentric cycles C1, . . . , Ck, with ∆i being the closed disc bounded by the trace of the inner cycle of Ci in ρ for each i ∈ [k], such that ci ⊆ ∆i and (Ci, c i)

and (Cj , c j ) are stacked for all distinct i, j ∈ [k].

Proof. Due to the presence of W, we can definitely find at least k sets of s′ := sd /2 concentric cycles C1, . . . , Ck, with ∆i defined as in our statement, in ρ such that ci ⊆ ∆i. In particular, we may choose all of these sets such that they are tight in ρ. For each i ∈ [k] let Ci = ⟨Ci

> 1

, . . . , C is′ ⟩,

which Ci 

> 1

being the innermost cycle of Ci.Suppose that there exist distinct i, j ∈ [k] and hi, h j ∈ [s′] such that V (Cihi ) ∩ V (Cjhj )̸ = ∅. Then let v ∈ V (Cihi ) ∩ V (Cjhj ) be a node of ρ and note that the tightness of both Ci and Cj implies that there exist ρ-aligned curves γi, γ j such that for both x ∈ { i, j } the curve γi ends in v and Nρ(cx)

and intersects at most hx + 1 nodes of ρ. Thus γi ∪ γj contain a ρ-aligned curve intersecting at most hi + hj + 2 ≤ 2sd /2 + 2 nodes of ρ and thus contradict the fact ci and cj lie at distance at least sd + 3 in ρ.Therefore, for any two distinct i, j ∈ [k] we have V (Ci) ∩ V (Cj ) = ∅. The fact that all our sets are now pairwise stacked then follows directly from standard considerations for the topology of the sphere. 103 Now that we have proven this base case, we note that the following result due to Mohar and Thomassen lifts the above lemma to graphs with a rendition in a surface of positive genus and high representativity. 

Proposition 7.6 (Mohar and Thomassen [MT01]) . Let d be a positive integer. Let G be a graph with an embedding ψ in a surface of positive genus and representativity at least 2d + 2 .Then for every face F of ψ there exists a set of d cycles C1, . . . , C d in G such that the Cd-disc ∆

contains f and C1, . . . , C d−1 are concentric in ∆.

Corollary 7.7. Let d, k, s be positive integers with s being even. Let G be a graph with a 

Σ-rendition ρ such that Σ has positive genus, any two vortices of ρ lie at distance at least sd + 3 ,

and ρ has representativity at least sd + 2 , and let c1, . . . , c k be the vortices of ρ.Then there exist k sets of sd /2 tight, concentric cycles C1, . . . , Ck, with ∆i being the closed disc bounded by the trace of the inner cycle of Ci in ρ for each i ∈ [k], such that ci ⊆ ∆i and (Ci, c i)

and (Cj , c j ) are stacked for all distinct i, j ∈ [k].

7.4 Reduction to graphs without apices 

Before we can prove the main result of this section, we need a way to produce a large mesh if our graph has high treewidth. The standard reference for this is the grid theorem [RS86,CC16,CT21]. Since we also exclude a clique as a minor, we can actually use slightly more optimised bounds from [GSTW26]. 

Proposition 7.8 (Gorsky, Stamoulis, Thilikos, and Wiederrecht [GSTW26]) . There exists a function grid 7.8 : N2 → N with grid (t, k ) ∈ O(t2k + t2304 ) such that the following holds. Let k, t be positive integers. Any graph excluding both a (k × k)-grid and Kt as a minor has treewidth at most grid 7.8(t, k ).Having now gathered all of our tools, we are finally ready to gather them up to prove the main theorem of this section which reduces an instance of a graph with a vital linkage that is already excluding a clique-minor of a certain size to an instance which has a rendition with some convenient properties. Most importantly, the rendition is for the entire instance and does not require the deletion of apices. 

Theorem 7.9. There exist functions clique 7.9, breadth 7.9, depth 7.9 : N → N, paths 7.9 : N2 → N and 

wall 7.9 : N3 → N, with breadth 7.9(t), clique 7.9(t), depth 7.9(t), paths 7.9(t, s ), wall 7.9(t, s, r ) ∈ poly (t+

s + r).Let r, t, s be positive integers. Let (G, R ) be an annotated graph with bidim (G, R ) ≤ t that does not contain a Kclique 7.9(t)-minor and let L be an R-linkage in G with a pattern partitioning R.Then either G has treewidth in wall 7.9(t, s, r ), or there exists a surface Σ with a blank Σ-rendition 

ρ with breadth b ≤ breadth 7.9(t) and depth at most depth 7.9(t) of an annotated graph (H, R ′)

containing a linkage L′, and there exist b vortices c1, . . . , c b ∈ C(ρ) such that i) the genus of Σ is in 9t4, and |L ′| − |L| ≤ paths 7.9(t, s ),

ii) there exist b sets of s(depth 7.9(t) + 1) tight, concentric cycles C1, . . . , Cb, with ∆i being the closed disc bounded by the trace of the inner cycle of Ci in ρ for each i ∈ [b], such that 

ci ⊆ ∆i, and (Ci, c i) and (Cj , c j ) are stacked for all distinct i, j ∈ [b],

104 iii) the vortices in ρ pairwise lie at distance at least 2s(depth 7.9(t) + 1) + 3 ,

iv) there exists a disc ∆0 such that, if we let ∆′ 

> i

be the trace of the outer cycle of Ci for each 

i ∈ [b1], we have ∆0 ∩ ∆′ 

> i

= ∅ for all i ∈ [b1] and there exists a flat r-wall in ρ whose trace is contained in ∆0, and v) R′ contains exactly the endpoints of L′ and if L is vital in G then L′ is vital in H.

Proof. Our functions are chosen as follows: 

clique 7.9(t) := ⌊5/2⌋t2 + 1 ,

breadth 7.9(t) := 3/2(t2 − 1)(3 t − 4) + t(t − 1) − 3 + 2 apex 3.8(t2, t ) + 9 t4,

depth 7.9(t) := ( depth 3.8(t2, t ) + 2)( breadth 7.9(t) − 1) + 18 t4,

paths 7.9(t, s ) := 2 apex 3.8(t2, t ) + 18 st 4(depth 7.9(t) + 1) + breadth 7.9(t) · (2 s(depth 7.9(t) + 1) + 8 depth 7.9(t)) , and 

wall 7.9(t, s, r ) := grid 7.8(clique 3.8(t), mesh 3.8(t, clique 7.9(t), (r

+ (9 t4(4 s(depth 7.9(t) + 1) + 4) + breadth 7.9(t)(4 s(depth 7.9(t) + 1) + 6) + 2 s(depth 7.9(t) + 1))) 

√

apex 3.8(t2, t ) + 1) .

For the rest of our proof we may assume that L is vital. This makes a few of our constructions easier to analyse. We may assume that G has treewidth at least wall 7.9(t, s, r ), as we are otherwise done. Thus, Proposition 7.8 tells us that there exists an r′-mesh in G, where 

r′ ≥ mesh 3.8(t, clique 7.9(t), (r + (9 t4(4 s(depth 7.9(t) + 1) + 4) + breadth 7.9(t)(4 s(depth 7.9(t) + 1) + 6) + 2 s(depth 7.9(t) + 1))) 

√

apex 3.8(t2, t ) + 1) .

This allows us to apply Proposition 3.8. We cannot reach the first item of Proposition 3.8, since 

G already excludes a Kclique 7.9(t)-minor, and we cannot reach the second item, since finding a red 

Kt2+1 -minor contradicts bidim (G, R ) ≤ t. Thus Proposition 3.8 returns a set A ⊆ V (G) with 

|A| ≤ apex 3.8(t2, t ) and a surface Σ of genus less than 9t4 such that (G − A, R \ A) has a blank 

Σ-rendition ρ with breadth at most 3/2(t2 − 1)(3 t − 4) + t(t − 1) − 3, depth at most depth 3.8(t2, t ),

and there exists a vortex-free, ρ-aligned disc ∆ ⊆ Σ such that the restriction of ρ to ∆ contains a flat r0-mesh W0, where 

r0 = ( r + 9 t4(4 s(depth 7.9(t) + 1) + 4) + breadth 7.9(t)(4 s(depth 7.9(t) + 1) + 6) + 2 s(depth 7.9(t) + 1)) 

√

apex 3.8(t2, t ) + 1 .

We first modify the graph to get rid of the apices in A at the cost of introducing new vortices. For each a ∈ A let ua

> 1

, u a 

> 2

be its up to two neighbours in ⋃ L. (We will ignore the vertices in A

which constitute a trivial path in L and simply delete them from L and G for simplicity. Clearly this does not affect the vitality of L in G.) Let La ∈ L be the path with a ∈ A. First, we delete 

a from G and instead introduce a1, a 2 (with a1 = a2 if ua 

> 1

= ua

> 2

), making them adjacent to ua

> 1

, u a

> 2

respectively. Then we let Lia be the component of La − a that contains uia for each i ∈ [2] ,

remove La from L, and add Lia ∪ ({ai, u ai }, {aiuai }) for each i ∈ [2] . These modifications are 105 performed iteratively. The identity of ua

> 1

, u a

> 2

, and La may change several times over the course of this process, but this is not dangerous as long as we make these modifications iteratively. Let G′ and L1 be the resulting graph and linkage. We then modify ρ into a Σ-rendition of 

G′ as follows. For each a ∈ A and i ∈ [2] , if uai̸ ∈ N (ρ) there exists a unique c ∈ C(ρ) such that uai ∈ V (σρ(c)) , then we simply add ai and its incident edge to σρ(c). Note that if c is a vortex, this does not increase its depth, as we may simply add ai to one of the bag of its linear decomposition which also includes uai . Thus we may instead assume that uai ∈ N (ρ). In this case we introduce a new cell ca ⊆ Σ that intersects no other cell of ρ (or any of the cells we have added thus far) and intersects N (ρ) exactly in uai . We then update ρ to let σρ(ca) = ( {ai, u ai }, {aiuai })

and note that ca is a vortex despite having very short length, since it contains a terminal of our linkage and thus one of the coloured vertices of our annotated graph. We let ρ1 be the resulting rendition, noting that this is indeed a Σ-rendition of G′ whose depth is still at most d and the fact that L1 is vital in G′ is implied by the vitality of L in 

G. Furthermore, ρ1 is blank and we have added at most 2|A| “vortices” to ρ1 in comparison to ρ, which means that the breadth of ρ1 is safely within poly (t + b′) and similarly, if we let 

R′ = ( R ∩ V (G′)) ∪ { a1, a 2 : a ∈ A}, we can easily note that bidim (G′, R ′) ∈ poly (t + b′).Unfortunately, some of these new vortices may have landed in our r0-wall W0. So to sort these out, we use the fact that r0 = r1

> √

apex 3.8(t2, t ) + 1 to find an r1-wall W1 ⊆ W0 contained in a ρ′-aligned disc that is entirely disjoint from all of our vortices, by dividing our wall up into 

apex 3.8(t2, t ) + 1 pairwise disjoint r1-walls, where 

r1 = r + (9 t4(4 s(depth 7.9(t) + 1) + 4) + breadth 7.9(t)(4 s(depth 7.9(t) + 1) + 6) + 2 s(depth 7.9(t) + 1)) .

Finding a rendition with high distance and representativity. Now our goal is to get to an instance of a graph with a vital linkage embedded on some surface of high representativity (or on the sphere) and with high distance between any two vortices. We will accomplish this as follows. First, we increase the distance between any two vortices Lemma 7.3. Then, we check if the representativity of our rendition is high enough and if it is not, we apply Lemma 7.4. However, whilst this reduces the genus of the instance we are interested in, this does introduce up to two more vortices that may now actually be close to some of the existing vortices. Thus, whenever we are forced to apply Lemma 7.4, we return to the first step and iterate. Since Lemma 7.4 decreases the genus of the surface we work on, this will terminate. In total, Lemma 7.4 will produce a number of vortices proportional to the genus of Σ and Lemma 7.3 decreases the number of vortices by one with each application whilst only adding at most 2 to the depth of the rendition. Thus, if b1 is the breadth of ρ1 and g is the genus of Σ, we will at worst generate b2 := b1 + 2 g vortices in this process. In particular, since each application of Lemma 7.3 fuses two of these vortices whose depth simply gets added together with 2, the final depth of our vortices is at most d2 := ( d + 2)( b2 − 1) + 2 g, since Lemma 7.3 can only be applied at most b2 − 1 times and Lemma 7.4 can only applied g times. Let us now be more precise about the numbers with which we apply both of these lemmas. First, consider Lemma 7.3, for which we try to ask for distance 2s(d2 + 1) + 3 between the vortices of the current rendition. Any modification that results from this lemma does not change the surface, results in a vital linkage with at most 4s(d2 + 1) + 6 new endpoints (and thus the annotated graph created by taking these endpoints as the red vertices still has bounded bidimensionality), 106 all of these endpoints are found in vortices, and outside of the addition of the new fused vortex the rendition is not changed. Thus, if the old rendition contained a flat wall of order w′, our new rendition preserves the existence of a (w′ − (4 s(d2 + 1) + 6)) -wall. On the other hand, we apply Lemma 7.4 asking for representativity 2s(d2 + 1) + 2 . If this cuts apart our surface into two components, we choose the w′-wall in our original instance to orient ourselves, since the new instance still contains a flat (w′ − (4 s(d2 + 1) + 4)) -mesh which is draw on either of the two new surfaces. This allows us to choose the surface containing the remains of our flat wall. We then note that this also creates a vital linkage with at most 2s(d2 + 1) + 2 + 6 d2

endpoints (again ensuring that the bidimensionality of the corresponding annotated graph is still bounded), all of which are found in vortices. Furthermore, both the breadth and the depth of our rendition increases at most by 2. Thus, after this process we will arrive at a graph G2 containing a vital linkage L2 with a 

Σ2-rendition ρ2 such that i) the genus of Σ2 is at most the genus of Σ,

ii) |L 2| ≤ |L 1| + g(2 s(d2 + 1) + 2) + b2(2 s(d2 + 1) + 2 + 6 d2),

iii) all endpoints of L2 are found in vortices of ρ2,

iv) the depth of ρ2 is at most d + d2,

v) the breadth of ρ2 is at most b2,

vi) there exists a flat (r1 − (g(4 s(d2 + 1) + 4) + b2(4 s(d2 + 1) + 6))) -wall W2 in ρ2,

vii) the vortices of ρ2 pairwise lie at distance at least 2s(d2 + 1) + 3 , and viii) if Σ2 has positive genus, the representativity of ρ2 is at least 2s(d2 + 1) + 2 .From this we can easily derive an annotated graph (G2, R 2) by letting R2 be the set of endpoints of the paths in L2.

Building nests and making the rendition blank. By simply applying Lemma 7.5 or Corollary 7.7, we can now find the desired pairwise disjoint nests of order s(d2 + 1) around the vortices of 

ρ2. These nests may intersect W2, but this at worst causes us to lose the outermost 2s(d2 + 1) 

horizontal and vertical paths of W2 and thus we can find an r2-wall W3 ⊆ W2, with r2 =(r1 − (g(4 s(d2 + 1) + 4) + b2(4 s(d2 + 1) + 6))) − 2s(d2 + 1) , whose perimeter is disjoint from the trace of all cycles of all nests we have just constructed. We note that 

r1 − (9 t4(4 s(depth 7.9(t) + 1) + 4) + breadth 7.9(t)(4 s(depth 7.9(t) + 1) + 6) + 2 s(depth 7.9(t) + 1)) ≥ r. 

Finally, we still have to turn ρ2 into a blank rendition of (G2, R 2). Note that the only problem here is that some vertices of R2 may be placed on the boundary of one of our vortices. Thus for each v ∈ R2 with Nρ2 (c) for some vortex c of ρ2, we create a copy v′̸ ∈ V (G2), make v adjacent to v′ and add v′ to the vortex c. Note that this does not increase the depth of c and thus does not increase the depth of ρ2. Furthermore, we then elongate the path in L2 that uses v by adding v′ and the edge vv ′ to it and replacing v in R2 with v′. This clearly preserves the vitality of the linkage. Repeating this for every vertex in R2 yields a blank rendition of a graph with a vital linkage having the desired properties. This completes our proof. 107 8 What to do with a clique? 

One of the most fundamental parts of our proof and the Graph Minor Algorithm we will present later is the problem of dealing with the existence of large clique-minors in our graph, since we would really like them to be absent to apply the tools from Graph Minor Structure Theory. Luckily there is a well-established set of tools which allow us to see that these cliques are actually quite helpful for us. This gives us permission to focus on graphs that exclude a clique-minor. The following is (6.1) from [RS95], where we note that the original statement confusingly discusses digraphs . However the proof by Robertson and Seymour in particular shows the following statement for undirected graphs. To get the algorithmic part of the statement derives from algorithm (6.2) in [RS95]. 

Proposition 8.1 (Robertson and Seymour [RS95]) . Let G be a graph, let ℓ, d ∈ N be non-negative integers, and let Z ⊆ V (G) with |Z| ≤ ℓ. Further let k = ⌊5/2 · ℓ⌋ + 3 d2 + 1 , let φ be a minor model of Kk in G, and let (A, B ) be a separation in G such that i) A ∩ φ(v) = ∅ for some v ∈ V (Kk),

ii) Z ⊆ A, 

iii) subject to item i) and item ii), (A, B ) is of minimum order, and iv) subject to item i), item ii), and item iii), A is maximal. Then for any v ∈ B \ A, v is irrelevant to the d-folio of G relative to Z.In particular, given G, Z, and φ as above, such a vertex v can be found in poly (ℓ + d)|| H|| -time. We will also require the following result from [PTW25] which refines some of the tools from [RS95]. 

Proposition 8.2 (Protopapas, Thilikos, and Wiederrecht [PTW25]) . Let q, t, k ∈ N be positive integers with k ≥ ⌊ 3/2 · qt ⌋ + t. Let (G, χ ) be a q-colorful graph such that G contains a minor model φ of Kk. Then one of the following is true: i) There exists a colorful minor model ψ of a rainbow Kt in (G, χ ) such that Tψ is a truncation of Tφ, or ii) There exists a set S ⊆ V (G) of size at most qt − 1 such that the Tφ-big component of 

G − S is restricted. Furthermore, there exists an algorithm that takes as input t, (G, χ ), and φ as above and finds one of the two outcomes in time poly (q + t)|| G|| .We combine these two results into a simple lemma that will later on allow us to efficiently find irrelevant vertices for the folio-problem in Section 10. 

Lemma 8.3. Let k, b, d ∈ N be positive integers, let (G, Z ) be an annotated graph with bidimensionality less than b and |Z| ≤ k, and let φ be a Kt-minor-model in G with t ≥⌊5/2⌋b2 + 3 d2 + 1 .Then G contains an irrelevant vertex for the (k, d )-folio of (G, Z ), which can be identified in 

poly (k + b + d)|G|-time. 

Proof. We view (G, Z ) as a colorful graph (G, χ ) with one colour which is assigned by χ exactly to the vertices in Z. If there existed a colorful minor model ψ of a rainbow Kb2 in (G, χ ),

then this would directly contradict bidim (G, Z ) < b . Thus, as t ≥ ⌊ 5/2⌋b2 + 1 ≥ ⌊ 3/2 · b2⌋ + b2,

108 Proposition 8.1 tells us that there exists a set S ⊆ V (G) of order b2 − 1 such that the Tφ-big component of G − S is restricted and thus contains no terminals from Z.In particular, this means that there exists a separation (A, B ) in G with A ∩ B = S such that 

A ∩ φ(v) = ∅ for some V (Kt) and we have Z ⊆ A. This allows us to apply Proposition 8.1, which confirms that any vertex in B is irrelevant, completing our proof. Of course to do something with a clique-minor, we first need to find one. To do this efficiently, we take a tool from Reed and Wood [RW09], who state that their algorithm actually takes a running time dependent on both the number of vertices and the number of edges of G. However as Kawarabayashi, Kobayashi, and Reed [KKR12] point out, by only considering 2t−3|G| edges of the graph, this algorithm ends up finding the clique-minor in a running time only depending on |G| and the size of the clique we search for. 

Proposition 8.4 (Reed and Wood [RW09]) . Let t be a positive integer and let G be a graph with || G|| ≥ 2t−3|G|. Then one can find a Kt-minor model in G in O(t|G|)-time. 

# 9 The Vital Linkage Theorem 

In the previous sections we have shown that  

> •

graphs with large cliques contain irrelevant vertices for vital linkages (see Section 8),  

> •

graphs with high treewidth and excluding a clique-minor yields a graph with a well-structured rendition without apices (see Section 7),  

> •

graphs hosting a vital linkage that have a well-structured rendition without apices can be reduce down until they no longer have vortices without introducing many terminals (see Section 6), and  

> •

graphs containing a vital linkage embedded on a surface with bounded genus and a bounded number of holes hosting terminals of the linkage cannot have large treewidth (see Section 4.2). We will now apply these insights in the given order to prove our first main theorem, which gives the first explicit bound for the Linkage Function, showing that it is polynomial in the number of terminals and singly exponential only in the bidimensionality of these terminals. 

Theorem 9.1. There exists a function β9.1 : N2 → N such that for every annotated graph 

(G, T ) with bidim (G, T ) ≤ b, if there exists a vital T -linkage of order at most k in G, then 

tw (G) ≤ β9.1(k, b ). Moreover, β9.1(k, b ) ∈ 2poly (b) · poly (k).

Proof. For future use, we let 

r := 2 cycles 6.29 (b + 2 paths 7.9(b, breadth 7.9(b)) , depth 7.9(b),f4.10 (breadth 7.9(b) + 9 b4, terminals 6.29 (k

+ 2 paths 7.9(b, breadth 7.9(b)) , breadth 7.9(b), depth 7.9(b), 9b4))) .

We will prove this theorem by setting β9.1(k, b ) := wall 7.9(b, breadth 7.9(b), r ). Let (G0, T 0) be a counterexample to our statement, meaning that there exists a vital T0-linkage of order at most 

k in G0, we have bidim (G0, T 0) ≤ b, and tw (G0) > β 9.1(k, b ).109 We now first apply Lemma 8.3 to exclude the presence of a Kt-minor in G0 with t = ⌊5/2⌋b2 + 1 ,

whilst noting that the linkage problem is simply the folio problem with detail 0. This follows, since the presence of an irrelevant vertex for the linkage would imply that G0 is in fact not a minimal counterexample. Together with the large treewidth of G0, this allows us to now apply Theorem 7.9, which yields an annotated graph (G1, T 1), a vital T1-linkage L1 in G1, and a blank, stretched Σ1-rendition ρ1 with breadth b1 ≤ breadth 7.9(b) and depth at most depth 7.9(b) on a surface Σ1 of genus at most 9b4, such that i) bidim (G1, T 1) ≤ b + 2 paths 7.9(b, breadth 7.9(b)) and |L 1| ≤ k + paths 7.9(b, breadth 7.9(b)) ,

ii) there exist b1 sets of breadth 7.9(b)( depth 7.9(b) + 1) concentric cycles C1, . . . , Cb1 , with ∆i

being the closed disc bounded by the trace of the inner cycle of Ci in ρ1 for each i ∈ [b1],

such that ci ⊆ ∆i and (Ci, c i) and (Cj , c j ) are stacked for all distinct i, j ∈ [b1],

iii) the vortices in ρ1 pairwise lie at distance at least 4( depth 7.9(t) + 1) + 3 , and iv) there exists a disc ∆0 such that, if we let ∆′ 

> i

be the trace of the outer cycle of Ci for each 

i ∈ [b1], we have ∆0 ∩ ∆′ 

> i

= ∅ for all i ∈ [b1] and there exists a flat r-mesh M1 in ρ1 whose trace is contained in ∆0.Thanks to the second property, we may now apply Theorem 5.8 to our rendition ρ1 to find a blank, stretched Σ1-rendition ρ′ 

> 1

of (G1, T 1) with breadth at most b1 such that property i) above is preserved, and each vortex of ρ′ 

> 1

either has a boundary consisting of at most 3 nodes, or is 

depth 7.9(b)-stuffed with gap at most 1. Furthermore, M1 continues to be flat in ρ1 and ∆0 is disjoint from all vortices of ρ′

> 1

.These constructions allow us to observe that by iteratively stripping the perimeter from M1, we find a set of r/2 concentric cycles CM forming an r/2-locus. We now let 

s := f4.10 (b1 + 9 b4, terminals 6.29 (k + 2 paths 7.9(b, breadth 7.9(b)) , b 1, depth 7.9(b), 9b4)) .

Note that we have 

> r

/2 ≥ cycles 6.29 (b + 2 paths 7.9(b, breadth 7.9(b)) , depth 7.9(b), s ).

We may therefore apply Corollary 6.29 to find an annotated graph (G2, T 2) with 

|T2| ≤ terminals 6.29 (k + 2 paths 7.9(b, breadth 7.9(b)) , b 1, depth 7.9(b), 9b4) ∈ poly (k + b) · 2poly (b),

a vital T2-linkage L2, an embedding ψ2 of G2 in a surface Σ2 with at most b1 boundary components, and containing a set of concentric cycles C = ⟨C1, . . . , C s⟩. Furthermore, we have 

ˆΣ2 ∼= ˆΣ1, there exists a disc ∆2 ⊆ Σ2 such that ψ(Ci) ⊆ ∆2 for all i ∈ [s], G 2 = ⋃ C ∪ ⋃ L2,ψ(T ′) ⊆ bd (Σ 2), and for all L ∈ L 2 the curve ψ(L) is internally disjoint from bd (Σ 2).Our goal is to now adjust ψ2 and Σ2 to fit the requirements of Theorem 4.10. To accomplish this, we simply cut out an open disc in Σ2 that does not intersect any point used by ψ2. This allows us to homeomorphically deform both Σ2 and ψ2 into a surface that can be described as the union of a closed disc ∆3 with bd (∆ 3) = ψ(Cs) and a set of at most g3 := b1 + 9 b4 strips S1, . . . , S g3 .110 Now we are ready to apply Theorem 4.10 to (Σ 2, G 2, C, L2) and since s ≥ f4.10 (g3, |T2|), this leads to a contradiction to the vitality of our linkage. We note that g3 ∈ poly (b). Thus 

f4.10 (g3, |T2|) ∈ poly (k + b) · 2poly (b) and 

cycles 6.29 (b + 2 paths 7.9(b, breadth 7.9(b)) , depth 7.9(b), s ) ∈ poly (k + b) · 2poly (b),

which confirms the bound claimed in our statement as b ≤ k.

# 10 Tackling the Folio Problem 

The previous sections were all concerned almost entirely with proving Theorem 9.1. However, establishing good bounds for the Linkage Function is merely the first step towards reigning in the galactic parametric dependencies in the running time of the Graph Minor Algorithm. Indeed, in order to prove Theorem 2.2 we need to prove Theorem 2.5 which is the statement that guarantees the existence of an irrelevant vertex in all instances of large enough treewidth. In this section and the following one we take on the task to deal with the algorithmic consequences of Theorem 9.1 for the (k, d )-Folio problem. The main goal of this section is to show that within a large “homogeneous” flat wall W avoiding the set R of annotated vertices, it is always possible to redraw a minor model invading the compass of W in a way such that it avoids the centre of the wall. 

10.1 Quickly combing an annulus 

A key result in the algorithm theory of graph minors is the so-called “Annulus Combing Lemma” of Golovach, Stamoulis, and Thilikos [GST23a]. This result is a slight strengthening of similar lemmas originally proven by Robertson and Seymour [RS12] and essentially says the following: Given a Σ-rendition ρ of a graph together with some disc ∆ ⊆ Σ such that the restriction of ρ

to ∆ is a vortex-free rendition containing a large grounded cylindrical wall W together with a pattern of order k, say Π, in G and a Π-linkage L, then there exists a still big cylindrical subwall 

W ′ of W, another Π-linkage L′ and a subset R of radial paths in W ′ such that the intersection of L′ with the compass of W ′ is a subset of the paths in R. Here, the compass of a cylindrical wall W grounded in ρ is the union of all graphs σ(c) over the cells c contained in the annulus defined by the traces of the outer- and inner-most cycle of W . Similarly, the compass of a wall 

W ∗ grounded in ρ is the union of all graphs σ(c) over the set of all cells c contained in the disc defined by the trace of the perimeter of W ∗. Notice that, whenever we have a graph G with an embedding Γ in some surface Σ, one may obtain a trivial Σ-rendition of G from Γ by defining, for each edge xy ∈ E(G) a cell cxy obtained by choosing an ε-disc ∆xy around the drawing of 

xy with ε > 0 such that x, y ∈ bd (∆ xy ), ∆xy intersects Γ only in x, y, and xy, and the curve 

xy \ { x, y } is contained in the interior of ∆xy .The notions of “large” and “big” in the statement above depend on k and the Linkage Function from Theorem 9.1. In fact, we prove a slightly more general statement for which we require some further definitions. 111 Figure 20: A railed annulus with 5 circles and 7 rails. 

A partially embedded railed annulus. Let w, r ≥ 0 be two integers. A (w, r )-railed annulus is a graph Aw,r such that there exist pairwise vertex-disjoint cycles C1, . . . , C w, called the circles ,and pairwise vertex-disjoint paths R1, . . . R r, called the rails , such that i) Aw,r = ⋃ 

> i∈[w]

Ci ∪ ⋃ 

> i∈[r]

Ri is a planar graph, ii) Ri has one endpoint on C1, the other on Cw for all i ∈ [r], and is otherwise disjoint from 

C1 ∪ Cw,

iii) for all i ∈ [r], j ∈ [w], R i ∩ Cj is a path, and iv) for each i ∈ [r], R i visits the cycles C1, . . . , C w in the order listed when traversing along 

Ri starting from its endpoint on C1.We call C1 and Cw the boundary circles of Aw,r . We say that a graph A is a railed annulus if there exist r and w such that A is a (w, r )-railed annulus. See Figure 20 for an example. Now let Σ be a surface and G be a graph with a Σ-rendition ρ. We say that a railed annulus 

A ⊆ G is separating in ρ if i) A is grounded in ρ, 

ii) if A has at least two circles and at least two rails, then there exists an annulus ⊚ ⊆ Σ such that the traces of the boundary circles of A coincide with the two boundary components of ⊚, and the trace of every rail of A is contained in ⊚,

iii) ⊚ is disjoint from the closures of the vortices of ρ, and iv) for every circle C of A, the trace of C is a separating curve in Σ.See Figure 21 for some examples. We call the annulus ⊚ above the domain of A in ρ. The crop of G by ⊚ is the union of all graphs σ(c) whose cell c of ρ is contained in ⊚. Finally, if (G, T ) is an annotated graph with a Σ-rendition ρ and a separating railed annulus A with domain ⊚, we say that A is blank if the crop of G by ⊚ does not contain any vertices from T .Let p ≥ 0 and q ≥ 2 be integers. Let A = A2p+q,r be a railed annulus. The p-trimming of A is the railed annulus Aq,r obtained from A by removing the first and last p circles and restricting the rails to their minimal Cp+1 -Cp+q-subpaths. 112 Figure 21: Two separating annuli in different surfaces. The separating annulus on the left bounds a disc in its interior, while the separating annulus on the right is genus-reducing for its surface. In this paper we only care about the situation on the left, however, Theorem 10.1 holds also in the situation on the right. 

Combed linkages. Let Σ be a surface, G be a graph with a Σ-rendition ρ, and let A ⊆ G be a separating railed annulus in G with domain ⊚ in ρ. Let H be the crop of G by ⊚. A linkage L

in G is combed in A if the intersection of ⋃ L and H is a subgraph of the union of the rails of A.The main theorem of this subsection now reads as follows. 

Theorem 10.1. There exist functions f10 .1, h 10 .1, g 10 .1 : N2 → N such that for every annotated graph (G, T ) with bidim (G, T ) ≤ b, every surface Σ, and every Σ-rendition ρ of G, the following holds: If A = Aa,r is a blank and separating railed annulus with a ≥ f10 .1(k, b ) and r ≥ g10 .1(k, b ) in G

and ρ and L is a T -linkage of order at most k, then there exists a T -linkage L⋆ in G such that i) τ (L) = τ (L⋆),

ii) L⋆ is combed in the h10 .1(k, b )-trimming of A, and iii) if ⊚ is the domain of A and G′ is the crop of G by ⊚, then ⋃ L⋆ − G′ ⊆ ⋃ L − G′.Moreover, f10 .1(k, b ), h 10 .1(k, b ), g 10 .1(k, b ) ∈ 2poly (b) · poly (k).We will need the following classic theorem for lower bounds on the treewidth of graphs (see for example [ST93, RS12]). Let G be a graph. A bramble in G is a collection of connected subgraphs B of G such that for all B1, B 2 ∈ B either V (B1) ∩ V (B2)̸ = ∅ or there exists an edge with one end in B1 and the other in B2. A hitting set for a bramble B is a set S ⊆ V (G) such that S ∩ V (B)̸ = ∅ for all 

B ∈ B . The order of a bramble B is the minimum size of a hitting set for B.

Proposition 10.2 (Reed [Ree97]) . Let k ≥ 0 be an integer and G be a graph. If G has a bramble of order k + 1 , then tw (G) ≥ k.113 Proof of Theorem 10.1. Let us start by defining our functions, to this end let β be the Linkage Function from Theorem 9.1. We set 

f10 .1(k, b ) := 16 β(k, b ) + 16 

h10 .1(k, b ) := 8 β(k, b ) + 8 , and 

g10 .1(k, b ) := 6 β(k, b ) + 6 .

The claimed bounds now follow directly from Theorem 9.1. Let C = ⟨C1, . . . , C a⟩ be the circles of A and let G′′′ := ⋃ L ∪ ⋃ C. In the following we assume that L is chosen to minimise |E(L) \ E(C)| among all linkages Q in G with τ (Q) = τ (L). This is a fair assumption since the assertion allows us to make changes to the original linkage. Let ⊚ be the domain of A in Σ. Let S be the set of all (V (C1) ∪ V (Ca)) -subpaths of the paths in L which are contained in the crop of G by ⊚. A path in S is called a river if it is a 

V (C1)-V (Ca)-path, a mountain if it is a V (C1)-path, and a valley if it is a V (Ca)-path. See Figure 22 for an illustration. Let now G′′ be obtained from G by iteratively picking a vertex v of degree exactly 2 and contracting one of its two incident edges. In a second step, let now G′ be obtained from G′′ 

by contracting every remaining edge which belongs to some circle of A and some path in L.Notice that G′ still contains a sequence C′ = ⟨C′

> 1

, . . . , C ′

> a

⟩ of vertex-disjoint cycles such that C′

> i

is obtained from Ci for each i ∈ [a]. Moreover, if x is an endpoint of some path in L, then x is not a vertex of any circle of A since A is blank and thus, x has degree 1 in G′′ . It follows that G′

contains a linkage L′ such that τ (L′) = τ (L). This is true in particular since the construction step to go from G′′ to G′ only contracted edges that already belonged to L and thus ensured that the paths in L remain paths. Finally, notice that, since G′ is a minor of G, we may inherit a Σ-rendition ρ′ of G′ from the restriction of ρ to G′′′ .

Figure 22: An illustration of a collection of concentric cycles together with segments of a linkage. In magenta we depict the mountains while the valleys are drawn in blue and the rivers are drawn in yellow. 

Claim 10.2.1 . The linkage L′ is vital in G′.

Proof of claim. Suppose there is a vertex v ∈ V (G′) not used by L′. Then there exists i ∈ [a]

such that v ∈ V (C′

> i

) \ V (L). But then, v must have degree 2 in G′ which is ruled out by the construction of G′. Hence, V (L′) = V (G′).114 Indeed, we may make a stronger observation: Let v ∈ V (C′

> i

) for some i ∈ [ℓ], then v has degree 

4 in G′ since v has degree at least 3, may be incident with at most four edges of G′, and two of those edges are required to belong to L′. Since L′ cannot share an edge with C′ 

> i

as otherwise we would have contracted this edge, it follows that v cannot be of degree 3.Now suppose that L′ is not unique in G′. Then there exists a linkage Q′ in G′ with the same pattern such that L′̸ = Q′. Suppose further that there exists an edge e in E(L′) \ E(Q′) such that e / ∈ E(Q′). Then, since G′ is a minor of G and all endpoints of the paths in L still have degree 1 in G′, there would be a linkage Q in G of the same pattern as L such that 

E(Q) ⊆ (E(L) ∪ E(C)) \ { e}. Hence, |E(Q) \ E(C)| < |E(L) \ E(C)| which is a contradiction to our choice of L. Therefore, L′ must be unique in G′ which finally implies that L′ is a vital linkage. ⊣

Let T ′ := V (G′) ∩ T .

Claim 10.2.2 . We have that bidim (G′, T ′) ≤ b.

Proof of claim. The claim follows directly from the fact that bidimensionality is monotone under taking red minors and (G′, T ′) is indeed a red minor of (G, T ). ⊣

We say that two rivers J1 and J2 are consecutive , if deleting their traces from ⊚ leaves one component ζ′, whose closure is homeomorphic to a disc, that does not intersect the trace of any other river in S. Note that we may define what it means for two rails of A′ to be consecutive in the same way. We call the closure ζ = cl (ζ′) of such a disc a slice of ⊚. Notice that the rivers in 

S decompose ⊚ into |S| slices ζ1, . . . , ζ ℓ where ℓ is the number of rivers in S. Moreover, for every mountain or valley P in S there exists a unique i ∈ [ℓ] such that the trace of P is contained in 

ζi. For each i ∈ [ℓ] let us denote by Mi the set of all mountains whose trace is contained in ζi

and by Vi the set of all valleys whose trace is contained in ζi.In what follows, we wish to argue that rivers and valleys cannot enter deeply into the circles. For this, the goal is to apply – among others – Lemma 4.2 which requires us to confine the curves of mountains and valleys into wells. Since the arguments for dealing with valleys is analogous to those for mountains, we only discuss the mountain case below. 

Draining a well in a mountain. Fix any i ∈ [ℓ]. Let Gi be the graph ⋃ Mi ∪ C ′. Then Gi

is a planar graph with a plane embedding Γi inherited from ρ through Theorem 6.5 and we may declare Ωi to be the cyclic ordering of the vertices of C′ 

> 1

obtained by traversing along C′ 

> 1

in clockwise order. Then (Gi, Ωi, ρ, C′, Mi) is a well and by Lemma 4.2 we may assume this well to be drained. We call (Gi, Ωi, ρ, C′, Mi) the well associated with Mi. This is, because the new collection of paths returned by Lemma 4.2 must still have all of its traces contained in ζi and is therefore guaranteed to stay disjoint from the rivers of S.In particular, any mountain in Mi encloses a disc with the boundary of ζi which cannot contain the trace of any valley from Vi. This observation allows us to apply the same treatment to the valleys and assume that their respective wells are also drained. 

Levelling mountains and filling valleys. With the assumption that each of the wells associated with Mi or Vi is drained we are now ready to prove our first major claim. 

Claim 10.2.3 . Let M be a mountain and V be a valley in S. Then M is disjoint from C′

> 2β(k,b )+3

and V is disjoint from C′

> a−2β(k,b )−2

.115 Proof of claim. As before, the arguments for mountains and valleys are analogous so it suffices to only discuss the mountains. Suppose there exist i ∈ [ℓ] and a mountain M ∈ M i which intersects C′

> 2β(k,b )+3

. Then, since the well (Gi, Ωi, ρ, C′, Mi) is drained, we know that there exists a sequence ⟨M1, . . . , M 2β(k,b )+3 ⟩ of pairwise vertex-disjoint mountains in Mi such that for each j ∈ [2 β(k, b ) + 3] , M j intersects C′ 

> j

.Notice that, whenever a mountain Mj intersects the circle C′ 

> j

, then Mj also intersects C′ 

> j′

for all 

j′ ≤ j.Now let us define, for each j ∈ [2 β(k, b ) + 3] the graph Bj to be Mj ∪ C′ 

> j

and let B := {Bj : j ∈

[2 β(k, b ) + 3] }. See Figure 23 for an illustration of this construction. Notice that every member of B is connected, and any two members must intersect by the remark above. Moreover, it follows from the fact that the Mj are pairwise vertex-disjoint and the C′ 

> j

are also pairwise vertex disjoint, that no vertex of G′ may be contained in more than two distinct members of B. Hence, 

B is a bramble of order at least β(k, b ) + 2 . Also recall that by Claim 10.2.2 we know that 

bidim (G′, T ′) ≤ b. Therefore, Proposition 10.2 says that tw (G′) ≥ β(k, b ) + 1 . However, by Claim 10.2.1 we have that L′ is a vital T -linkage in G′ and by Theorem 9.1 this means that 

tw (G′) ≤ β(k, b ) which is absurd. ⊣

Figure 23: An illustration of the construction of the bramble in the proof of Claim 10.2.3. Each horizontal line corresponds to one of the circles of the annulus and the pairs consisting of a single circle and one mountain that form the bramble elements are colour coded. The mountains in gray illustrate how other parts of the linkage might interact with the mountains we select for our bramble. 

Bounding the rivers. Now we know that neither mountains, nor valleys are able to penetrate deep into our annulus. The only members of S we need to be concerned with now are the rivers. These must necessarily intersect all cycles in C′, however, with an argument similar to the one above, we can find that their number is bounded. Let W ⊆ S be the set of all rivers in S.

Claim 10.2.4 . We have that |W| ≤ 2β(k, b ) + 2 .

Proof of claim. Suppose |W| ≥ 2β(k, b ) + 3 . As before, we define a bramble of large order to reach a contradiction – via the Linkage Function – to the fact that L′ is a vital linkage in G′.To this end let W = {W1, . . . , W w} with w ≥ 2β(k, b ) + 3 and let w′ := 2 β(k, b ) + 3 . Now, for each i ∈ [w′], let Qi := Wi ∪ C′ 

> i

and let Q := {Qi : i ∈ [w′]}. Then, since the Wi are pairwise vertex disjoint and so are the C′

> i

, but every Wi intersects every C′ 

> j

, it follows that Q is a bramble in G′ such that no vertex of G′ may belong to more than two members of Q. Hence, the order of 

Q is at least β(k, b ) + 2 . As before, Proposition 10.2 now implies that tw (G′) ≥ β(k, b ) + 1 . On 116 the other hand, Claim 10.2.1 says that L′ is a vital T -linkage in G′ and thus tw (G′) ≤ β(k, b ) by Theorem 9.1 which is impossible. ⊣

Straightening rivers. Finally, we reach the point where the actual combing can take place. Notice that G′ still contains an annulus A′′ with q circles and r rails which is obtained from A

through the contractions that transformed G′′′ into G′.Let A′ be the (2 β(k, b ) + 2) -trimming of A′′ , let ⊚′ be the domain of A′, and let R be the set of rails of A′. Notice that the set of circles of A′ is the set 

C′′ := ⟨C′

> 2β(k,b )+3

, . . . , C ′

> a−2β(k,b )−2

⟩.

Let us set a′ := a − 4β(k, b ) − 4 and adjust indices to set C′′ = ⟨C′′  

> 1

, . . . , C ′′  

> a′

⟩ such that the order of the indices is preserved. We require two additional railed annuli as follows. Let A′ 

> 1

be the railed annulus obtained from 

A′ by first restricting its circles to the cycles C′′  

> 1

, . . . , C ′′ 

> 6β(k,b )+6

, and then taking, as rails, from each R ∈ R its minimal C′′  

> 1

-C′′ 

> 6β(k,b )+6

-subpath. Let ⊚′ 

> 1

be the domain of A′

> 1

. Similarly, let A′

> 2

be the railed annulus obtained from A′ by taking as circles the cycles C′′ 

> a′−6β(k,b )−5

, . . . , C ′′  

> a′

and by taking as rails from each R ∈ R its minimal C′′ 

> a′−6β(k,b )−5

-C′′  

> a′

-subpath. Let ⊚′ 

> 2

be the domain of A′

> 2

.Finally, let S′ be the collection of all (V (C′′  

> 1

) ∪ V (C′′  

> a′

)) -subpaths of the paths in L′ which are contained in the crop of G′ by ⊚′. As before, we may partition S′ into mountains, valleys, and rivers. However, by our choice of A′ and Claim 10.2.3 it follows that every member of S′ is a river. Moreover, |S ′| ≤ 2β(k, b ) + 2 by Claim 10.2.4. Let now for each i ∈ [2] be S′ 

> i

be the restriction of the paths in S′ to the crop of G′ by ⊚′ 

> i

– let us denote the crop of G′ by ⊚′ by G′

> i

. Moreover, let X1 be the set of endpoints of the paths in S′ 

> 1

on C′′  

> 1

and let X2 be the set of endpoints of the paths in S′ 

> 2

on C′′  

> a′

. We say that a set of D rails is consecutive if D = {D1, . . . , D |D| } such that Di and Di+1 are consecutive for all 

i ∈ [|D| − 1] . Let Y1 be the set of endpoints of 2β(k, b ) + 2 consecutive rails of A′ 

> 1

on C′′ 

> 6β(k,b )+6

.Finally, let Y2 be the set of endpoints of the rails of A′ 

> 2

on C′′ 

> a′−6β(k,b )−5

.

Claim 10.2.5 . There exists a linkage F1 of size |S ′| = |X1| between X1 and Y1 in G′

> 1

.

Proof of claim. Suppose there does not exist a X1-Y1-linkage of order X1 in G′

> 1

. Then, by Menger’s theorem Proposition 3.1, there exists a set Z1 ⊆ V (G′

> 1

) of size at most |X1| − 1 such that in G′ 

> 1

− Z1 there is no X1-Y1-path. Since |X1| ≤ 2β(k, b ) + 2 as a consequence of Claim 10.2.4 and |Y1| = |R| = r ≥ 2β(k, b ) + 2 

there must exist a rail R of A′ 

> 1

which completely avoids Z1. Moreover, there must also exist a river S ∈ S ′ 

> 1

which is disjoint from Z1 and finally, there must exist a circle C of A′ 

> 1

which is disjoint from Z1. Now, however, R ∪ S ∪ C is a connected graph which contains a vertex of 

X1 – an endpoint of S – and a vertex of Y1 – an endpoint of R. This is a contradiction to the choice of Z1 and thus the claim must be true. ⊣

Now let Y ′ 

> 2

be the subset of Y2 consisting of precisely those vertices in Y2 that belong to members of R′ that contain an endpoint of some path of F1. Then |Y ′ 

> 2

| = |F 1| = |X2|. Moreover, let G′′ 

> 2

be the subgraph of G′ 

> 2

consisting only of the circles of A′

> 2

, the rails of A′ 

> 2

with vertices in Y ′′  

> 2

,

and the paths in S′

> 2

.117 Claim 10.2.6 . There exists a linkage F2 of size |S ′| = |X2| between X2 and Y ′ 

> 2

in G′′  

> 1

. Moreover, for every path S ∈ S ′, if x ∈ Y1 is the endpoint of the path in F1 containing an endpoint of S

and y ∈ Y ′ 

> 2

is the endpoint of the path in F2 containing the other endpoint of S, then there exists a rail of A′ which contains both x and y.

Proof of claim. The proof of this claim follows along two steps. First we route the paths in S′

starting from X2 onto the rails containing the end of F1 in Y1, and then we use the remaining infrastructure in A′ 

> 2

in order to guarantee that the vertices of X2 are connected to the rails in the way required by the claim. Let now B1 be the railed annulus obtained from A′ 

> 2

by taking the cycles C′′ 

> a′−2β(k,b )−1

, . . . , C ′′ 

> a′

together with the restriction of the rails of A′ 

> 2

to these cycles. Let ⊚′′  

> 1

be the domain of B1 and let H1 be the crop of G′ by ⊚′′  

> 1

.Moreover, let B2 be the railed annulus obtained from A′ 

> 2

by first deleting B1 and then iteratively removing vertices of degree 1. Let ⊚′′  

> 2

be the domain of B2 and let H2 be the crop of G′ by ⊚′′  

> 2

.Notice that B2 has 4β(k, b ) + 4 cycles. We denote by R⋆ the set of rails of A′ containing vertices from Y ′ 

> 2

. Recall that these rails are precisely those which contain the endpoints of the paths from F1 in Y1. Now let Z1 be the set of all ends of those rails of B1 on C′′  

> a′−2β(k,b )−1

which are subpaths of the paths in R⋆. Similarly, let 

Z2 be the set of ends endpoints of those rails of B2 on the cycle C′′  

> a′−2β(k,b )−2

which are subpaths of the paths in R⋆.Finally, let F′′  

> 2

be the collection of all Z1-Z2-subpaths of the paths in R⋆.

Re-routing in B1. We now proceed with the first step. That is, we use arguments analogous to those from the proof of Claim 10.2.5 to find an X2-Z1-linkage F′ 

> 2

of size |X2| in H1. As before, the existence of this linkage is guaranteed by Menger’s theorem Proposition 3.1 and the fact that |X2| = |Z1| ≤ 2β(k, b ) + 2 .Notice that, it is possible to combine the linkages F′ 

> 2

and F′′  

> 2

along the rails in R⋆ to create an 

X2-Z2-linkage of size |X2|. All that is left is now to ensure that the second part of our claim is satisfied. That is, we need to route the vertices in Z2 to the correct vertices in Y ′ 

> 2

as specified by 

F1. See Figure 24 for an illustration of the current situation. 

Fixing the connections in B2. Recall that Z2 denotes the set of endpoints of the rails of B2

on the cycle C′′  

> a′−2β(k,b )−2

which are subpaths of the paths in R⋆. Moreover, Y ′ 

> 2

denotes the set of endpoints of the rails of B2 on the cycle C′′ 

> a′−6β(k,b )−5

. Similarly, X′ 

> 2

denotes the set of the endpoints of the paths in F′ 

> 2

on the cycle C′′  

> a′

and Z1 denotes the set of endpoints of the paths in F′ 

> 2

on the cycle C′′  

> a′−2β(k,b )−1

while Y ′ 

> 1

denotes the endpoints of the paths in F1 on the cycle 

C′′ 

> 2β(k,b )+2

.Let us now set r⋆ := |R ⋆| and R⋆ = {R⋆

> 1

, . . . , R ⋆r⋆ } such that, when restricting the rails of A′ to 

R⋆, the rails R⋆i and R⋆i+1 are consecutive. We derive from this ordering indices for the elements of Y ′ 

> 1

, Y ′ 

> 2

, Z 1, and Z2 as follows. We number Y ′ 

> 1

= {y11 , . . . , y 1 

> r⋆

} and Y ′ 

> 2

= {y21 , . . . , y 2 

> r⋆

} such that 

yji lies on R⋆i for both j ∈ [2] and all i ∈ [r⋆]. We also number the vertices in X1 = {x11, . . . , x 1 

> r⋆

}

such that x1 

> i

is the endpoint of the path in F1 that contains y1 

> i

for each i ∈ [r⋆]. Then, we number the vertices X2 = {x21, . . . , x 2 

> r⋆

} such that x1 

> i

and x2 

> i

belong to the same path, denoted by Si, of S′ for each i ∈ [r⋆]. Finally, we number Z1 = {z11 , . . . , z 1 

> r⋆

} and Z2 = {z21 , . . . , z 2 

> r⋆

} such that z1 

> i

and z2 

> i

belong to the path R⋆i .118 A′

> 1

B2

B1

X1

X2

Figure 24: An illustration of the situation in the proof of Theorem 10.1 after rerouting the paths in A′ 

> 1

and B1. The figure depicts the situation in the proof of Claim 10.2.6 right before we begin to fix the connections in B2. The magenta paths illustrate the original rivers, while the yellow paths depict the linkage F1 and the blue paths depict the linkage F′

> 2

.Let us now define the bijection π : [ r⋆] → [r⋆] such that for each i ∈ [r⋆], z 2 

> i

lies on R⋆π(i).It is now entirely possible that i̸ = π(i), however, in order to complete our proof we need to find a Z2-Y ′ 

> 2

-linkage in B2 which connects z2 

> π(i)

to y2 

> i

for each i ∈ [r⋆]. However, we claim that within 

⊚′′  

> 2

, this linkage is topologically feasible. To see this notice that we know we may use the paths from F1 and F′ 

> 2

∪ F ′′  

> 2

to redraw the curves obtained from the traces of the paths in S′ to pass through the points of Y ′ 

> 2

and Z2. It follows now that for each of those curves, the remaining curve between the two points in Y ′ 

> 2

and Z2 may now be confined to be contained entirely in ⊚′′ 

> 2

and this is possible while keeping the collection of these curves being a topological linkage. With the pattern of order r⋆ defined as {{y2 

> i

, z 2

> π(i)

} : i ∈ [r⋆]} being topologically feasible in ⊚,

and the fact that B2 is a railed annulus with at least 2r⋆ circles and at least 2r⋆ rails, it follows from Lemma 4.13 that it is realisable in B2, leading to a linkage F′′′  

> 2

. Now, F2 := F′ 

> 2

∪ F ′′  

> 2

∪ F ′′′ 

> 2

is our desired linkage. ⊣

Let Y ′ 

> 1

denote the subset of Y1 consisting only of endpoints of paths from F1. To complete the proof of the theorem, we now observe that R⋆ contains a Y ′ 

> 1

-Y ′ 

> 2

-linkage F3 of size |Y ′ 

> 1

| = |Y ′ 

> 2

| =

|R ⋆| that is internally vertex-disjoint from both F1 and F2. By combining F1, F2, and F3 into a single linkage S⋆, we have no found a set of rivers that is combed in the (6 β(k, b ) + 6) -trimming 

A∗ of A′. This means that, by replacing S′ with S⋆ we may obtain a linkage L∗ which is combed in A∗ and which satisfies τ (L∗) = τ (L′). Since G′ is a minor of G and A∗ is a minor of the 119 (8 β(k, b ) + 8) -trimming A⋆ of A, it follows that L∗ corresponds to a linkage L⋆ in G which is combed on A⋆ and has the same pattern as L. With this, the proof is complete. 

10.2 Redrawing topological minors models in partially disc-embedded graphs 

With Theorem 10.1 we now have a way to redraw a linkage onto the rails of some subannulus. Next we need to show that this can be applied in a broader setting as follows: Suppose some rooted graph (H, J ) is a rooted minor of our rooted graph (G, R) and part of G is embedded in a disc ∆ containing, in particular, a large flat subwall of G. Inside of this subwall we may find a big railed annulus A separating an interior area of ∆ from everything of G not drawn into ∆.From here, the plan is to proceed in two steps. First, redraw the minor model of (H, R) such that it intersects the domain of A only in few rails and nowhere else. Second, use A to crop the interior part of the minor model and then redraw it within A itself, thereby avoiding the centre of the wall. 

10.3 Combing a topological minor 

Our first target is a generalisation of Theorem 10.1 to work also with fixed topological minors and not just with vertex-disjoint paths. As we are going to work with topological minors throughout most of this section, we now spend some time defining the necessary notions. 

Topological minors. We say that an annotated graph (J, T ) is a tm-pair if all vertices in 

V (J) \ T have degree precisely 2 in J and no component of J − T is a path. Given a graph G

and a vertex v ∈ V (G) of degree 2, the operation of dissolving v is defined as deleting v and introducing an edge between the two neighbours of v if they were not already adjacent. We denote by Diss (J, T ) the graph obtained from the tm-pair (J, T ) by dissolving all vertices of 

V (J \ T . A tm-pair of a graph G is a tm-pair (J, T ) such that J ⊆ G. We now say that a graph 

H is a topological minor of a graph G if there exists a tm-pair (J, T ) in G such that Diss (J, T )

is isomorphic to H. In this case we say that (J, T ) models H and J is a subdivision of H. The vertices of T are called the branch vertices and the paths in J with both endpoints in T but internally vertex-disjoint from T are called the subdivision paths of (J, T ), finally, the vertices in 

V (J) \ T are called the subdivision vertices .For our railed annuli, we already had a glimpse of the idea what a “partial” embedding might look like: In the case of annuli, we only really needed a sphere-rendition of our graph G with two vortices such that the railed annulus is grounded and the trace of each of its circles separates the two vortices in the sphere. Now, we go one step further and focus only on graphs that are “partially” embedded in a disc. 

Partially disc-embedded graphs. Let ∆ be a closed disc. We say that a graph G is ∆-embedded 

(via Γ) if Γ is an embedding of G in ∆ such that the intersection of bd (∆) and Γ is a subset of 

V (G). A partial ∆-embedding of a graph G is a triple (G1, G 2, Γ) where G = G1 ∪ G2, G 1 and G2

intersect in vertices only, and G1 is ∆-embedded via Γ. We say that G1 is the ∆-embedded part 

of G and we usually identify G1 and Γ. When we say that a graph G is partially ∆-embedded , we implicitly assume that G comes with a partial ∆-embedding. A graph G is said to be partially disc embedded if there exists a disc ∆ such that G is partially ∆-embedded .120 In a more general setting, we say that a sphere-rendition ρ of a graph G is a imperfect rendition in a disc if ρ has a unique vortex c0. In such a situation, we refer to the closure of the set obtained from the sphere by deleting c0 as the disc of ρ. We sometimes say that ρ is an imperfect rendition in a disc ∆ to say that ρ is an imperfect rendition in a disc with disc ∆. Notice that every partial ∆-embedding of some graph G gives rise to an imperfect rendition of G in a disc. 

A railed annulus in a disc. Let G be a graph with an imperfect rendition in a disc, ∆ be the disc of ρ, and A ⊆ G be a separating railed annulus in G with domain ⊚ ⊆ ∆. In such a situation we assume that the circles of A are numbered as C1, . . . , C s such that for all i < j ∈ [r],

the Ci-disc ∆i is contained in the Cj -disc ∆j .Now let b ≥ 0 be an integer and let (G, R ) be an annotated graph and ρ be an imperfect rendition in a disc ∆ for G, a set X ⊆ V (G) with R ⊆ X is split in ∆ by a railed annulus A with domain 

⊚, if i) A is blank, ii) there exists a set D ⊆ R such that, if G′ is the crop of G by ∆, then D = G′ ∩ R, and iii) if ∆′ ⊆ ∆ is the unique component of ∆ \ ⊚ which is homeomorphic to a disc, then D is a subset of the vertices of the crop of G by ∆′.We say that the set D is the set of trapped terminals .

Controlling topological minors. Let (J, T ) be a tm-pair in an annotated graph (G, R ). The 

detail of (J, T ), denoted by detail R(J, T ), is the integer d := |T \ R|. Let ρ be an imperfect rendition in a disc ∆ for G, then (J, T ) is carefully split in ∆ by a railed annulus A if (G, R ∪ T )

is split in ∆ where the set of trapped terminals is a subset of T \ R.Let now (J, T ) be a tm-pair in (G, R ), ρ be an imperfect rendition in a disc ∆ for G, and A be a railed annulus in G. We say that A confines (J, T ) if i) (J, T ) is carefully split by A, and ii) if ⊚ is the domain of A in ∆ and G′ is the crop of G by ⊚, then J ∩ G′ is a collection of subpaths of the rails of A.See Figure 25 for an illustration of these definitions. What follows is an analogue of the so-called “Model Combing Lemma” by Golovach, Stamoulis, and Thilikos [GST23b]. This may be seen as a strengthening of Theorem 10.1 where we replace the linkage with a topological minor model. 

Lemma 10.3. There exist functions f10 .3, g 10 .3, h 10 .3N3 → N such that for all integers k, b, d ∈ N,

graphs H, and annotated graphs (G, R ), if  

> •

bidim (G, R ) ≤ b,  

> •

(J, T ) is a tm-pair in G modelling H,  

> •

|T ∩ R| ≤ k,  

> •

detail (J, T ) ≤ d,  

> •

G has a partial ∆-embedding (G1, G 2, Γ) where ∆ is a closed disc,  

> •

V (G1) ∩ R = ∅, and  

> •

A = As,r is a railed annulus with s ≥ f10 .3(k, b, d ) and r ≥ g10 .3(k, b, d ) such that A

carefully splits (J, T ).Let A′ be the h10 .3(k, b, d )-trimming of A. Then there exists a tm-pair (J′, T ′) modelling H in 

G such that, 121 Figure 25: A sketch of a tm-pair (J, T ) with terminals in red – those are the ones belonging to 

R – and magenta with a partial rendition in a disc ∆ depicted in gray. The magenta curves illustrate the paths of J between the vertices in T . The yellow area is the domain of a railed annulus A which carefully splits (T, J ). The darker shade of yellow marks the domain of a subannulus A′ of A that confines (T, J ).i) T ′ = T, 

ii) A′ confines (J′, T ′), and iii) if ⊚ is the domain of A and G′ is the crop of G by ⊚, then J − G′ ⊆ J′ − G′.Moreover, f10 .3(k, b, d ), g 10 .3(k, b, d ), h 10 .3(k, b, d ) ∈ 2poly (b+d) · poly (k).Before we dive into the proof, we need a small auxiliary lemma on the bidimensionality of vertices in partially disc-embedded graphs. Let G be a graph v ∈ V (G) be a vertex and F ⊆ E(G) be a set of edges incident with v. The 

F -splitting of v in G is the graph Gv obtained from G by first subdividing each edge e ∈ F with a new vertex xe and then deleting v. Similarly, if S ⊆ V (G) is a set of vertices and F ⊆ E(G) is a set of edges such that each edge in F is incident with some vertex of S, the F -splitting of S

in G is the graph obtained from G by iteratively splitting the vertices in S at their respective edges in F . In case some edge e in F is incident with two vertices of S, this edge will receive two subdivision vertices. That is, after splitting the first endpoint u of e = uv in the process above and introducing the subdivision vertex xe, the edge xev must be added to F, replacing e.We call the set X of all newly introduced vertices xe for the F -splitting of S in G the residue of 

S and we call the elements of X the residual vertices . See Figure 26 for an illustration. 

Lemma 10.4. Let ∆ be a closed disc, (G, R ) be an annotated graph and (G1, G 2, Γ) be a partial ∆-embedding of G. Let S ⊆ V (G1) \ R be a set of vertices not drawn on bd (∆) and let F ⊆ E(G)1 be a set of edges such that each edge in F is incident with some vertex of 

S. Finally, let G′ be the F -splitting of S in G and let X be the residue of S in G′. Then, 

bidim (G′, R ∪ X) ≤ bidim (G, R ∪ X) + 2 ≤ bidim (G, R ) + |X| + 2 .122 (i) (ii) 

Figure 26: (i) A graph G with an edge set F – depicted in blue – and vertex set S – depicted in magenta. (ii) The F -splitting of G at S where the residue of S is depicted in yellow. 

Proof. Let s ∈ S be any vertex and let x1, . . . , x p be the residual vertices introduced when we split at s in the creating of G′. Notice that we inherit a natural partial ∆-embedding (G′

> 1

, G ′

> 2

, Γ′)

from (G1, G 2, Γ) where G2 = G′ 

> 2

and G′ 

> 1

is the F -splitting of S in G1. Then all of x1, . . . , x p sit on a common face in ∆. It follows that, if (H, Y ) is a red-minor of (G′, R ∪X) where H is planar and 

φ is a red minor-model of (H, Y ) in G′, if P = {v ∈ V (H) : there exists i ∈ [p] s.t. xi ∈ φ(v)},

and ΓH is the drawing of H obtained from G′, then there exists a face of ΓH which contains all of P . Hence, in any red grid-minor J of (G′, R ∪ X) there must exist a facial cycle of J

containing all involved vertices among the xi. Thus, the number of 4-cycles in any red grid-minor of (G′, R ∪ X) may exceed the maximum number of 4-cycles in a red grid-minor of (G, R ) by at most |S|. Notice that any grid has at most one facial cycle of length more than 4 – its “outer cycle” – and deleting this outer cycle reduces the order of the grid by 2. So after removing the outer cycle of any red grid-minor in (G′, R ∪ X), the total number of 4-cycles remaining cannot exceed bidim (G, R )2 by more than S. Thus, bidim (G′, R ∪ X) ≤ bidim (G, R ) + |S| + 2 as desired. 

Proof of Lemma 10.3. We first fix our functions as follows: 

f10 .3(k, b, d ) := f10 .1(k + ( k + d)2, b + d + 2) ,g10 .3(k, b, d ) := g10 .1(k + ( k + d)2, b + d + 2) , and 

h10 .3(k, b, d ) := h10 .1(k + ( k + d)2, b + d + 2) .

With Lemma 10.4 we are now able to simply reduce the claim to an application of Theorem 10.1. For this recall that (J, T ) is a tm-pair in G modelling a graph H, we have that detail (J, T ) ≤ d, 

(G1, G 2, Γ) is a partial ∆-embedding of G, and A is a railed annulus in G with s ≥ f10 .3(k, b, d )

circles and r ≥ g10 .3(k, b, d ) rails. Let now D be the set of trapped terminals for (G, R ∪ T ), A, and (G1, G 2, Γ) . Then D ⊆ T \ R

by definition. Moreover, since the vertices in D are trapped (by A) it follows that no vertex of 123 D is drawn on bd (∆) . Let now F ⊆ E(G) ∩ J be the set of all edges of J that are incident with some vertex in D. It follows that |F | ≤ (k + d)2.Now consider the F -splitting G′ of D in G and let X be the set of residual vertices in G′. Notice that (J, T ) naturally defines a pattern of order |E(H)| in G by assigning to each subdivision path in J its two endpoints as terminals. Similarly, in G′, we may define a pattern of order 

|E(H)| on the set X ∪ (T \ D) which is realised by the linkage L consisting of the paths in 

G′ obtained from subdivision paths of (J, T ) by replacing, in each subdivision path P, the endpoints of P that belong to D with the respective residual vertices. Finally, we may observe that bidim (G′, R ∪ (T \ D) ∪ X) ≤ bidim (G, R ∪ (T \ D)) + |D| + 2 by Lemma 10.4. Moreover, by Observation 2.1 we have that 

bidim (G, R ∪ (T \ D)) + |D| + 2 ≤ bidim (G, R ) + |T \ D| + |D| + 2 ≤ b + d + 2 .

Now, we apply Theorem 10.1 to (G′, R ∪ (T \ D) ∪ X) and L and A. This yields a linkage L′ in 

G′ with τ (L) = τ (L′) such that L′ is combed in the h(k, b, d )-trimming A′ of A. Moreover, if ⊚

is the domain of A, and G′′ is the crop of G′ by ⊚, then ⋃ L′ − G′′ ⊆ ⋃ L − G′′ . Notice that, if we let L′′ be the collection of paths obtained from the paths in L′ by replacing each vertex of X

with the corresponding vertex of D, then L′′ is a collection of internally vertex-disjoint paths in G with all endpoints in T . Indeed, it follows from the construction of G′, that (⋃ L′′ , T ) is indeed a tm-pair in G modelling H and our proof is complete. Notice that, if one was not interested in the bounds on the functions involved or in the explicit dependency on the bidimensionality, Lemma 10.3 is precisely the same as the Model Combing Lemma of Golovach, Stamoulis, and Thilikos (Theorem 6 in [GST23b]). Indeed, when considering the bounds abstractly, the main difference is that our proof depends only linearly on the Linkage Function, while the original proof had a quadratic dependency. This difference is only visible in the proof though as this subtle difference in the degrees is hidden in the poly -notation. Our main application of Lemma 10.3 is to argue that another redrawing-type theorem from the literature – this time due to Baste, Sau, and Thilikos [BST23] – is applicable in our setting while maintaining the close-to-optimal bounds to the Linkage Function guaranteed by Theorem 9.1. Before we continue, we need to introduce a hand full of additional definitions in order to state the result of Baste et al. 

Contracting respectfully. Let G and H be graphs and Q ⊆ V (H) be a set of vertices. We say that a map ϕ : V (H) → 2V (G) is a Q-respecting contraction-mapping of H to G if    

> •⋃
> x∈V(H)

ϕ(x) = V (G), 

> •

for all x̸ = y ∈ V (H) it holds that ϕ(x) ∩ ϕ(y) = ∅, 

> •

for each x ∈ V (H), ϕ (x) is connected,  

> •

for each xy ∈ E(H), ϕ (x) ∪ ϕ(y) is connected, and  

> •

for each x ∈ Q it holds that |ϕ(x)| = 1 .One may interpret the idea behind Q-respectful contraction-mappings as an interpolation between topological minors and minors. For some special vertices – namely those in Q – we do not allow any form of further contraction, but for those outside Q normal minor rules apply. 

Dispersing vertices in a wall. Let G be a planar graph with an embedding Γ in a disc ∆.The outer face of Γ is the unique face that contains bd (∆) . Given two vertices x and y of G, 

124 we define their face-distance in Γ to be the smallest integer d such that there exists a curve γ

between x and y in ∆ such that γ is internally disjoint from the outer face of Γ, no internal point of γ is a vertex of Γ, and γ intersects at most d faces of Γ.We say that a graph G is plane if G comes identified with an embedding Γ of G in a disc ∆.In case G is a plane graph, the face distance between two of its vertices is the face distance between those vertices in Γ. Given two vertex sets X, Y ⊆ V (G), the face distance between X

and Y is the minimum integer d such that there are x ∈ X and y ∈ Y with face distance at most d. Let H1, H 2 be two subgraphs of G. The face distance of H1 and H2 is the face distance of V (H1) and V (H2).Given an integer d ∈ N and a vertex x ∈ V (G), we denote by FdG(x) the set of all vertices of G

that are within face distance at most d of x.Let G be a plane graph, s ∈ N, and a tm-pair (J, T ) of G, we say that (J, T ) is safely s-dispersed 

in G if i) any two distinct vertices t, t ∈ T are within face distance at least 2s + 1 in G, and ii) for every t ∈ T with deg J (t) = d, the graph J[FsG(t) ∩ V (J)] consists of d paths with t as a unique common endpoint. 

Layers and central subwalls. Let r ≥ 3 be an integer and W be an r-wall. Notice that W may be understood as an (r × r)-mesh with a perimeter. We define the layers of W recursively as follows: The first layer of W is its perimeter. For i ∈ [2 , ⌊r/2⌋], the ith layer of W is the (i − 1) th layer of the (r − 1) -wall obtained from W by removing its perimeter and iteratively removing vertices of degree 1.Given an integer q ∈ [3 , r ] such that r − q is even, the q-central subwall of W is the q-wall obtained from W by removing the first r−q/2 layers of W and then iteratively deleting vertices of degree at most 1.Next, we need a lemma that allows us to redraw planar parts of a tm-pair onto an annulus while also guaranteeing big distances between certain branch vertices and maintaining a fixed interface. 

Proposition 10.5 (Baste, Sau, and Thilikos [BST23]) . There exists a function f10 .5 : N3 → N

such that the following holds: Let c, r, r ′, ℓ ∈ N, r ′ ≤ r, let H be a ∆-embedded graph with ℓ + r′ vertices and let Z =

{z1, . . . , z r′ } ⊆ V (H) such that  

> •

the vertices of H have degree at most 3, 

> •

Z is an independent set of H,  

> •

all vertices of Z have degree 1 in H,  

> •

bd (∆) ∩ H = Z, and  

> •

⟨z1, . . . , z r′ ⟩ is the cyclic ordering of the vertices of Z as they appear in the boundary of ∆.Let also G be a ∆′-embedded graph, A be a railed annulus with x circles C1, . . . , C x and y rails 

R1, . . . , R y such that x, y ≥ f10 .5(c, r, ℓ ) ≥ r. Let further wi denote the endpoint of Ri on C1 for each i ∈ [r] and let I := {i1, . . . , i r′ } ⊆ [r]. Then A contains a tm-pair (J, T ) such that i) Diss (J, T ) = H, 

ii) there exists a bijection σ : V (H) → T inducing an isomorphism between Diss (J, T ) and H

such that for each j ∈ [r′] it holds that σ(zj ) = wij ,

125 iii) the tm-pair (J, T ) is safely c-dispersed in A, and iv) none of the vertices of T \ { wi1 , . . . , w ir′ } is within face distance less than c from some vertex in V (C1) ∪ V (Cr).Moreover, it holds that f10 .5(c, r, ℓ ) ∈ O (cr (ℓ + r)) .We are finally ready to state our variant of the tm-pair redrawing lemma of Baste, Sau, and Thilikos [BST23] needed for confining and dispersing partially disc embedded tm-pairs inside a railed annulus. See Figure 27 for an illustration. 

(i) (ii) 

Figure 27: (i) The input for Theorem 10.6: A tm-pair partially drawn in the disk-embedded part of a partially disk-embedded graph together with a railed annulus separating the branch vertices – depicted in magenta. (ii) The outcome of Theorem 10.6 applied to the input depicted in (i): the tm-pair now coincides with the rails of the central part of the annulus – the green paths – while the inner part of the tm-pair – depicted in yellow has been fully redrawn into the inner part of the annulus and the outer part – indicated in magenta – has been tamed to avoid the central and the inner layer of our annulus. 

Theorem 10.6. There exist three functions f10 .6 : N5 → N, g 10 .6 : N3 → N, and h10 .6 : N4 → N

such that the following holds: Let s, b, d, k, z ∈ N with z ≥ 3 being odd. Let ∆ be a disc and (G, R ) be an annotated graph satisfying bidim (G, R ) ≤ b with a partial ∆-embedding (G1, G 2, Γ) such that 

• V (G1) ∩ R = ∅,

• G1 contains an f10 .6(s, z, b, d, k )-wall W whose perimeter separates its interior from bd (∆) 

in ∆,

• C = {C1, . . . , C g10 .6(d,b,k )+ h10 .6(s,d,k,b )} are the first g10 .6(d, b, k ) + h10 .6(s, d, k, b ) layers of W

indexed in the natural order, and 

• ∆1, . . . , ∆g10 .6(d,b,k )+ h10 .6(s,d,k,b ) ⊆ ∆ denote the open discs defined by these layers. If (J, T ) is a tm-pair of G with detail (J, T ) ≤ d and |R ∩ T | ≤ k where Q ⊆ T is a set containing vertices of degree at most 3 in J, then there exists a tm-pair (J′, T ′) of G and an integer 

q ∈ [g10 .6(d, b, k )] such that 126 i) J′ − (V (G1) ∩ ∆q) is a subgraph of J − (V (G1) ∩ ∆q),

ii) if ⊚ ⊆ ∆ denotes the annulus with boundary components Cq and Cq+h10 .6(s,d,k,b )−1 and G′

denotes the crop of G1 by ⊚, then V (G′) ∩ (T ∪ T ′) = ∅,

iii) (J′ ∩ (G1 ∩ cl (∆ q+h10 .6(s,d,k,b ))) , T ′ ∩ (V (G1) ∩ cl (∆ q+h10 .6(s,d,k,b )))) is a tm-pair of W that is safely s-dispersed in W and none of the vertices of T ′ ∩(V (G1)∩cl (∆ q+h10 .6(s,d,k,b ))) is within face distance less than s in W from some vertex of Cq+h10 .6(s,d,k,b )∪Cq+g10 .6(d,b,k )+ h10 .6(s,d,k,b ),

iv) J′ ∩ (G1 ∩ ∆g10 .6(d,b,k ) + h10 .6(s, d, k, b )) = ∅,

v) the compass of the z-central subwall of W is contained in ∆g10 .6(d,b,k )+ h10 .6(s,d,k,b ), and vi) there is a Q-respecting contraction mapping of Diss (J, T ) to Diss (J′, T ′).Moreover, it holds that f10 .6(s, z, d, b, k ) ∈ 2poly (b+d) · poly (s + z + k) and g10 .6(d, b, k ) ∈

2poly (b+d) · poly (k) and, h10 .6(s, d, k, b ) ∈ 2poly (b+d) · poly (s + k).

Proof. We open by defining our functions. 

f10 .6(s, z, b, d, k ) := 2(( d + 2) · f10 .3(k, b, d ) + f10 .5(s, k, d ) + 2 g10 .3(k, b, d )) + (3 s + 1) · (g10 .3(k, b, d )) + f10 .5(s, f 10 .3(k, b, d ), d + 2 d2) + z + 1 

g10 .6(d, b, k ) := ( d + 2) · f10 .3(k, b, d ) + 2 g10 .3(k, b, d )

h10 .6(s, d, k, b ) := f10 .5(s, f 10 .3(k, b, d ), d + 2 d2)

With this, the claimed bounds on the functions follow directly from Lemma 10.3 and Proposi-tion 10.5. Let us now define C1, . . . , C (d+2) ·f10 .3(k,b,d )+ h10 .6(s,d,k )+2 g10 .3(k,b,d ) the first (d + 2) · f10 .3(k, b, d ) + 

h10 .6(s, d, k, b ) + 2 g10 .3(k, b, d ) layers of W . for each i ∈ [d + 1] define ⊚i ⊆ ∆ to be the annulus with boundary components C(i−1) ·(f10 .3(k,b,d ))+1 and Ci·f10 .3(k,b,d ) and let Hi be the crop of G by 

⊚i. We say that C(i−1)( ·f10 .3(k,b,d ))+1 is the outer cycle of ⊚i and Ci·· f10 .3(k,b,d ) is the inner cycle 

of ⊚i.Notice that there exist (3 s + 1) · (g10 .3(k, b, d )) + f10 .5(s, f 10 .3(k, b, d ), d + 2 d2) vertical paths of R′′  

> 1

. . . R ′′  

> (3 s+1) ·(g10 .3(k,b,d ))+ f10 .5(s,f 10 .3(k,b,d ),d +2 d2)

of W such that for each i ∈ [(3 s + 1) ·

(g10 .3(k, b, d )) + f10 .5(s, f 10 .3(k, b, d ), d + 2 d2)] and j ∈ [( d + 2) · f10 .3(k, b, d ) + h10 .6(s, d, k, b ) + 2g10 .3(k, b, d )] , R ′′  

> i

∩ Cj has precisely two components and each such component is a subpath of both R′′  

> i

and Cj . From each R′′  

> i

select R′ 

> i

to be a minimal V (C1)-V (C(d+2) ·f10 .3(k,b,d )+ h10 .6(s,d,k,b ) +2g10 .3(k, b, d )) -subpath of R′′  

> i

and assume, without loss of generality, that the paths 

R′

> 1

, . . . , R ′

> (3 s+1) ·(g10 .3(k,b,d ))+ f10 .5(s,f 10 .3(k,b,d ),d +2 d2)

are numbered according to the clockwise order of the appearance of their endpoints in C1. Then, for every j ∈ [g10 .3(k, b, d )] let 

aj := 3 js + 1 ,

Now, for each j ∈ [g10 .3(k, b, d )] let 

Rj := R′

> aj

127 and notice that, in W, any two of the Rj ’s are at face distance at least 3s from each other. More-over, ⋃ 

> i∈[( d+2) ·f10 .3(k,b,d )+ h10 .6(s,d,k,b )]

Ci ∪⋃ 

> j∈[g10 .3(k,b,d )]

forms a railed annulus A with g10 .3(k, b, d )

rails and (d + 2) · f10 .3(k, b, d ) + h10 .6(s, d, k, b ) circles. For each i ∈ [d + 1] let Ai denote the railed annulus with f10 .3(k, b, d ) circles and g10 .3(k, b, d )

rails obtained by cropping A by ⊚i.

Combing the model. Since detail (J, T ) ≤ d and V (G1) ∩ R = ∅, there must exist i ∈ [d + 1] 

such that V (Hi) ∩ T = ∅. Let ∆i denote the disc in ∆ bounded by the outer cycle of ⊚i.Moreover, let G′ 

> 1

be the crop of G1 by ∆i and let G′ 

> 2

be the graph obtained from G by deleting all vertices and edges drawn on the interior of ∆i. Finally, let Γ′ be the restriction of Γ to ∆i.Then (G′

> 1

, G ′

> 2

, Γ′) is a ∆i-embedded graph. Notice now that 

• bidim (G, R ) ≤ b, 

• (J, T ) is a tm-pair in G modelling Diss (J, T ),

• |T ∩ R| ≤ k, 

• detail (J, T ) ≤ d, 

• G has a partial ∆i-embedding (G′

> 1

, G ′

> 2

, Γ) where ∆′ is a closed disc, 

• V (G′

> 1

) ∩ R = ∅, and 

• Ai is a railed annulus with s ≥ f10 .3(k, b, d ) circles and r ≥ g10 .3(k, b, d ) rails such that Ai

carefully splits (J, T ).Hence, we may now apply Lemma 10.3 to (J, T ) and Ai in G. As a result we get that, if A′

> i

denotes the h10 .3(k, b, d )-trimming of A and ⊚′ 

> i

denotes the domain of A′

> i

, then there exists a tm-pair ( ˜J, ˜T ) modelling Diss (J, T ) in G such that, i) ˜T = T, 

ii) A′ 

> i

confines ( ˜J, ˜T ), and iii) J − H′ 

> i

⊆ ˜J − H′ 

> i

where H′ 

> i

denotes the crop of G1 by ⊚′

> i

.For each j ∈ [g10 .3(k, b, d )] let ̂ Rj denote the subpath of Rj in A′

> i

. We say that ̂ Rj is used if ̂

Rj ⊆ J′ and we denote by I ⊆ [g10 .3(k, b, d )] the set of all j ∈ [g10 .3(k, b, d )] such that ̂ Rj is used. For every j ∈ I we denote by uj the endpoint of Rj on C(d+2) ·f10 .3(k,b,d ).

Redrawing the model. Now let ̂ T ′ ⊆ ˜T be the set of all terminals of ( ˜J, ˜T ) trapped by A′

> i

.Furthermore, let ̂ J be the crop of ˜J by the disc ̂ ∆ whose boundary coincides with the inner cycle of ⊚′ 

> i

– that is the unique boundary component of ⊚′ which is separated from bd (∆) by the other boundary component of ⊚′

> i

. Let π : [|I|] → I be a bijection such that x < y ∈ I implies that 

π−1(x) < π −1(y). For each j ∈ [|I|] let zj be the end of ̂ Rπ(j) on the inner cycle of ⊚′ 

> i

and let 

Z := {zj : j ∈ [|I|]}. Finally set ̂ T :=̂ T ′ ∪ Z. Now notice that (̂ J, ̂ T ) is a tm-pair in G. Indeed, if we let G′′  

> 1

be the crop of G1 by ̂ ∆, then G′′  

> 1

is ̂ ∆-embedded and (̂T , ̂ J) is a tm-pair in G′′  

> 1

.Let us briefly pause and observe that ∆( ̂J) might be larger than 3. Indeed, currently, we have that ̂ J itself is a ̂ ∆-embedded graph intersecting 18 bd (̂ ∆) precisely in Z. In the next step we create a new tm-pair (J⋆, T ⋆) from (̂J, ̂ T ) by iteratively “splitting” vertices while maintaining i) that (J⋆, T ⋆) is ̂ ∆-embedded, ii) that J⋆ intersects bd (̂ ∆) precisely in Z, 

iii) that |T ⋆ \ Z| ≤ | ̂ T | + 2 |E(Diss (̂ J, ̂ T )) |, and 

> 18 Notice that this claim is not entirely true, but we may assume to slightly shift all other vertices and edges on the boundary away from it as they play a less crucial role.

128 iv) Diss (̂ J, ̂ T ) is a minor of J⋆.Before we start the process, notice that each vertex of Z has degree 1 in ̂ J by construction. Now, set ̂ J0 := ̂ J and ̂ T0 := ̂ T . As long as there exists v ∈̂ Ji with deg ̂ Ji (v) ≥ 4 we partition N̂Ji into sets X and Y such that |X| = 2 and |Y | = deg ̂ Ji (v) − 2. Then we delete v and instead introduce two vertices v1 and v2 together with edges such that v1 is adjacent exactly to the vertices in X

and v2, and v2 is adjacent exactly to the vertices in Y and v1. We then denote the resulting graph by ̂ Ji+1 . By our choice of v it must be true that v ∈̂ Ti and now we replace v ∈̂ Ti by v1

and v2 to create the set ̂ Ti+1 . Notice that in each step the number of vertices increases by 1,

the number of edges increases by 1, and the degree of some vertex decreases by 1. Hence, after a bounded number of iterations, we reach a point where J⋆ =̂ Ji has maximum degree 3 and 

|T ⋆ \ Z| ≤ | ̂ T | + 2 |E(Diss (̂ J, ̂ T )) | where T ⋆ := ̂ Ti as desired. Notice also that the set Q ⊆ T was a set of vertices of degree at most 3 in J and so we still have that Q ∩̂ T ′ ⊆ T ⋆ as J − H′ 

> i

⊆ ˜J − H′

> i

.Now require two additional railed annuli. One in order to apply Proposition 10.5 and the other in order to reconnect the redrawn model into the used rails of A′

> i

. Recall that Ci·f10 .3(k,b,d ) is the inner cycle of ⊚′.Let B1 denote the railed annulus with circles Ci·f10 .3(k,b,d )+1 , . . . , C i·f10 .3(k,b,d )+2 g10 .3(k,b,d )) and rails 

P1, . . . , P (3 s+1) ·(g10 .3(k,b,d ))+ f10 .5(s,f 10 .3(k,b,d ),d +2 d2) obtained by restricting the R′ 

> j

to their minimal 

Ci·f10 .3(k,b,d )+1 -C2g10 .3(k,b,d )) -subpaths. Let ⊚1 denote the domain of B1.Similarly, let B2 denote the railed annulus with circles 

Ci·f10 .3(k,b,d )+2 g10 .3(k,b,d ))+1 , . . . , C i·f10 .3(k,b,d )+2 g10 .3(k,b,d ))+ f10 .5(s,f 10 .3(k,b,d ),d +2 d2)

and rails Q1, . . . , Q (3 s+1) ·(g10 .3(k,b,d ))+ f10 .5(s,f 10 .3(k,b,d ),d +2 d2) obtained by restricting the R′ 

> j

to their minimal C·f10 .3(k,b,d )+2 g10 .3(k,b,d ))+1 -Ci·f10 .3(k,b,d )+2 g10 .3(k,b,d ))+ f10 .5(s,f 10 .3(k,b,d ),d +2 d2)-subpaths. We have now gained the right to apply Proposition 10.5 to J⋆ and the annulus B2.Let wj denote the endpoint of Qj on Ci·f10 .3(k,b,d )+2 g10 .3(k,b,d ))+1 for each j ∈ [i · f10 .3(k, b, d ) + 2g10 .3(k, b, d )) + f10 .5(s, f 10 .3(k, b, d ), d + 2 d2)] and recall our set I of indices. We now gain from Proposition 10.5 that B2 contains a tm-pair (J†, T †) such that i) Diss (J†, T †) = J⋆,

ii) there exists a bijection σ : V (J⋆) → T † inducing an isomorphism between Diss (J†, T †) and 

J⋆ such that for each j ∈ [|I|] it holds that σ(zπ−1(j)) = wj ,

iii) the tm-pair (J†, T †) is safely s-dispersed in B2, and iv) none of the vertices of T † \ { wi : j ∈ I} is within face distance less than s from some vertex in V (Ci·f10 .3(k,b,d )+2 g10 .3(k,b,d ))+1 ) ∪ V (Ci·f10 .3(k,b,d )+2 g10 .3(k,b,d ))+ f10 .5(s,f 10 .3(k,b,d ),d +2 d2)).See (ii) in Figure 27: Here, the yellow part illustrates the tm-pair (J†, T †) now rooted on the rails of the annulus. 

Reconnecting the model. The final step is to simply call upon Lemma 4.12 to connect the vertices zπ−1(j) to the vertices wj within B1. As this linkage is clearly topologically feasible within the domain of B1, Lemma 4.12 yields the existence of the desired linkage L.Let (J$, T $) be obtained by adding the paths in L to J† and replacing the vertices wj in T †

with the vertices zπ−1(j) for all j ∈ I.129 Let G′′  

> 2

be obtained from G by deleting all vertices and edges of G′′  

> 1

drawn in the interior of ̂

∆. Now let J% be the intersection of ˜J with G′′  

> 2

and let T % be the intersection of T with the vertices of G′′  

> 2

. Finally, let J# := J$ ∪ J% and T # := T $ ∪ T %. It is easy to see that (J#, T #)

is now a tm-pair of G such that no vertex or edge of J# is drawn in or intersects the interior of the disc in ∆ bounded by Ci·f10 .3(k,b,d )+2 g10 .3(k,b,d ))+ f10 .5(s,f 10 .3(k,b,d ),d +2 d2) Moreover, Diss (J) is a minor of J# and, in particular, there exists a Q-respecting contracting mapping of Diss (J, Y ) to 

Diss (J#, T #) by construction. From here it is straightforward to verify that (J#, T #) is indeed the tm-pair required by our assertion. 

# 11 An irrelevant vertex for folio 

In this section we finally prove the core statement of the Graph Minor Algorithm, that is Theorem 2.5. Towards this goal we need a number of additional definition and intermediate results. In broad strokes, what is left to do at this point is to first, explaining homogeneous flat walls in the abstract and then describing the set of colours which defines the homogeneity. Second, we explain how Theorem 10.6 may be used to show that any minor model invading deep into a flat homogeneous wall may be redrawn in a way that fully avoids its centre. Third, we require a way to efficiently find a flat wall whose compass has bounded treewidth and which allows us to efficiently compute the colours required in the first and second step. Combining the outcomes of all three steps with the tools from Section 8 for handling clique-minors then finally results in a proof of Theorem 2.5. 

11.1 Homogeneous walls 

In order to describe how minor models may invade the compass of a flat wall, we need to take into account the way such minor models may interact with the graphs contained in the cells of the rendition witnessing the flatness of our wall. Moreover, since most flat walls come under the condition that a small apex set has already been removed, we also need to take into account how the graphs inside the cells can be enhanced through the additional boundary represented by those apex vertices. In particular, to really say that the centre of some flat wall is irrelevant, we must ensure that these interactions with minor models are essentially interchangeable everywhere in the wall. Please note that below we talk about meshes, but since every wall is a mesh and every 2r-mesh contains an r-wall, the two definitions are interchangeable up to a factor of 2.Let H be a subgraph of a graph G. An H-bridge in G is a connected subgraph J of G such that E(J) ∩ E(H) = ∅ and either E(J) consists of a unique edge with both ends in H, or J is constructed from a component C of G − V (H) and the non-empty set of edges F ⊆ E(G) with one end in V (C) and the other in V (H), by taking the union of C, the endpoints of the edges in 

F, and F itself. Notice that the H-bridges induce a partition of E(G) \ E(H). The vertices in 

V (J) ∩ V (H) are called the attachments of B and the set V (J) \ V (H) is called the interior of 

J.

Homogeneous meshes. Let r ≥ 3 be an integer and M be an r-mesh in G and let CP be the perimeter of M . Let C ⊆ M be any cycle of M . The compass of C is the union of C

130 together with all C-bridges in G that are entirely contained in the compass of M . We denote the compass of C with respect to ρ by compass M (C) and we drop the ρ in the subscript if it is understood from the context. The interior of a cycle C ⊆ M, denoted by int M (C) is the graph compass ρ(C) − C. We also drop the M in the subscript if the wall is understood from the context. Recall the definition of q-colorful graphs. We allow for q to be 0. In this case, for every 0-colorful graph (G, χ ) it holds that χ(v) = ∅ for all v ∈ V (G). Moreover, in such a case we do not distinguish between the graph G and the 0-colorful graph (G, χ ).Given an arbitrary q-colorful graph (G, χ ), a set X ⊆ V (G) and a subgraph H ⊆ G, we define 

χ(X) := ⋃

> v∈X

χ(v),

as well as χ(H) := χ(V (H)) . Note that this should not be confused with the chromatic number of H, which is of no concern to us. Finally, we write (H, χ ) for the q-colorful subgraph of G, 

where we implicitly restrict χ to the vertex set of H.Let q be a non-negative integer and (G, χ ) be a q-colorful graph. Let r ≥ 3 be an integer and M

be an r-mesh in G such that M is flat in G witnessed by a sphere-rendition ρ. We say that M

is homogeneous in (G, χ ) if for every cycle C ⊆ M it holds that 

χ(int (C)) = χ(compass (M )) .

We stress that the original notions of homogeneous flat walls were introduced by Robertson and Seymour [RS95, RS12] however, as pointed out by Sau, Stamoulis, and Thilikos, the price of homogeneity [SST20, SST22, SST23] that the exponential price for obtaining a homogeneous wall is a major obstacle along the path towards an efficient graph minor theory. It was shown by Gorsky, Seweryn, and Wiederrecht [GSW26] that in q-colorful graphs it is possible to find a large homogeneous flat wall within another huge flat wall by paying a price polynomial in q and the order of the target wall. 

Proposition 11.1 (Gorsky, Seweryn, and Wiederrecht [GSW26]) . There exists a function 

f11 .1 : N2 → N with f (q, k ) ∈ O (q4 · k6) such that for all non-negative integers q and k and every 

q-colorful graph G with a flat f (q, k )-wall W0 there exists a flat k-wall W1 ⊆ W0 such that the tangle of W1 is a truncation of the tangle of W0 and W1 is homogeneous. Moreover, there exists an algorithm that takes as input a colorful graph (G, χ ) and a flat wall 

W0 and computes the flat wall W1 as above in time poly (q + k)|| G|| .The main problem now is to define the colours in a way that allows us to model our desired properties. 

Augmenting cells. Let a, r ∈ N with r ≥ 3. Let G be a graph, A ⊆ V (G) be a set of at most a

vertices, and let W be an r-wall in G that is flat in G − A witnessed by the sphere rendition ρ.We denote by C(W ) the collection of all cells contained in the disc defined by the trace of the perimeter of W which contains all non-perimeter vertices of W which are of degree 3 in W .For each cell c ∈ C(W ) we consider a labelling λc : N (c) → [3] such that the set of labels assigned by λc to N (c) is one of [1] , [2] , or [3] . In addition, we consider a bijection αA : A → [a].131 The labellings λc and αA will be used to fix labels for the boundaries of the annotated graphs 

(G[V (σ(c)) ∪ A], N (c) ∪ A) to translate them into rooted graphs. For this to fully serve out purposes, we require some additional definitions. Let c ∈ C(W ), we define the ordering Ωc := ⟨x1, . . . , x ℓ⟩ with ℓ ≤ 3 of the vertices of N (c) such that the following holds: i) ⟨x1, . . . , x q⟩ is a counter clockwise cyclic ordering of the vertices of N (c) as they appear on the boundary of c in ρ and ii) for each i ∈ [q] we have that λc(xi) = i.Notice that the cyclic ordering above is significant only in the case where |N (c)| = 3 in the sense that ⟨x1, x 2, x 3⟩ remains invariant under shifting, i.e., ⟨x1, x 2, x ⟩) is the same as ⟨x2, x 3, x 1⟩,

but not under inversion, i.e., ⟨x1, x 2, x 3⟩ is not the same as ⟨x3, x 2, x 1⟩. See Figure 28 for an illustration. The second condition, on the other hand, is necessary for us to align the topological information of ρ with the abstract information of the labelling λc which will give rise to our rooted graphs. For each cell c ∈ C(W ) we now fix πc : A ∪ N (c) → [a + |N (c)|] such that πc(x) = αA(x) for all 

x ∈ A and πc(x) − a = λc(x) for all x ∈ N (c). Finally, this allows us to define the augmented cell c as the rooted graph 

Rc := ( G[V (σ(c) ∪ A)] , r 1, . . . , r a+|N (c)|)

where ri = π−1 

> c

(i) for all i ∈ [a + |N (c)|]. We denote the graph G[V (σ(c) ∪ A)] by Rc.

(i) (ii) 

x1

x2 x3

x1

x3 x2

Figure 28: Two labellings of the nodes of some 3-cell c that cannot be translated into each other by rotation.. 

Palettes of augmented cells. With each c ∈ C(W ) we now associate a set of graphs. Let d ≥ 0 be an integer. We denote by d-palette (c) the set d-folio (Rc) to which we refer as the 

d-palette of c.Notice that |d-palette (c)| ∈ 2O(( a+d)2). In the following, we will treat the set of all rooted graphs of detail at most d with at most a + 3 roots, i.e., the largest possible choice for a set d-palette (c),

denoted by Folio (d, a + 3) , as the set of colours for our colorful graph. Hence, in the following we will have that q ∈ 2(a+d)2

for our colorful graph. 

A d-folio homogeneous wall. Let a, r ∈ N with r ≥ 3. Let G be a graph A ⊆ V (G) a set of at most a vertices and let W be an r-wall in G that is flat in G − A witnessed by the sphere rendition ρ. We define the (d, A, W, ρ )-folio augmentation of G, denoted by (G(d,A,W,ρ ), ϕ ), as 132 the colorful graph obtained from G by introducing, for each c ∈ C(W ), a vertex xc adjacent to exactly the vertices of N (c), setting ϕ(v) := ∅ for all v ∈ V (G) and ϕ(c) := d-palette (c) for every c ∈ C(W ). Notice that ρ may be extended to a sphere rendition ρ′ of G(d,A,W,ρ ) − A such that ρ is the restriction of ρ′ to G − A ⊆ G(d,A,W,ρ ) − A simply by setting σρ′ := σ(c) + xc for all c ∈ C(W ) and σρ′ (c) := σ(c) for all c ∈ C(ρ) \ C(W ). We call ρ′ the ρ-augmentation for 

G(d,A,W,ρ ).Notice that W is still flat in G(d,A,W,ρ ) − A as witnessed by ρ′.We say that W is (d, A )-folio homogeneous in G if W is homogeneous in (G(d,A,W,ρ ) − A, ϕ ).

A flat wall of small treewidth. Let G be a graph and W ⊆ G be a flat wall in G witnessed by the sphere rendition ρ. The treewidth of W in G is the smallest integer w such that the treewidth of the compass of W in ρ is at most w.

Suspended walls. Let r ≥ 4. Given a flat wall W in a graph G witnessed by a sphere rendition 

ρ, we say that a cell c ∈ C(W ) is an inner cell of W if the second and third layer of W separate 

N (c) from the perimeter of W in G.Let r ≥ 4 be an integer. Let G be a graph and W ⊆ G be an r-wall in G. We say that W is a suspended r-wall – or simply a suspended wall – in G if there exists a sphere-rendition ρ of 

G − A such that W is flat in ρ and for every cell c ∈ C(W ) the following tow properties hold: i) for every non-empty set S ⊆ N (c) there exists a connected subgraph of σ(c) containing all vertices from S and avoiding all vertices from N (c) \ S and ii) there exist |N (c)| vertex-disjoint paths from N (c) to the perimeter of W .We say that ρ witnesses that W is suspended in G.We are now ready to state the main result of this subsection. 

Theorem 11.2. There exists a function f11 .2 : N3 → N such that for all integers r ≥ 3 and 

d ≥ 0 the following holds. Let G be a graph, A ⊆ V (G) with a := |A|, and W0 be a flat 

f11 .2(a, d, r )-wall of in G − A with a sphere rendition ρ witnessing the flatness of W in G − A.Then there exists an r-wall W1 ⊆ W0 such that i) W1 is flat in G − A witnessed by ρ, 

ii) the tangle of W1 in G − A is a truncation of the tangle of W0 in G − A, and iii) W1 is (d, A )-folio homogeneous in G.In particular, if W0 is suspended in G−A witnessed by ρ, then so is W1. Moreover, f11 .2(a, d, r ) ∈

2poly (a+d) · poly (r) and there exists an algorithm that takes as input G, A, W 0, and ρ as above and computes W1 in time 2poly (w+a+d) · poly (r) · (|G| + || G|| ) where w denotes the treewidth of 

W0 in G.

Proof. Let us set q = q(d, a ) := |Folio (d, a + 3) |. We then set f11 .2(a, d, r ) := f11 .1(q, r ) ∈

2poly (d+a) · poly (r).Notice that |C(W0)| ∈ O(|G|). Moreover, ∑ 

> c∈C(W0)

|σ(c)| ∈ O(|G|). It follows, that we may use the algorithm from Proposition 2.4 to compute the (d, A, W, ρ )-folio augmentation (G(d,A,W,ρ ), ϕ )

of G in time 2poly (w+a+d) · | G|. We then apply the algorithm from Proposition 11.1 to the wall W0 in (G(d,A,W,ρ ) − A, ϕ ) to obtain the desired r-wall W1 in (G(d,A,W,ρ ) − A, ϕ ). It is now straightforward to verify that W1 is indeed the desired (d, A )-folio homogeneous wall in G.133 11.2 Avoiding the centre of a homogeneous wall 

We have now almost reached the core proof if this section. Our goal is to show that given a small apex set A in a graph G together with a large enough suspended wall W in G − A that is (d, A )-folio homogeneous in G, any tm-pair with small intrusion to the interior of W can be replaced with an equivalent tm-pair avoiding the compass of the centre of W .Before we can dive into this part of the proof, we need a way to bridge the setting of Theorem 10.6 and the setting of flat walls. This is because a flat wall comes together with a rendition, while Theorem 10.6 requires a partially disc-embedded graph. To deal with this we adopt the solution of Baste, Sau, and Thilikos [BST23] – see Figure 27 for an illustration how tm-pairs may be redrawn to avoid the central part of a homogeneous wall. 

Levellings. Let r ≥ 4 be an integer, G be a graph, and W ⊆ G be a flat r-wall in G as witnessed by the sphere rendition ρ. Let further ∆ denote the disc bounded by the perimeter of W and 

W ′ be the (r − 1) -central subwall of W such that W ′ is grounded in the restriction ρ′ of ρ to ∆.Let further G′ ⊆ G be the crop of G by ∆.We define the (W, ρ )-levelling of G, denoted by Level (G, W, ρ ) as the bipartite graph 

(N (G′) ∪ { vc : c ∈ C(ρ′)}, {xv c : c ∈ C(ρ′) and x ∈ N (c)}).

See Figure 29 for an illustration. That is, the vertex set of Level (G, W, ρ ) consists of the nodes contained in ∆, referred to as the node-vertices , on one side, one fresh vertex vc, called a 

cell-vertex , for each cell contained in ∆ on the other side, and edges xv c between nodes and cell-vertices whenever x is a node on the boundary of c. Notice also that Level (G, W, ρ ) is the incidence graph of the hypergraph with vertex set N (ρ′) and with hyperedges {N (c) : c ∈ C(ρ′)}.Moreover, it is easy to see that G′ has an embedding Γ′ in ∆ such that ∆ intersects Γ′ only in the nodes of W that belong to the perimeter of W .The partial (W, ρ )-levelling of G, denoted by PLevel (G, W, ρ ), is the partially disc-embedded graph with vertex set (V (G) \ V (G′)) ∪ V (Level (G, W, ρ )) obtained as the union of G′ and the graph 

G′′ which is obtained from G by deleting all edges of G′, all vertices of G′ \ perimeter (W ), where 

perimeter (W ) denotes the perimeter of W . It follows that (G′, G ′′ , Γ′) is a partial ∆-embedding of PLevel (G, W, ρ ), we refer to (G′, G ′′ , Γ′) as the natural ∆-embedding of PLevel (G, W, ρ ). The 

node-vertices of PLevel (G, W, ρ ) are the node-vertices of G′, the cell-vertices of PLevel (G, W, ρ )

are the cell-vertices of G′, and the outer-vertices of PLevel (G, W, ρ ) are the vertices of G′′ − G′.A key observation is that the cell-vertices of PLevel (G, W, ρ ) have maximum degree 3.

Observation 11.3. Let r ≥ 4 be an integer, G be a graph, and W ⊆ G be a flat r-wall in G as witnessed by the sphere rendition ρ. Let further ∆ be the disc bounded by the perimeter of 

W that contains all nodes of W and G⋆ := PLevel (G, W, ρ ) be the partial (W, ρ )-levelling of G.Then, for every cell-vertex vc of G⋆ it holds that deg G⋆ (v) ≤ 3.

Levelling a tm-pair. Let r ≥ 4 be an integer, G be a graph, and W ⊆ G be a flat r-wall in G

as witnessed by the sphere rendition ρ. Let further ∆ be the disc bounded by the perimeter of 

W that contains all nodes of W and G⋆ := PLevel (G, W, ρ ) be the partial (W, ρ )-levelling of G.Now let J = ( J, T ) be a tm-pair in G. We denote by Level (G, W, ρ, J ) the (W, ρ )-levelling of J

defined as follows: Let (G1, G 2, Γ) be the natural ∆-embedding of G⋆ and let J1 := J ∩ G1 as 134 (i) (ii) 

Figure 29: A snapshot of a Σ-rendition ρ of some graph where (i) depicts some ground vertices – in magenta – together with some cells c – the blue discs – and the graphs σ(c)

associated with those cells. In (ii), the result of the levelling of ρ in the same snapshot is depicted. Now each graph σ(c) has been replaced with a single cell-vertex – depicted in yellow. well as J′ 

> 2

be the intersection of J with the crop of G by ∆. The vertex set of J′ 

> 2

consists of two types of vertices, those in N (ρ) and those that belong to σ(c) − N (c) for some cell c ⊆ ∆.Similar to the (W, ρ )-levelling of G, we may now define J2 to be the bipartite graph with vertex set 

(N (ρ) ∩ V (J′

> 2

)) ∪ { vc : c ∈ C(ρ), c ⊆ ∆, and V (J′

> 2

) ∩ V (σ(c) − N (c)) ̸ = ∅} 

and edge set 

{xv c : x ∈ N (ρ) ∩ V (J′

> 2

), x ∈ N (c), c ⊆ ∆, and V (J′

> 2

) ∩ V (σ(c) − N (c)) ̸ = ∅} .

We set ̂ J := J1 ∪ J2. Moreover, let ̂

T := ( T ∩ V (J1)) ∪ (T ∩ N (ρ)) ∪ { vc ∈ V (J2)}.

That is, we remove all vertices of T which are drawn inside of cells from ∆ and replace them with the corresponding cell-vertices of J2. The resulting pair (̂ J, ̂ T ) is now a tm-pair of 

G⋆ := PLevel (G, W, ρ ) and we define Level (G, W, ρ, J ) := ( ̂J, ̂ T ).Let W be a wall, s ∈ N be an integer, and x ∈ V (W ) be a vertex at face-distance at least s + 1 

from the perimeter of W in W . The s-central subwall around x of W is the smallest subwall W ′

of W with s layers such that the innermost layer of W ′ separates s from the perimeter of W .See Figure 30 for an illustration. 

Theorem 11.4. There exists a function f11 .4 : N4 → N such that for all integers d, k, b, r ∈ N, if 

(G, R ) is an annotated graph of bidim (G, R ) ≤ b with A ⊆ V (G) containing an f11 .4(b, d, k, r )-wall such that W is suspended and (4 d, A )-folio homogeneous in G − A as witnessed by the sphere 135 x

Figure 30: The 3-central subwall around the vertex x. The three layers of the subwall are depicted in a slightly darker shade of yellow than the rest of the subwall. rendition ρ of G − A such that the compass of W does not contain a vertex of R, then the following holds: If ∆r is the disc bounded by the perimeter of the r-central subwall W ′ of W which contains all nodes of W ′ in ρ and 

X := ⋃

> c∈C(ρ)
> c⊆∆r

V (σ(c)) ,

then v is strongly irrelevant for (k, d )-folio (G, R ).Moreover, f11 .4(b, d, k, r ) ∈ 2poly (b+d) · poly (k + r).Before we proceed with the proof of Theorem 11.4 we require some technical lemmas on locally redrawing paths inside of suspended walls. First we need to ensure that any three paths entering a large enough wall and passing through it can always be connected into specific branch vertices of the wall while maintaining their endpoints in the perimeter and avoiding the central part of the wall. 

Lemma 11.5. Let s ≥ 14 and t ≥ 13 be integers, ∆ be a closed disc, and W be a ∆-embedded 

s-wall such that the perimeter of W separates bd (∆) from all non-perimeter vertices of W . Let now q ∈ [3] be an integer and v ∈ V (W ) be a vertex contained in the (t − 4) -central subwall W ′

of W . If there exist internally vertex disjoint paths P1, . . . , P q in W such that  

> •

v is an endpoint of Pi for all i ∈ [q], 

> •

Pi has its other endpoint xi on the perimeter of W for all i ∈ [q], and  

> •

the Pi are indexed such that their edges incident with v appear in ∆ in counter-clockwise order. Then there exist pairwise vertex disjoint paths Q1, . . . , Q q in W such that i) there are vertices yi, i ∈ [q], on the perimeter of W ′ appearing in counter-clockwise order, each with a neighbour in the interior of the disc ∆′ bounded by the perimeter of W ′,

ii) Qi has endpoints xi and yi for each i ∈ [q], and iii) Qi is internally disjoint from ∆′ for each i ∈ [q],

Proof. This is a simple application of Proposition 3.1. Let C1, . . . , C 4 be the first four layers of W ′, let Y denote the set of all vertices of C4 which have degree 3 in W and a neighbour in the interior of the disc bounded by C4. Finally, let F be the collection of all minimal 

V (C1)-V (C4)-paths in W . Notice that |F| ≥ 4 since t − 8 ≥ 5.136 Now let G′ be the graph consisting of the union of the Pi, i ∈ [q], together with the union of the 

Ci, i ∈ [4] , and the union of all paths in F. Let Q be an X := {xi : i ∈ [q]}-Y -linkage in G′

of maximum order. We claim that |Q| = q which would imply the assertion. So suppose that 

|Q| < q . Then Proposition 3.1 gives a separator S with |S| < q ≤ 3 between X and Y in G′.However, by our choices we now know that S must miss one of the Pi, one of the cycles Cj and at least 3 of the paths from F, say F1, . . . , F 3. Since |S| ≤ 2 we know that on C4 there must be some vertex y of Y and h ∈ [3] such that there exists a subpath of C4 between the endpoint of 

Fh on C4 and y in G − S. As this is enough to certify that G′ − S still contains an X-Y -path we have reached a contradiction. Next, we wish to show that any cell deep in a suspended wall can be linked to a set of prescribed branch vertices on the perimeter of the same wall. Together with Lemma 11.5, this acts as the foundation allowing us to replace cell-vertices with actual cells when translating between tm-pairs in the levelling of some suspended wall and tm-pairs in the actual graph. Let r and s be integers with 2r ≥ s + 3 and let W be an r-wall. We say a brick B of W is 

s-central if is a brick of the s-central wall of W .

Lemma 11.6. Let r and s be integers with 2r ≥ s + 25 . Let G be a graph with an r-wall W

suspended in G as witnessed by the sphere rendition ρ.If c ∈ C(ρ) is a cell contained in the compass of an s-central brick of W together with the labelling λc of N (c) and x1, . . . , x |N (c)| are distinct vertices of degree 3 on the perimeter of W

numbered in counter-clockwise order according to their appearance on the perimeter of W, then there exist |N (c)| pairwise vertex-disjoint paths P1, . . . , P |N (c)| such that for each i ∈ [|N (c)|],Pi has endpoints xi and λc(i).

Proof. Let A ⊆ W be the annulus defined on the first 8 layers of W together with all minimal subpaths of W with one end on the perimeter of W and the other on the 8th layer of W . Let further W ′ denote the 7-central subwall of W .Then A and W ′ coincide precisely in the perimeter of W ′.

Claim 11.6.1 . There exists a linkage L1 of order |N (c)| between N (c) and the set Y of vertices on the perimeter of W ′ that have neighbours in W which do not belong to W ′. Moreover, L1 is entirely contained in the compass of the 7th layer of W .

Proof of claim. We have assumed that W is suspended in G as witnessed by ρ. Hence, there exist |N (c)| pairwise vertex disjoint paths between N (c) and the perimeter of W . It follows that there also exists a linkage P of order |N (c)| between N (c) and the perimeter of W ′ which is entirely contained in the compass of the 7th layer of W .Let C now denote the 4th layer of W ′. Then there exists a linkage Q of order 5 between Y and 

C in W ′ which is internally disjoint from the compass of C. Now a similar argument as the one used in the proof of Lemma 11.5 together with Proposition 3.1 yields the existence of the desired linkage L1. ⊣

Now consider the layers 2 to 7 of W together with all minimal subpaths of W between these two layers. This results in an annulus A′ with 6 circles and at least 6 rails. Recall that the vertices 

x1, . . . , x |N (c)| are numbered in counter-clockwise order along the perimeter of W and observe 137 that the endpoints of the paths in L1 on the perimeter of W ′ are forced to follow the labelling 

λc which is also based on the counter-clockwise orientation of ∆. Let now ⊚ be the domain of A

and ⊚′ ⊆ ⊚ be the domain of A′. We may now find a drawing of the graph G′′ that is the union of A′ ∪ ⋃ L1 together with three pairwise vertex-disjoint subpaths of W between the vertices xi

and the 2nd layer of W in ⊚ such that A′ is drawn in ⊚′, the xi lie on one boundary component of ⊚ while each path in L1 has one endpoint on the other boundary component of ⊚. It follows from our discussion above and this construction that the topological linkage with pattern 

{{ xi, λ −1 

> c

(i)} : i ∈ [|N (c)|]}

is topologically feasible in ⊚. Hence, an application of Lemma 4.13 yields that this linkage is also realisable in G′′ . Let us denote this linkage by L2. We now obtain the desired paths Pi by combining the linkages L1 and L2.We immediately obtain the following corollary. 

Corollary 11.7. Let r and s be integers with 2r ≥ s + 25 . Let G be a graph with an r-wall W

suspended in G as witnessed by the sphere rendition ρ and let G⋆ be the (W, ρ )-levelling of G

where W ⋆ denotes the (W, ρ )-levelling of W in G.If c ∈ C(ρ) is a cell contained in the compass of an s-central brick of W and x1, . . . , x |N (c)|

are distinct vertices of degree 3 on the perimeter of W ⋆ numbered in counter-clockwise order according to their appearance on the perimeter of W ⋆, then there exist |N (c)| pairwise internally vertex-disjoint paths P1, . . . , P |N (c)| such that for each i ∈ [|N (c)|], P i has endpoints xi and vc.Consult Figure 31 to gain some further intuition on how tm-pairs may interact with flat walls in graphs. Our main goal is now to combine most tools of this section and the previous one into a single argument that allows us to redraw any possible minor model into an “equivalent” one that voids the centre of a given flat and homogeneous wall. 

Proof of Theorem 11.4. We begin by setting the stage through defining the function f11 .4.

f11 .4(b, d, k, r ) := f10 .6(67 , r, b, 4d, k ) + ( b + 2) 2 + 2 ,

then the claimed bounds follow directly from Theorem 10.6. Let us select an ordered multiset R of k roots from R and let (H, RH ) ∈ (k, d )-folio (G, R) be any graph. Recall that detail (H, RH ) = max {| V (H) \ R H |, |E(H)|} . It follows that, since (H, RH )

is a rooted minor of detail at most d in (G, R ) where RH is a labelled multisubset of R with 

|R H | ≤ k, there exists a tm-pair (J, T ) in (G, R ) such that |T \ R| ≤ 4d and there exists a labelled multiset T of T ∩ R with |T | ≤ k such that (H, RH ) is a rooted minor of (J, T ).Recall that ρ is a sphere rendition of G − A witnessing that W is suspended and flat in G − A.Let ∆ denote the disc bounded by the trace of the perimeter of W which contains all nodes of 

W . Let further (G1, G 2, Γ) be the natural partial ∆-embedding of G⋆ := PLevel (G, W, ρ ) and let 

( ˜J, ˜T ) = Level (G, W, ρ, (J, T )) be the (W, ρ )-levelling of (J, T ).138 Figure 31: An illustration of how a tm-pair (J, T ) may interact with the compass of a flat wall. The yellow curves indicate the paths of J between the vertices of T . For a single cell 

c, the figure illustrates the possible behaviour of (J, T ) inside σ(c) and for one of the paths P of J, its behaviour inside the cells of the rendition is indicated in the bottom right of the figure. Let Q denote the set of all cells c ∈ C(ρ) such that vc ∈ V ( ˜J). For each c ∈ C let Rc = ( Hc, Uc)

be the augmented cell c and recall that we associated a labelling λ(c) of N (c) with c which is reflected in the labelling Uc. Next, consider the graph 

Jc := ( Hc ∩ J) ∪ { u ∈ (N (c) ∪ A) \ V (J) : there is u′ ∈ U c with u = u′}

and denote by Jc the rooted graph (J, Uc). Notice that, since the detail of (J, T ) is at most 4d we have that Jc ∈ 4d-folio (Rc). Finally, observe that every vertex of Q has degree at most 3 in ˜J.

Redrawing the levelling. We now apply Theorem 10.6 to the tm-pair ( ˜J, ˜T ) in G⋆ and the wall 

W aiming for a safely 67 -dispersed redrawing of ( ˜J, ˜T ) avoiding the compass of the r-central subwall of W .Now note the following:  

> •

by our assumption that the compass of W does not contain a vertex from R we have that 

R ∩ V (G1) = ∅, 

> •

let W ′ be the subwall of W obtained by removing the first layer of W and let W ⋆ ⊆ G⋆ be the (W, ρ )-levelling 19 of W ′, then G1 contains an f11 .4(b, d, k, r ) := f10 .6(67 , r, b, 4d, k )-wall 

W ′ whose perimeter separates its interior from bd (∆) ,      

> 19 We omit denoting the branch vertices of W′here as those are precisely all of its vertices that are of degree 3in
> W.

139 • we may denote by C⋆ 

> 1

, . . . , C ⋆g10 .6(4 d,b,k )+ h10 .6(67 ,4d,k,b ) the first g10 .6(4 d, b, k ) +

h10 .6(67 , 4d, k, b ) layers of W ⋆ indexed in the natural order, and 

• we denote by ∆⋆

> 1

, . . . , ∆⋆g10 .6(4 d,b,k )+ h10 .6(67 ,4d,k,b ) ⊆ ∆ the open discs defined by these layers. Then Theorem 10.6 provides us with a tm-pair (J⋆, T ⋆) of G⋆ and an integer q ∈ [g10 .6(4 d, b, k )] 

such that i) J⋆ − (V (G1) ∩ ∆⋆q ) is a subgraph of ˜J − (V (G1) ∩ ∆⋆q ),

ii) if ⊚ ⊆ ∆ denotes the annulus with boundary components C⋆q and C⋆q+h10 .6(67 ,4d,k,b )−1 and 

G′ denotes the crop of G1 by ⊚, then V (G′) ∩ ( ˜T ∪ T ⋆) = ∅,

iii) (J⋆ ∩(G1 ∩cl (∆ ⋆q+h10 .6(67 ,4d,k,b ))) , T ⋆ ∩(V (G1)∩cl (∆ ⋆q+h10 .6(67 ,4d,k,b )))) is a tm-pair of W ⋆ that is safely 67 -dispersed in W ⋆ and none of the vertices of T ⋆ ∩ (V (G1) ∩ cl (∆ ⋆q+h10 .6(67 ,4d,k,b ))) 

is within face distance less than 67 in W ⋆ from some vertex of C⋆q+h10 .6(67 ,4d,k,b ) ∪

C⋆q+g10 .6(4 d,b,k )+ h10 .6(67 ,4d,k,b ),

iv) J⋆ ∩ (G1 ∩ ∆⋆g10 .6(4 d,b,k )+ h10 .6(67 ,4d,k,b )) = ∅,

v) the compass of the r-central subwall of W ⋆ is contained in ∆g10 .6(4 d,b,k )+ h10 .6(67 ,4d,k,b ), and vi) there is a Q-respecting contraction mapping ϕ of Diss ( ˜J, ˜T ) to Diss (J⋆, T ⋆).

Reconstructing (H, RH ). Our goal is to now use the homogeneity of W and the tm-pair 

(J⋆, T ⋆) in order to reconstruct a rooted minor model of (H, RH ) which still avoids all nodes and vertices inside cells contained in ∆⋆g10 .6(4 d,b,k )+ h10 .6(67 ,4d,k,b ). Once this is done, we have shown that for every member of (k, d )-folio (G, R ) there exists a rooted minor model avoiding the interior of ∆⋆g10 .6(4 d,b,k )+ h10 .6(67 ,4d,k,b ) which implies in particular that the entire compass of the r-central subwall of W is irrelevant. To reach this point recall the definition of safely s-dispersed: We know that 

(J◦, T ◦) := ( J⋆ ∩ (G1 ∩ cl (∆ ⋆q+h10 .6(67 ,4d,k,b ))) , T ⋆ ∩ (V (G1) ∩ cl (∆ ⋆q+h10 .6(67 ,4d,k,b )))) 

is safely 67 -dispersed in W ⋆ which means that i) any two vertices x, y ∈ T ◦ are at face distance of least 135 in W ⋆, and ii) for every x ∈ T ◦ with deg J◦ = d, the graph J◦[F67   

> W⋆

∩ V (J◦)] consists of d paths with x as their unique common endpoint. It follows that for every vc ∈ Q there exists a 134 -subwall W % 

> c

of W ⋆ such that ϕ(vc) is at face distance 133 from the perimeter of W % 

> c

and every brick of W % 

> c

is also a brick of W ⋆. Then W %

> c

naturally corresponds to a 134 -subwall W $ 

> c

of W .Then the paths from J◦[F67   

> W⋆

∩ V (J◦)] form a family of internally vertex-disjoint paths Lc of order 

dc := deg ˜J (vc) = deg J⋆ (ϕ(vc)) ≤ 3 in W % 

> c

sharing the unique common endpoint ϕ(vc). Recall that W is (4 d, A )-folio homogeneous in G − A. Hence, if we denote the innermost brick of W %

> c

by B⋆c , then B⋆c corresponds to a brick Bc of W . Then there exists a cell c′ ∈ C(ρ) contained in the interior of the disc defined by the trace of Bc such that Jc ∈ 4d-folio (Rc′ ). Hence, the vertex 

vc′ ∈ V (G⋆) exists in the interior of B⋆c . By combining Lemma 11.5 and Corollary 11.7 inside 

W % 

> c

we may replace the paths in Lc with a family of dc internally vertex-disjoint paths Lc′ such that 

• each path L ∈ L c′ has vc′ as one endpoint, 

• the other endpoint of L ∈ L c′ is an endpoint of some path in Lc that is not ϕ(vc), and 

• the paths in Lc′ are contained in the disc whose boundary is the perimeter of W % 

> c

.140 Now let ̂ J be the graph obtained from J⋆ by replacing the paths Lc and the vertex ϕ(vc) with the paths Lc′ and the vertex vc′ for all vc ∈ Q. Moreover, if we replace each ϕ(vc) in T ⋆ with vc′

for each vc ∈ Q resulting in the set ̂ T , we obtain a tm-pair (̂J, ̂ T ) in G⋆ such that Diss (J⋆, T ⋆)

and Diss (̂J, ̂ T ) are isomorphic. Indeed, this means that there exists a Q-preserving contraction mapping ψ of ( ˜T , ˜J) to (̂J, ̂ T ) such that ψ(vc) = vc′ for all vc ∈ Q.At this point, we are almost done. Recall that we had labellings λc for the nodes of each cell 

c ∈ C(ρ) assigned to those nodes in counter clockwise orientation on the boundary of cl (c). This means that in our choices for the paths Lc′ we may ensure that for every edge xv c ∈ E( ˜J) there now is a path Lxv c ∈ L c′ such that there exists an edge yv c′ ∈ E(L) with λc(x) = λc′ (y). We stress that Corollary 11.7 ensures that this choice is indeed possible. Let us denote by ̂ Q the set ̂

Q := {ψ(x) : x ∈ Q}

and by ̂ Q∗ the set ̂

Q∗ := (V (̂ J) ∩ { vc ∈ V (G⋆) and c ∈ C(ρ)}) \̂ Q

Then ̂ Q ∩̂ Q∗ = ∅ and V (̂J) \ (̂Q ∪̂ Q∗) ⊆ V (G).We now construct a new tm-pair (J#, T #) in G as follows. First, for each vc ∈̂ Q∗ let Hc be a minimal connected subgraph containing all vertices from 

N (c) which are adjacent to vc in ̂ J but none of the other vertices from N (c). The existence of 

Hc is guaranteed by the assumption that W is suspended in G as witnessed by ρ. Let Tc be the set of N (c) ∩ V (Hc) together with all vertices in Hc of degree at least 3. Notice that ∆( Hc) ≤ 3

and there is at most one vertex in Hc with degree at least 3 by minimality. Second, for each vc′ ∈̂ Q we know that there exists vc ∈ Q with ψ(vc) = vc′ such that 

Jc ∈ 4d-folio (Rc′ ). This means that there exists a tm-pair (Dc′ , F c′ ) in Rc′ = ( Rc′ , Rc′ ) such that Fc′ contains all roots Rc′ of Rc′ and Jc is a rooted minor of (Dc′ , Rc′ ).Finally, we let J# be the graph obtained from ̂ J by deleting, for every vc ∈̂ Q∗ the vertex vc

and replacing it by the graph Hc. Similarly, we also delete, for each vc′ ∈̂ Q, the vertex v′ 

> c

and replace it by the graph Dc′ . Moreover, we remove all cell-vertices from T # and instead add all members of the sets Fc′ and Tc has above. We may now observe three facts: i) J# is vertex-disjoint from the compass of the (g10 .6(4 d, b, k ) + h10 .6(67 , 4d, k, b ) + 1) th layer of W, 

ii) for every vertex r that appears in T we still have that r ∈ V (J#), and iii) (H, RH ) is a rooted minor of (J#, T ).In particular, this means that, if X is the vertex set of the compass of the r-central subwall of 

W, then (H, RH ) ∈ (k, d )-folio (G − X, R ). Since our choices of R and (H, RH ) were arbitrary based on R this implies that v is strongly irrelevant as desired. 

11.3 Quickly finding a good flat wall 

An important assumption on our flat wall W in Theorem 11.4 is that W must be suspended in 

G − A. The other core assumption is that W is (k, d )-folio homogeneous. In order to guarantee the second condition we may call upon Theorem 11.2. Indeed, if the input wall for Theorem 11.2 141 was already suspended, then so is the (k, d )-folio homogeneous wall that comes out on the other side. However, in order to apply Theorem 11.2 we first need a suspended flat wall whose compass has bounded treewidth. Finally, there is a third assumption on W in Theorem 11.4, that is, its compass should be disjoint from R. Among all three properties, this is the easiest to guarantee as here, we may use a simple pigeonhole argument based on our bidimensionality bound. Indeed, here we are able to mimic a result from the work of Gorsky, Protopapas, and Wiederrecht [GPW26]. We slightly change their proof to obtain more clear and better dependencies. 

Lemma 11.8. For all integers r ≥ 2 and b ≥ 1 and every annotated graph (G, R ), if W is a flat 

w-wall with w ≥ (3 b + 1) r + 1 wall in G as witnessed by the sphere-rendition ρ, then one of the following holds: i) bidim (G, R ) ≥ b, or ii) there exists an r-subwall W ′ of W such that the compass of W ′ does not contain a vertex from R.Moreover, if ρ witnesses that W is suspended in G, then ρ also witnesses that W ′ is suspended in G. There also exists an algorithm that, given G, ρ, and W as input finds either a red 

(( b + 1) × (b + 1)) -red-minor in G or the wall W ′ as above in time poly (b + r)|| G|| .

Proof. We treat W as a mesh and number its vertical paths as P1, . . . , P w and its horizontal paths as Q1, . . . , Q w as in the definition of meshes. Let ˜W be the wall obtained by taking the horizontal and vertical paths Pi·(r+1)+1 and Qi·(r+1)+1 

for all i ∈ [0 , 3b + 1] . Then ˜W is a (3 b + 2) -subwall of W . Moreover, the compass of every brick 

B of ˜W contains an r-subwall WB of W which is disjoint from B itself. Without loss of generality we may assume that every vertex in a cell c in the compass of W is connected to one of the nodes of c.Now there are two cases. 

Case 1: The compass of every brick of ˜W contains a vertex of R in its interior. Then, for each of the (3 b + 1) 2 bricks B of ˜W there exists a vertex of R which can be connected to B by a path that is otherwise disjoint from ˜W . In this case it follows immediately that (G, R )

contains a red (b × b)-grid as a red-minor and thus bidim (G, R ) ≥ b.

Case 2: There exists a brick B of ˜W such that the interior of its compass does not contain a vertex from R.In this case it follows that the compass of WB does not contain a vertex from R and our proof is complete. From now on we only need to be concerned with finding a large suspended wall whose compass has small treewidth. This is because in annotated graphs of bounded bidimensionality, Lemma 11.8 can then easily guarantee the third requirement of Theorem 11.4. Before we can go there, we need to sit down and have a discussion about the history of the flat wall theorem and its application in algorithm design. In many papers that utilise the Irrelevant Vertex Technique and the Flat Wall Theorem, the flatness of a wall W under an apex set A is encoded as a so-called “flatness pair”. Below we provide a high-level discussion of flatness pairs 142 and some of their properties. Note that we do not state the definitions involved as we are not working with these definitions and only require very specific implications thereof. A flatness pair is essentially just a pair (W, R) where the object R holds the information about the graph G, 

the apex set A and the rendition ρ that witnesses the flatness of W in G − A. Sau, Stamoulis, and Thilikos [SST24], the authors investigate a set of fundamental properties of the cells inside the compass of a flat wall and on its boundary. They classify and further refine those cells and show that they are able to always guarantee that their flatness pairs have a property called “regularity”. The only core property of regular flatness pairs we are interested in is encapsulated in the following definition: 

Regular flat walls. Let r ≥ 4 be an integer. Let G be a graph and W ⊆ G be an r-wall in G.We say that W is a regular flat r-wall – or simply a regular flat wall – in G if there exists a sphere-rendition ρ of G − A such that W is flat in ρ and for every cell c ∈ C(W ) and for every non-empty set S ⊆ N (c) there exists a connected subgraph of σ(c) containing all vertices from 

S and avoiding all vertices from N (c) \ S. We say that ρ witnesses that W is a regular and flat wall of G − A.Next, we need the following corollary of Lemma 5.8 of the work of Baste, Sau, and Thilikos on the minor-deletion problem [BST23]. It follows directly from regularity and the fact that for any rendition ρ of some graph G and any non-vortex cell c ∈ C(ρ), if G contains two vertex-disjoint paths P1 and P2 such that none of the endpoints of P1 and P2 belongs to σ(c) − N (c), then at most one of the two paths can contain edges or non-boundary vertices of σ(c).

Proposition 11.9 (Baste, Sau, Thilikos [BST23]) . Let r ≥ 4 be an integer. Moreover, let G be a graph and W ⊆ G be a regular flat (r + 2) -wall in G as witnessed by the sphere-rendition ρ.Then the central r-subwall W ′ of G is suspended in G and the suspension of W in G is witnessed by ρ.In light of Proposition 11.9, in order to find a large suspended wall whose compass has bounded treewidth, all that is required is to find a slightly larger regular flat wall whose compass has bounded treewidth. This brings is to the core proposition we import from the work of Sau, Stamoulis, and Thilikos [SST24]. 

Proposition 11.10 (Sau, Stamoulis, Thilikos [SST24]) . There exists a functions 

f11 .10 , g 11 .10 : N → N such that for every integer t ≥ 1, all odd integers r ≥ 5, and every graph G one of the following holds: i) G contains a Kt minor, ii) G has a tree-decomposition of width at most at most f11 .10 (t) · r, or iii) there is a set A ⊆ V (G), where |A| ≤ g11 .10( t) together with an r-wall W that is regular flat in G − A as witnessed by the sphere-rendition ρ and the treewidth of W in G is at most f11 .10 (t) · r.Moreover, f11 .10 (t) ∈ 2O(t2 log t), g 11 .10 (t) ∈ O(t24 ), and there exists an algorithm that finds one of the three outcomes above in time 22O(t2 log t)·r log r+O(r2) · | G| + 2 2O(t2 log t)·r3 log r.Notice that the proof of Proposition 11.10 uses two theorems from the literature. The first is the flat wall theorem of Kawarabayashi, Thomas and Wollan [KTW18] which is the source of the dependency g11 .10 (t) ∈ O(t24 ). It is possible to replace the use of this theorem with the Flat 143 Wall Theorem as proven by Gorsky, Seweryn, and Wiederrecht [GSW25] to obtain the bound 

g11 .10 (t) ∈ O(t3). Similarly, the proof uses a theorem by Kawarabayashi and Kobayashi [KK20] stating that every Kt-minor-free graph with treewidth in 2Ω( t2 log t) · r contains an r-wall. In light of Proposition 7.8, also this dependency can be tamed to show that f11 .10 (t) ∈ poly (t).However, these improvements do not impact the final running times and dependencies of our results which is the reason why we do not spend further efforts on implementing these stronger bounds. 

11.4 Proof of Theorem 2.5 

We are now ready for the proof of Theorem 2.5 which is the core engine of our algorithm for the 

Folio problem. This is mostly done by combining our previous findings in this section. Let us start by preparing the function f2.5.For this, we first need to fix the constant for dealing with clique-minors. 

t(b, d ) :=  

> ⌊

52

> ⌋

b2 + 3 d2 + 1 

Now we may proceed with the main dependency of Theorem 2.5. 

f2.5(k, b, d ) := f11 .10 (t(b, d )) · ((3 b + 4)( f11 .2(g11 .10 (t(b, d )) , 4d, f 11 .4(b, d, k, 3)) + 1) + 4 )

The claimed bounds now follow directly from the bounds in Theorem 2.5, Proposition 11.10, Theorem 11.2, and Theorem 11.4. Therefore, from here, all we have to do is explain the algorithm and prove its correctness. 

Input: An annotated graph (G, R ) with bidim (G, R ) ≤ b.

Step 1: As long as |E(G)| ∈ 2Ω( t(b,d )2 log t(b,d )) |G| run the algorithm from Proposition 8.4 to find a Kt(b,d )-minor in G. Then forward the corresponding minor model to Step 7 .

Step 2: Run the algorithm from Proposition 11.10 looking for a regular flat ((3 b +4)( f11 .2(g11 .10 (t(b, d )) , 4d, f 11 .4(b, d, k, 3)) + 1) + 4 )-wall W0. This can have three outcomes. 

Case 2.1: The algorithm returns a model of a Kt(b,d )-minor . Then forward the clique-minor model to Step 7 .

Case 2.2: The algorithm returns a tree-decomposition (T, β ) of width at most f2.5(k, b, d ).

Then return (T, β ) and terminate .

Case 2.3: The algorithm returns an apex set A ⊆ V (G) with |A| ≤ g11 .10 (t(b, d )) together with a regular flat ((3 b + 4)( f11 .2(g11 .10 (t(b, d )) , 4d, f 11 .4(b, d, k, 3)) + 1) + 4 )-wall 

W0 in G − A and a sphere-rendition ρ of G − A witnessing the regular flatness of 

W0. Moreover, the algorithm guarantees that the treewidth of W0 in G is at most 

f2.5(k, b, d ). Then forward A, W 0, and ρ to Step 3 .

Step 3: Input: A set A ⊆ V (G) of size at most g11 .10 (t(b, d )) , together with a ((3 b +4)( f11 .2(g11 .10 (t(b, d )) , 4d, f 11 .4(b, d, k, 3)) + 1) + 4 )-wall W0 in G − A and a sphere-rendition 

ρ of G − A witnessing the regular flatness of W0 such that W0 has treewidth at most 

f2.5(k, b, d ) in G.144 Then let W1 be the (3 b + 4)( f11 .2(g11 .10 (t(b, d )) , 4d, f 11 .4(b, d, k, 3)) + 1) -central subwall of 

W0 which is now suspended in G − A as witnessed by ρ due to Proposition 11.9. Forward 

A, W 1, and ρ to Step 4 .

Step 4: Input: A set A ⊆ V (G) of size at most g11 .10 (t(b, d )) , together with a (3 b +4)( f11 .2(g11 .10 (t(b, d )) , 4d, f 11 .4(b, d, k, 3)) + 1) -wall W1 in G − A, and a sphere-rendition ρ

of G − A witnessing that W1 is suspended in G − A such that W1 has treewidth at most 

f2.5(k, b, d ) in G.

Then run the algorithm from Lemma 11.8. Since bidim (G, R ) ≤ b it follows that the algorithm returns a suspended f11 .2(g11 .10 (t(b, d )) , 4d, f 11 .4(b, d, k, 3) -subwall W2 of W1 such that R is disjoint from the vertices in the compass of W2. Moreover, the treewidth of W2

is still at most f2.5(k, b, d ) in G and ρ witnesses that W2 is suspended in G − A. Forward 

A, ρ, and W2 to Step 5 .

Step 5: Input: A set A ⊆ V (G) of size at most g11 .10 (t(b, d )) , together with a

f11 .2(g11 .10 (t(b, d )) , 4d, f 11 .4(b, d, k, 3)) -wall W2 in G − A, and a sphere-rendition ρ of 

G − A witnessing that W2 is suspended in G − A such that W2 has treewidth at most 

f2.5(k, b, d ) in G and its compass is disjoint from R.

Then run the algorithm from Theorem 11.2 in W2 and A to find a f11 .4(b, d, k, 3) -subwall 

W3 of W2 that is suspended in G − A, has treewidth at most f2.5(k, b, d ) in G, whose compass is disjoint from R, and that is (4 d, A )-folio homogeneous. Forward A, ρ, and W3

to Step 6 .

Step 6: Input: A set A ⊆ V (G) of size at most g11 .10 (t(b, d )) , together with an f11 .4(b, d, k, 3) -wall W3 in G − A, and a sphere-rendition ρ of G − A witnessing that W3 is suspended in 

G − A such that W3 has treewidth at most f2.5(k, b, d ) in G, its compass is disjoint from 

R, and W3 is (4 d, A )-folio homogeneous. 

Then let W4 be the 3-central subwall of W3 and let v ∈ V (W4) be any vertex of degree at least 3 in W4 not on the perimeter of W3. Return v and terminate .

Step 7: Input: A minor model of Kt(b,d ) in G.

Then run the algorithm from Lemma 8.3 to find an irrelevant vertex v ∈ V (G), return 

the irrelevant vertex v, and terminate .

Correctness of the algorithm. We begin by discussing the correctness of the algorithm above. With Step 1 we only call upon Proposition 8.4 and this correctly determines either that the number of edges in G is below the threshold or finds a Kt(b,d )-minor model in G. If the minor model is found, Lemma 8.3 correctly finds an irrelevant vertex v. Indeed, this vertex v must now be strongly irrelevant due to the way it arises from the clique-minor and thus, Step 1 is correct. Similarly, in Step 2 , Case 2.1 also refers to Step 7 and is therefore correct. Case 2.2 is the only case where the algorithm might determine that the treewidth of G is small which is one of the two valid outcomes of Theorem 11.4 and therefore safe. Finally, Case 2.3 finds the initial large wall W0 which is flat in G − A for the additional set A ⊆ V (G) of bounded size as guaranteed by Proposition 11.10. From here, the wall, its rendition, and the apex set are passed through Proposition 11.9, Lemma 11.8, and Theorem 11.2 in order. The result of the application Theorem 11.2 in Step 5 is the guarantee that all vertices in the compass of the 

3-central subwall of W3 are irrelevant. That is, if x ∈ V (G) is a vertex from the compass of W3,

then (k, d )-folio (G − x, R ) = ( k, d )-folio (G, R ). Continuing to Step 6 the algorithm now chooses 145 a vertex from W4 that has degree 3 in W4 but does not belong to the perimeter of W4. Since 

W4 is an r-wall with r ≥ 3 such a vertex always exists and by the arguments above, v is indeed irrelevant for the (k, d )-folio of (G, R ). This concludes the discussion on the correctness of the algorithm. 

Running time analysis. What is left is to discuss the running time. There are essentially only two crucial steps requiring discussion. The first is an application of Proposition 8.4 running in time 2O(t(b,d )2 log t(b,d )) |V (G)|. If this step is successful it immediately jumps to Step 7 , returning an irrelevant vertex in linear time. Otherwise, the algorithm proceeds to Step 2 . Since we did not immediately jump from Step 1 to Step 7 , from here we may assume that |E(G)| ∈ 2O(t(b,d )2 log t(b,d )) |V (G)| which allows us to replace all dependencies on the number of edges in all of the following algorithms with the number of vertices of G. This guarantees that the entire algorithm runs in time linear in |G|.Since f2.5(k, b, d ) ∈ 2poly (b+d) · poly (k), the only other step where the running time cannot be deduced immediately from the running times of the subroutines is the combination of Step 2 

and Step 5 . The algorithm from Proposition 11.10 runs in time 

22O(t(b,d )2 log t(b,d )) ·f2.5(k,b,d ) log f2.5(k,b,d )+ O(f2.5(k,b,d )2) · | G| + 2 2O(t(b,d )2 log t(b,d )) ·f2.5(k,b,d )3 log f2.5(k,b,d ).

With the bound on f2.5(k, b, d ) above this means that this step of the algorithm runs in time 

22poly (b+d)·poly (k) · | G|

which still fits into our predicted bounds. Notice that the treewidth of Wi in G is at bounded by f2.5(k, b, d ) for all i ∈ [4] . The running time of the algorithm from Theorem 11.2 is 

2poly (w+a+d) · poly (r) · (|G| + || G|| )

which, due to our analysis of the consequence of Step 1 , simplifies to 

2poly (w+a+d) · poly (r) · 2poly (b+d) · | G|

in our case. The value a in the expression above is the size of A which is in O(t(b, d )24 ) by Proposition 11.10. The value w on the other hand is the treewidth of W3 which satisfies 

f2.5(k, b, d ) ∈ 2poly (b+d) · poly (k). It follows that Step 5 runs in time 

22poly (b+d)·poly (k)|G|

as required. This completes the running time analysis of our algorithm and the proof of Theorem 2.5. 

# 12 Two lower bounds for the irrelevant vertex technique 

In this section we show that the irrelevant vertex technique cannot be expected to yield substantially better bounds than those in our main results. The two lower bounds rely on the same general principle: we construct graphs of very large treewidth in which every vertex is 146 Figure 32: The graph ˆΓ5 with a vital linkage L of order 5 in it. essential for preserving a prescribed minor-folio behaviour. The first construction exploits the graph ˆΓk together with its vital linkage structure and yields an exponential lower bound in terms of bidimensionality. The second construction enriches ˆΓk with many carefully chosen non-isomorphic attachments, forcing any potential irrelevant vertex to preserve a large amount of combinatorial information, which in turn yields a lower bound in terms of the parameter d.Our starting point is the family of graphs introduced in [AKK +11, AK19], which provides canonical obstructions for irrelevant vertex arguments based on linkage uniqueness. Intuitively, the graph ˆΓk contains a highly rigid system of k terminal pairs: there is a linkage connecting these pairs, and this linkage is so constrained that deleting any vertex may destroy the possibility of realizing the same pattern. In [AKK +11, AK19] a parametric graph ˆΓk, k ∈ N≥2 was defined as follows: Let mk = 2 k − 1.We start with a (mk × mk)-grid whose “leftmost” (resp. “rightmost”) vertices are v1, . . . , v mk

(resp. u1, . . . , u mk ), ordered as they appear from above to below. We first add all edges in the set {uiumk −i+1 | i ∈ [mk−1]} and for i ∈ [2 , k ] we add the edges in 

Ei := {v2i+j v2i+1 −j | j ∈ [2 i − 1] }.

We define τk := {(si, t i) | i ∈ [k]} as the set of pairs of vertices (terminals) in ˆΓk, where 

si = v2i−1 , i ∈ [k], t i = v3·2i−1 , i ∈ [k − 1] , and tk = u2i−1 . We also denote by Tk the vertices in the pairs of τk. For a drawing of ˆΓ5 and vital linkage in it with 5 pairs of terminals, see Figure 32. 

Proposition 12.1. For every k ∈ N≥2 the graph ˆΓk contains a vital linkage L of order k whose pattern in τk.The relevance of Proposition 12.1 is that it combines two features that are central for lower bounds: on the one hand, the graph ˆΓk has exponentially large treewidth in k, and on the other 147 hand, the linkage pattern prescribed by τk is rigid. This tension is exactly what makes ˆΓk anatural witness against overly optimistic irrelevant vertex bounds. As observed in [AKK +11, AK19], ˆΓk contains as a subgraph a (m × m)-grid, therefore, tw ( ˆΓk) ≥

2k − 1. Also, it is known that every (m × m)-grid has a path decomposition {X1, . . . , X m(m−1) },

where {v1, . . . , v m} ⊆ X1 and {u1, . . . , u m} ⊆ Xm(m−1) . This readily implies that tw ( ˆΓk) = 2 k −1

(actually the same we can say for the pathwidth of ˆΓk). 

12.1 Optimality of Theorem 1.2 

We first revisit the construction ˆΓk from the perspective of the parameter bidim ( ˆΓk, T k). The point is that the lower bound from [AKK +11, AK19] is not merely an artifact of the number of terminals: it remains significant even when expressed through bidimensionality. Thus, to understand the limitations of Theorem 1.2, it is enough to estimate how the bidimensionality of 

(ˆΓk, T k) grows with k.For every k ∈ N≥2 we set bk = bidim (ˆΓk, T k).

Lemma 12.2. There is a constant c such that, for every k ∈ N≥2, 1/2

√bk ≤ k ≤ c · b2

> k

.

Proof. Notice that for every annotated graph (G, S ), |S| ≥ (bidim (G, S )) 2. This fact applied for 

(ˆΓk, T k) and given that |Tk| = 2 k, implies 1/2

√bk ≤ k.We define the graph Zs by considering the (s × (s(2 s + 1)) -grid, where we denote the top vertices ordered from the left to the right by x1, . . . , x 2s(s+1) , and where, for every i ∈ [s], we add all edges in {x(2 s+1)( i−1)+ j x(2 s+1) i−j+1 | j ∈ [s]}. We also set As = {x(2 s+1)( i−1)+ s+1 | i ∈ [s]} (see Figure 33 for a drawing of (Z5, A 5) where the added edges are depicted in red). We claim that there is a constant c′ ∈ (0 , 1) such that bidim (Zt2 , A t2 ) ≥ c′t. To see this, observe first that (Z2s, A 2s), for odd s, contains the (s × 2s(s + 1)) -grid as a minor where the s vertices in Bs := {((2 s + 1)( i − 1) + s + 1 , (s + 1) /2) | i ∈ [s]} correspond to s connected sets of (Z2s, A 2s),

each containing at least one vertex from A2s. To visualise Bs consider the (s × 2s(s + 1)) -grid drawn in Figure 33 for s = 7 by omitting the red edges; the set Bs consists of the blue vertices. Also to visualise the minor relations, each shaded square of Z2s is contracted to a single “vertical” path containing one of the vertices in Bs in its centre. Next observe that the (s × 2s(s + 1)) -grid, when s = 2 ℓ2 contains the (ℓ × ℓ)-grid as a topological minor where the branch vertices are chosen to be ℓ2 vertices from Bs. Combining these two transformations together, we have that there is some constant c′, such that bidim (Zt2 , A t2 ) ≥ c′t.By applying the claim above for ⌊√t⌋ instead of t, we have that bidim (Zt, A t) ≥ c′ · ⌊ √t⌋.Next observe that ˆΓk contains a subdivision of Z⌊k/ 2⌋, where the vertices of A⌊k/ 2⌋ correspond to the terminals t⌊k/ 2⌋, . . . , t k. Combining these last two facts together, we obtain that 

bk = bidim (ˆΓk, T k) ≥ bidim (ˆΓk, {t⌊k/ 2⌋, . . . , t k}) ≥ bidim (Z⌊k/ 2⌋, A ⌊k/ 2⌋) ≥ c′ · ⌊ √k/ 2⌋.

Therefore there is a positive integer c such that k ≤ c · b2

> k

.The estimate in Lemma 12.2 shows that the bidimensionality of ( ˆΓk, T k) is polynomially related to the order of the vital linkage. In particular, replacing the number of terminals by bidimensionality 148 Figure 33: The annotated graph (Z7, A 7).does not fundamentally weaken the obstruction: the exponential behaviour in k still translates into an exponential lower bound in a polynomial function of bk.We now observe that the exponential lower bound from [AKK +11, AK19] applies not only in terms of the number of terminals, but also in terms of bidimensionality. 

Corollary 12.3. If Theorem 1.2 holds for some function β : N2 → N, then β(0 , b ) = 2 Ω( √b).

Proof. Assume that Theorem 1.3 holds for some function β : N2 → N. Then, for every 

k ≥ 2, we may apply it to the annotated graph ( ˆΓk, T k) and deduce by Proposition 12.1 that 

tw (ˆΓk) < β (k, b ). Therefore, as tw (ˆΓk) = 2 k − 1, by Lemma 12.2, β(k, b ) = 2 Ω( √b).Notice that in Corollary 12.3 we only used the “easy” upper bound to bk in Lemma 12.2. We chose to also argue on how to lower bound bk in terms of k, in order to illustrate that the gap between the size of the terminal set Tk and its bidimensionality in ˆΓk is polynomial. 

12.2 Optimality of Theorem 1.3 

We now turn to lower bounds for the folio version of the irrelevant vertex technique. In contrast with the previous subsection, where the obstruction came from the rigidity of a single linkage instance, here we build a family of graphs that encodes many pairwise non-isomorphic gadgets of small size. The role of these gadgets is to make every vertex indispensable: deleting a vertex necessarily destroys the ability to realise a certain prescribed minor. 

Asymptotic enumeration of 5-regular graphs. The first ingredient is a supply of many small pairwise non-isomorphic connected graphs of bounded degree. We obtain these from asymptotic enumeration of regular graphs as follows. 

Lemma 12.4. For all sufficiently large even integers n, there exist at least nn pairwise non-isomorphic connected 5-regular graphs on n vertices. 

Proof. For fixed degree r, the number ζ(r) 

> n

of labelled (simple) r-regular graphs on n vertices satisfies 

ζ(r) 

> n

∼ e−(r2−1) /4 (rn )! (rn/ 2)! 2 rn/ 2 (r!) n ,

by the asymptotic formula of Bender and Canfield [BC78] (see also [Bol82]). Specializing to 

r = 5 gives ζ(5)  

> n

∼ e−6 (5 n)! (5 n/ 2)! 2 5n/ 2 120 n , for even n. Moreover, Wormald [Wor81] proved that for every fixed r ≥ 3, almost all labelled r-regular graphs are connected; hence almost all labelled 

5-regular graphs are connected, and therefore the labelled connected count ζ(5 ,conn)  

> n

satisfies 

ζ(5 ,conn)  

> n

∼ ζ(5)  

> n

as n → ∞ through even integers. Finally, Bollobás [Bol82] proved that for fixed 149 r ≥ 3, almost all labelled r-regular graphs have trivial automorphism group. Hence, if ˜ζ(5 ,conn) 

> n

denotes the number of pairwise non-isomorphic connected 5-regular graphs on n vertices, then 

˜ζ(5 ,conn)  

> n

∼ ζ(5 ,conn)  

> n
> n!

∼ e−6 (5 n)!   

> n! (5 n/ 2)! 2 5n/ 2120 n

, again for even n.On the other hand, by Stirling’s formula, 

1

nn · e−6 (5 n)! 

n! (5 n/ 2)! 2 5n/ 2 120 n ∼ e−6

√πn 

( 5√524 e3/2

√n

)n

,

and the right-hand side tends to ∞ as n → ∞ through even integers. Therefore ˜ζ(5 ,conn)  

> n
> nn

→ ∞ .In particular, for all sufficiently large even n, one has ˜ζ(5 ,conn)  

> n

≥ nn.As an immediate consequence of Lemma 12.4, for every sufficiently large integer m, there exist 

m pairwise non-isomorphic connected 5-regular graphs, each on at most min {ℓ ∈ 2N : ℓℓ ≥ m}

vertices. In particular, all these graphs may be chosen to have at most (1 + o(1)) log m  

> log log m

vertices as m → ∞ . We record this in the following form. 

Lemma 12.5. There exists a function f12 .5 : N → N such that, for every sufficiently large integer k, there exist k pairwise non-isomorphic connected 5-regular graphs, each on f12 .5(k)

vertices. Moreover, f12 .5(k) = O

( log k 

> log log k

)

.

Thus we may think of f12 .5(k) as the cost of encoding k distinct isomorphism types by bounded-degree connected graphs. 

The graph ˆΓAk 

> k

. We now combine the rigid linkage structure of ˆΓk with the family of non-isomorphic 5-regular gadgets obtained above. Roughly speaking, for each terminal pair (si, t i)

we attach two copies of the same gadget Ai, one on the si-side and one on the ti-side. Since the gadgets corresponding to different indices are non-isomorphic, any minor model that preserves all of them is forced to match the two copies of Ai to each other. This is what ultimately recovers the terminal pairing pattern τk inside the central graph ˆΓk.Let Ak = {A1, . . . , A k} be a family of pairwise non-isomorphic connected 5-regular graphs, each on f12 .5(k) vertices. We define the graph ˆΓAk 

> k

as follows. Start with the disjoint union of ˆΓk and, for each i ∈ [k],

two copies Asi and Ati of Ai. Then, for each i ∈ [k], add two new vertices s′ 

> i

and t′

> i

, add all edges between {si, s ′

> i

} and V (Asi ), and add all edges between {ti, t ′

> i

} and V (Ati). Also add the edge 

siti for all i ∈ [k].A block of a graph is a maximal 2-connected subgraph of it, i.e., every two vertices are in a cycle. We say that a subgraph of G is a bridge 20 of G if it is isomorphic to K2 and the removal of its unique edge increases the number of connected components. In what follows, we use the term 

bridge for both the subgraph and the edge contained in it. 

Observation 12.6. If H is a minor of G, then every block of H is a minor of some block of G.Observe that ˆΓAk 

> k

has exactly 2k + 1 blocks: the block ˆΓk, together with the 2k blocks 

Gs

> 1

, . . . , G sk, G t

> 1

, . . . , G tk, where, for each i ∈ [k], the graph Gsi is the subgraph of ˆΓAk 

> k

induced by 

V (Asi ) ∪ { si, s ′

> i

}, and similarly Gti is the subgraph induced by V (Ati) ∪ { ti, t ′

> i

}. 

> 20 Not to be confused by the concept of H-bridge, defined in Section 11.1.

150 Let G := {Gs

> 1

, . . . , G sk, G t

> 1

, . . . , G tk}. Since each graph Ai is 5-regular, every graph in G is 

3-connected and has minimum degree at least 7. In particular, we obtain the following. 

Observation 12.7. For every G ∈ G and every vertex v ∈ V (G), the graph G − v is non-planar and 2-connected. Since the treewidth of a graph is the maximum of the treewidths of its blocks, and since every block in {Gs

> 1

, . . . , G sk, G t

> 1

, . . . , G tk} has order 2 + f12 .5(k), each such block has treewidth at most 

1 + f12 .5(k). As f12 .5(k) = O   

> (log k
> log log k
> )

, it follows that 1 + f12 .5(k) < 2k − 1 for all sufficiently large k. Therefore the block ˆΓk determines the treewidth of ˆΓAk 

> k

, and we obtain the following. 

Observation 12.8. For every sufficiently large k, tw (ˆΓAk 

> k

) = 2 k − 1.

The graph Hk. We define Hk to be the graph obtained from the disjoint union of 

Gs

> 1

, . . . , G sk, G t

> 1

, . . . , G tk by adding, for each i ∈ [k], the edge siti. Then Hk has exactly k

connected components, and for each i ∈ [k], exactly one of these components consists of the two blocks Gsi and Gti joined by the bridge siti.The graph Hk should be viewed as the target minor that records exactly the information carried by the attached gadgets and by the pairing of the terminals. 

Observation 12.9. For every k, |V (Hk)| = 2 k(2 + f12 .5(k)) .

The next lemma is the heart of the construction. It shows that Hk is present as a minor in 

ˆΓAk 

> k

, but becomes absent after the deletion of any vertex. In other words, no vertex of ˆΓAk 

> k

is irrelevant with respect to the minor Hk.

Lemma 12.10. The graph Hk is a minor of ˆΓAk 

> k

, and for every v ∈ V ( ˆΓAk 

> k

), the graph Hk is not a minor of ˆΓAk 

> k

− v.

Proof. Let L be the linkage in ˆΓk; we also regard it as a linkage in ˆΓAk 

> k

. Then Hk is a minor of 

ˆΓAk 

> k

: indeed, delete all edges of the planar block ˆΓk that do not belong to L, and then dissolve all vertices of degree 2 in that block. Now fix a vertex v ∈ V ( ˆΓAk 

> k

), and suppose for a contradiction that ˆΓAk 

> k

− v contains a minor model of Hk. Since the blocks of Hk are precisely Gs

> 1

, . . . , G sk, G t

> 1

, . . . , G tk, every block of Hk is non-planar. Hence, by Observation 12.6, every block of Hk must be a minor of a non-planar block of ˆΓAk 

> k

− v. The only planar block of ˆΓAk 

> k

− v is the block inherited from ˆΓk − v, while by Observation 12.7 every other block of ˆΓAk 

> k

− v is non-planar. Moreover, every block of Hk has exactly 2 + f12 .5(k) vertices, and the same is true for each graph in {Gs

> 1

, . . . , G sk, G t

> 1

, . . . , G tk}. Therefore each block of Hk must be a minor of one of these blocks. Since a connected graph cannot be a proper minor of a connected graph on the same number of vertices, each such minor relation is in fact an isomorphism. It follows that v does not belong to any graph in {Gs

> 1

, . . . , G sk, G t

> 1

, . . . , G tk}: indeed, if v belonged to one of them, then that block in ˆΓAk 

> k

− v would have fewer than 2 + f12 .5(k) vertices, and hence could not contain any block of Hk as a minor. Thus v is a non-terminal vertex of the planar block ˆΓk.Consequently, the minor model yields a bijection between the blocks of Hk and the blocks 

Gs

> 1

, . . . , G sk, G t

> 1

, . . . , G tk of ˆΓAk 

> k

− v. By construction, for distinct indices the corresponding graphs 151 are non-isomorphic, whereas Gsi ∼= Gti for every i ∈ [k]. Hence, for each i ∈ [k], the bridge siti

of Hk must be represented by a path in ˆΓk − v joining the attachment vertices si, t i of the two isomorphic blocks Gsi and Gti. These paths are pairwise internally vertex-disjoint, so they form a linkage in ˆΓk − v with pattern τk.This contradicts Proposition 12.1, since L is a vital linkage of ˆΓk. Therefore Hk is not a minor of ˆΓAk 

> k

− v for any v ∈ V (ˆΓAk 

> k

).We are now ready to extract the quantitative consequence. The graph ˆΓAk 

> k

still has treewidth 

2k −1, while the excluded minor Hk has only 2k(2+ f12 .5(k)) vertices. Since f12 .5(k) = O

( log k 

> log log k

)

,

this converts the exponential treewidth scale in k into the lower bound 2Ω( d log log d/ log d) in terms of the folio parameter d.

Theorem 12.11. If Theorem 1.3 holds for some function β : N3 → N, then β(0 , 0, d ) = 2Ω( d log log d  

> log d)

.

Proof. Assume that Theorem 1.3 holds for some function β : N3 → N. For each sufficiently large integer k, let d := 2 k(2 + f12 .5(k)). Applying Theorem 1.3 with the first two parameters equal to 

0, we obtain that for every graph G with tw (G) ≥ β(0 , 0, d ), there exists a vertex v ∈ V (G) such that (0 , d )-folio (G, ∅) = (0 , d )-folio (G − v, ∅).

By Observation 12.9, the graph Hk has exactly d vertices. Hence, if G contains Hk as a minor, then Hk ∈ (0 , d )-folio (G, ∅), and therefore also Hk ∈ (0 , d )-folio (G − v, ∅). Equivalently, G − v

contains Hk as a minor. Now apply this with G := ˆΓAk 

> k

. Since Hk is a minor of ˆΓAk 

> k

but is not a minor of ˆΓAk 

> k

− v for any v ∈ V ( ˆΓAk 

> k

) by Lemma 12.10, it follows that tw ( ˆΓAk 

> k

) < β (0 , 0, d ). Combining this with Observation 12.8, we obtain β(0 , 0, d ) > 2k − 1 for all sufficiently large k.Finally, since f12 .5(k) = O

( log k 

> log log k

)

, we have d = 2 k(2 + f12 .5(k)) = O

(

k log k 

> log log k

)

. By inversion, this yields k = Ω 

( d log log d 

> log d

)

. Therefore β(0 , 0, d ) > 2k − 1 = 2 Ω( d log log d 

> log d

)

, and hence β(0 , 0, d ) = 2Ω( d log log d 

> log d

)

.

# 13 Conclusion 

This paper provides strong evidence that the algorithmic side of the Graph Minors Series is much closer to the “solar system” of mainstream parameterized algorithms than its longstanding “galactic” reputation may suggest. 

13.1 Résumé 

Our main contribution is a quantitatively controlled version of the irrelevant-vertex machinery. More precisely, we prove that the vital-linkage threshold and, more generally, the irrelevant-vertex threshold for folios admit bounds of the form β(k, b, d ) ∈ 2poly (b+d) · poly (k), where the exponential dependence is governed by the bidimensionality parameter and the detail of the folio, rather than the number of terminals. Our lower bounds further show that the combinatorial source of this exponential behaviour can be identified precisely, isolated, and bounded in an essentially optimal way. 152 Beyond the technical core of the proof, we see our results as part of a broader program whose goal is to make the structural and algorithmic content of the graph minors framework quantitatively explicit. Our arguments build on a sequence of recent works [Chu15a, GSW25, GSTW25, GSW26, GPW26] that replaced enormous or implicit dependencies in several key ingredients of the series by polynomial ones (see also [KTW21, SST21, TW23, PPTW25, PTW25, TW26] for precursors). In this sense, the present paper may be viewed as the culmination of this line of research: once these ingredients are brought under polynomial control, the algorithmic heart of the graph minors framework – namely, the irrelevant-vertex technique for routing and rooted pattern detection – can finally be restated with bounds that are explicit, structurally meaningful, and essentially optimal. 

13.2 Bidimensionality, annotation irrelevancy, and more 

In the introduction we mentioned, as a direct consequence of Theorem 1.4, the following. 

Lemma 13.1. There exists an algorithm that, given an annotated graph (G, R ) with 

bidim (G, R ) ≤ b and |R| ≤ k, computes (d, k )-folio (G, R ) in 2poly (k)·2poly (b+d)

· | G|2 time. Since bidim (G, R ) ≤ √|R|, this yields the following corollary. 

Corollary 13.2. There exists an algorithm that, given an annotated graph (G, R ) with |R| ≤ k, 

computes (d, k )-folio (G, R ) in 22poly (k+d)

· | G|2 time. The algorithm in Lemma 13.1 is based on removing a set of vertices that produces an equivalent instance (G′, R ), where G′ is a subgraph of G, t := tw (G′) ∈ 2poly (b+d)poly (k), and 

(k, d )-folio (G′, R ) = (k, d )-folio (G, R ). (2) Since each removed vertex is strongly irrelevant , as certified by Theorem 1.3, the equality in (2) does not require any bound on the size of R.By standard dynamic programming, computing (k, d )-folio (G′, R ) can be done in 2poly (t,k,d ) · | G′|,

as the tables of the dynamic program encode (t + k + d)-rooted graphs of detail d, of which there are 2poly (t,k,d ). This implies the following. 

Theorem 13.3. There exists an algorithm that, given an annotated graph (G, R ) with 

bidim (G, R ) ≤ b, computes (d, k )-folio (G, R ) in 2poly (k)·2poly (b+d)

· | G|2 time. A natural challenge beyond Theorem 13.3 would be to eliminate the dependence on b from the complexity of the algorithm, again without assuming any bound on R. We believe that there exists an algorithm computing the (k, d )-folio of an annotated graph (G, R ) in 

222poly (k+d)

· | G|2 (3) time. In other words, we conjecture that Corollary 13.2 holds without any restriction on R. An 

f (k, d ) · | G|2-time algorithm – albeit with a huge and unspecified f – already follows from the meta-algorithmic results of [GST23c, SST25]. We believe that such an algorithm can be achieved by employing the “annotation irrelevant” argument that is implicit in [SST25] (see also [GST23c, GST23b]), where bidimensionality 153 plays a pivotal role. (For the combinatorial and algorithmic properties of bidimensionality, see [PPTW24a, PPTW25, PTW25].) Roughly speaking, the approach is as follows: if R has sufficiently large bidimensionality, then it is possible to find a vertex in R that is annotation irrelevant ; removing it from R – while keeping it in the graph – yields an equivalent instance. By iteratively removing such vertices from R, we can eventually bound the bidimensionality of the annotated set R, at which point Theorem 13.3 becomes applicable. Working out the details of this procedure is technically involved, as one must carefully control dependencies to remain within polynomial bounds. Addressing these issues is beyond the scope of this paper. Nevertheless, we emphasise that the idea of removing “annotation irrelevant” vertices from the annotation set is not specific to folio computation, but rather indicative of a broader principle. It underlies the meta-algorithmic framework of [SST25], which is driven by low bidimensionality and whose parameter dependencies are strongly influenced by the linkage function, which we now optimise. We expect that many of the algorithmic consequences of [SST25] can now be translated into more streamlined algorithms using our optimal bounds on the linkage function. More generally, for annotated graphs (or even colourful graphs [PTW25]), bidimensionality plays a role analogous to that of treewidth in many graph problems: it provides a threshold parameter above which annotation-irrelevant vertices can be found and below which irrelevant vertices can be identified, until eventually a bounded-treewidth equivalent instance is obtained. Based on this general algorithmic scheme, we expect that our bounds and algorithms will have sufficient gravitational pull to liberate more algorithms from their “galactic” reputation. This, however, should be the subject of a broader future project. 

13.3 Other research directions 

Reducing degrees of polynomials. A natural question is how far the quantitative bounds obtained here can be sharpened further. The near-optimality of our results leaves limited room for improving the general asymptotic form of the Linkage Function from Theorem 1.2. Still, even within a bound of the form β(k, b ) ∈ 2poly (b) · poly (k), it would be very interesting to reduce the degrees of the polynomials appearing both in the exponent and in the multiplicative factor. Our current proof still produces rather large constants in these degrees, and reducing them would require a careful quantitative refinement of several parts of the argument and the results which feed into our proof – particularly Proposition 3.8. Such improvements would be valuable not only from a technical point of view, but also for applications in more specialised settings. In particular, when one studies the Linkage Function under the exclusion of specific parametric graph classes, additional structure may become available and could lead to substantially better estimates. 

Other linkage-like constellations. Moving beyond graph minors, it would be very interesting to establish analogous linkage theorems for other rooted containment relations, such as labelled minors, immersions, or containment relations in directed graphs. Each of these settings appears to require genuinely new ideas, but the present work suggests that one should again search for the structural parameter that governs the exponential part of the bound. It is also natural to ask whether our proof techniques can be used to improve the parameter dependencies in several recent results in structural algorithmic graph theory, such as the edge-disjoint linkage theorem 154 for the strong immersion relation in Eulerian digraphs from [CKK25], and the group-labelled linkages studied in [LY25]. 

Meta-folios. We define the (k, d )-meta-folio of an annotated graph (G, R ) as follows 

(k, d )-meta-folio (G, R ) := {(k, d )-folio (G, R ′) | R′ ⊆ R}.

Notice that the meta-folio of an annotated graph can be seen as a “2nd order object”, as it contains a collection of collections of k-rooted graphs. By the strong irrelevance property in Theorem 1.3, the repeated application of the irrelevant vertex argument produces, in 

22poly (b+d)·poly (k) · | G|2

time, an annotated graph (G′, R ) such that G′ is an induced subgraph of G, tw (G′) ∈

2poly (b+d)poly (k), and, moreover, the (k, d )-meta-folio of (G, R ) coincides with that of (G′, R ).Since standard dynamic programming can compute the (k, d )-meta-folio of (G′, R ) in 

22poly (tw (G′)) 

· | G′|

time, this yields an algorithm for computing the (k, d )-meta-folio of (G, R ) in 

22poly (b+d)·poly (k) · | G|2 + 2 22poly (b+d)·poly (k)

· | G| (4) time. This establishes an interesting trade-off between the parametric dependence and the polynomial dependence for the computation of the meta-folio, seen as a 2nd order object. Can the dependencies in (4) be improved? More broadly, do such “higher-order” extensions of folios inherently involve higher towers of exponentiations and under what trade-offs? 

Reducing levels of exponentiality. On the algorithmic side, the most immediate challenge is to improve the running time of the folio-computation algorithm in Theorem 1.4 to 

2poly (d,k ) · | G|O(1) ,

or to obtain algorithms for k-Disjoint Paths with running time 

2poly (k) · | G|O(1) .

For k-Disjoint Paths , some progress has already been made for planar graphs in [LMP +20] and [COO23], where algorithms with running times 2O(k2)|G|6 and 2O(k2)|G|, respectively, were obtained. We believe that ideas from the proof of this paper, combined with those of [COO23], may help extend these results to more general minor-closed graph classes or even in general and for folios as well. In fact we are curious whether the (heavy) dynamic programming part in (4) or the running time in (3) for computing (k, d )-folio (G, R ) can be reduced by one level of exponentiality. 155 Reducing polynomial dependence. As a final challenge, we would like to highlight the recent result of Korhonen, Mi. Pilipczuk, and Stamoulis [KPS24b]. They gave an algorithm that, given an annotated graph (G, R ) with |R| ≤ k, computes (k, d )-folio (G, R ) in time 

f (k, d ) · m1+ o(1) ,

where m is the total number of vertices and edges of G. Moreover, it follows that this running time can be improved to O(f (k, d )·|| G||· log |G|), for some (galactic) function f : N2 → N [KPS26]. For surface-embeddable graphs, the dependence on the input size can even be made linear, as proved by Golovach, Kolliopoulos, Stamoulis, and Thilikos in [GKST25]. The parameter dependence hidden in the function f, however, remains galactic. This naturally raises the following question: is it possible to obtain a true “best of both worlds” theorem, combining the near-linear dependence on the input size achieved in [KPS24b] (or [GKST25]) with the controlled parameter dependence of Theorem 1.4? 156 References 

[ADF +11] Isolde Adler, Frederic Dorn, Fedor V. Fomin, Ignasi Sau, and Dimitrios M. Thilikos. Faster parameterized algorithms for minor containment. Theoret. Comput. Sci. ,412(50):7018–7028, 2011. doi:10.1016/j.tcs.2011.09.015 .[AK19] Isolde Adler and Philipp Klaus Krause. A lower bound on the tree-width of graphs with irrelevant vertices. Journal of Combinatorial Theory, Series B , 137:126–136, July 2019. doi:10.1016/j.jctb.2018.12.008 .[AKK +11] Isolde Adler, Stavros G. Kolliopoulos, Philipp Klaus Krause, Daniel Lokshtanov, Saket Saurabh, and Dimitrios Thilikos. Tight Bounds for Linkages in Planar Graphs. In Automata, Languages and Programming , volume 6755, pages 110–121. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2011. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-22006-7_10 .[AKK +17] Isolde Adler, Stavros G Kolliopoulos, Philipp Klaus Krause, Daniel Lokshtanov, Saket Saurabh, and Dimitrios M Thilikos. Irrelevant vertices for the planar Disjoint Paths Problem. Journal of Combinatorial Theory, Series B , 122:815–843, January 2017. doi:10.1016/j.jctb.2016.10.001 .[Arn23] Dan Arnon. Fixing the Kawarabayashi-Thomas-Wollan Flat Wall, April 2023. 

arXiv:2304.02701 .[BC78] E. A. Bender and E. R. Canfield. The asymptotic number of labeled graphs with given degree sequences. Journal of Combinatorial Theory, Series A , 24:296–307, 1978. [Bol82] B. Bollobás. The asymptotic number of unlabelled regular graphs. Journal of the London Mathematical Society , 26:201–206, 1982. [BST23] Julien Baste, Ignasi Sau, and Dimitrios M. Thilikos. Hitting minors on bounded treewidth graphs. IV. An optimal algorithm. SIAM J. Comput. , 52(4):865–912, 2023. doi:10.1137/21M140482X .[CC16] Chandra Chekuri and Julia Chuzhoy. Polynomial Bounds for the Grid-Minor Theorem. Journal of the ACM , 63(5):1–65, December 2016. doi:10.1145/2820609 .[Chu15a] Julia Chuzhoy. Excluded Grid Theorem: Improved and Simplified. In Proceedings of the Forty-Seventh Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing , pages 645–654, Portland Oregon USA, June 2015. ACM. doi:10.1145/2746539.2746551 .[Chu15b] Julia Chuzhoy. Improved Bounds for the Flat Wall Theorem. In Proc. of the 26th Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA) , pages 256–275, 2015. doi:10.1137/1.9781611973730.20 .[CKK24] Dario G Cavallaro, Ken-ichi Kawarabayashi, and Stephan Kreutzer. Edge-Disjoint Paths in Eulerian Digraphs, February 2024. arXiv:2402.13716 .[CKK25] Dario Cavallaro, Ken-ichi Kawarabayashi, and Stephan Kreutzer. Well-Quasi-Ordering Eulerian Digraphs Embeddable in Surfaces by Strong Immersion, Septem-ber 2025. arXiv:2509.26260 , doi:10.48550/arXiv.2509.26260 .[COO23] Kyungjin Cho, Eunjin Oh, and Seunghyeok Oh. Parameterized algorithm for the disjoint path problem on planar graphs: Exponential in k2 and linear in n. In 

Proceedings of the 2023 Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms 

157 (SODA 2023) , 2023. [CT21] Julia Chuzhoy and Zihan Tan. Towards tight(er) bounds for the Excluded Grid Theorem. Journal of Combinatorial Theory, Series B , 146:219–265, January 2021. 

doi:10.1016/j.jctb.2020.09.010 .[DHK05] Erik D Demaine, MohammadTaghi Hajiaghayi, and Ken-ichi Kawarabayashi. Algo-rithmic Graph Minor Theory: Decomposition, Approximation, and Coloring. In 

46th Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS’05) ,pages 637–646, Pittsburgh, PA, USA, 2005. IEEE. doi:10.1109/SFCS.2005.14 .[Die10] Reinhard Diestel. Graph Theory . Number 173 in Graduate Texts in Mathematics. Springer, Heidelberg ; New York, 4th ed edition, 2010. [DJKK25] Reinhard Diestel, Raphael W. Jacobs, Paul Knappe, and Jan Kurkofka. Canon-ical graph decompositions via coverings, June 2025. arXiv:2207.04855 , doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2207.04855 .[DKMW12] Reinhard Diestel, Ken-ichi Kawarabayashi, Theodor Müller, and Paul Wollan. On the excluded minor structure theorem for graphs of large tree-width. Journal of Combinatorial Theory, Series B , 102(6):1189–1210, November 2012. doi:10.1016/ j.jctb.2012.07.001 .[Dyc88] Walther Dyck. Beiträge zur Analysis situs: I. Aufsatz. Einund zweidimensionale Mannigfaltigkeiten. Mathematische Annalen , 32(4):457–512, December 1888. doi: 10.1007/BF01443580 .[Eul58] Leonhard Euler. Elementa doctrinae solidorum. Novi Commentarii academiae scientiarum Petropolitanae , 4:109–150, 1758. [Fel89] Michael R. Fellows. The Robertson-Seymour theorems: A Survey of Applications. In Graphs and Algorithms: Proceedings of the AMS-IMS-SIAM Joint Summer Research Conference Held June 28–July 4, 1987 , volume 89 of Contemporary Mathematics , pages 1–18. American Mathematical Society, Providence, RI, 1989. 

doi:10.1090/conm/089/1006472 .[FGS +25] Fedor V. Fomin, Petr A. Golovach, Ignasi Sau, Giannos Stamoulis, and Dimitrios M. Thilikos. Compound logics for modification problems. ACM Trans. Comput. Log. ,26(1):Art. 2, 57, 2025. [FL88] Michael R Fellows and Michael A Langston. Nonconstructive tools for proving polynomial-time decidability. Journal of the ACM , 35(3):727–739, June 1988. 

doi:10.1145/44483.44491 .[FLP +19] Fedor V. Fomin, Daniel Lokshtanov, Fahad Panolan, Saket Saurabh, and Meirav Zehavi. Hitting topological minors is FPT, April 2019. arXiv:1904.02944 , doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1904.02944 .[FM12] Benson Farb and Dan Margalit. A primer on mapping class groups . Princeton University Press, 2012. [FRS87] Harvey Friedman, Neil Robertson, and Paul Seymour. The metamathematics of the graph minor theorem. In Logic and combinatorics (Arcata, Calif., 1985) ,volume 65 of Contemp. Math. , pages 229–261. Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 1987. doi:10.1090/conm/065/891251 .158 [FW99] George K Francis and Jeffrey R Weeks. Conway’s ZIP Proof. The American Mathematical Monthly , 106(5):393–399, May 1999. doi:10.1080/00029890.1999. 12005061 .[GHR18] Jim Geelen, Tony Huynh, and R. Bruce Richter. Explicit bounds for graph minors. Journal of Combinatorial Theory, Series B , 132:80–106, September 2018. 

doi:10.1016/j.jctb.2018.03.004 .[GKST25] Petr A. Golovach, Stavros G. Kolliopoulos, Giannos Stamoulis, and Dimitrios M. Thilikos. Finding irrelevant vertices in linear time on bounded-genus graphs. In Proceedings of the 2025 Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algo-rithms (SODA) , pages 3762–3774. SIAM, Philadelphia, PA, 2025. doi:10.1137/1. 9781611978322.126 .[GPW26] Maximilian Gorsky, Evangelos Protopapas, and Sebastian Wiederrecht. Quickly excluding an annotated planar graph, February 2026. arXiv:2602.06516 , doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2602.06516 .[GST23a] Petr A. Golovach, Giannos Stamoulis, and Dimitrios M. Thilikos. Combing a linkage in an annulus. SIAM J. Discrete Math. , 37(4):2332–2364, 2023. doi: 10.1137/22M150914X .[GST23b] Petr A. Golovach, Giannos Stamoulis, and Dimitrios M. Thilikos. Hitting topological minor models in planar graphs is fixed parameter tractable. ACM Trans. Algorithms ,19(3):Art. 23, 29, 2023. [GST23c] Petr A Golovach, Giannos Stamoulis, and Dimitrios M Thilikos. Model-Checking for First-Order Logic with Disjoint Paths Predicates in Proper Minor-Closed Graph Classes. In Proceedings of the 2023 Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA) , pages 3684–3699, Philadelphia, PA, January 2023. Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics. doi:10.1137/1.9781611977554 .[GSTW25] Maximilian Gorsky, Giannos Stamoulis, Dimitrios M. Thilikos, and Sebastian Wiederrecht. Catching Rats in H-minor-free Graphs, June 2025. arXiv:2506. 22857 , doi:10.48550/arXiv.2506.22857 .[GSTW26] Maximilian Gorsky, Giannos Stamoulis, Dimitrios M. Thilikos, and Sebastian Wiederrecht. Catching Rats in H-minor-free Graphs. In Proceedings of the 2026 Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA) , pages 4644– 4659, Vancouver, January 2026. Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics. 

doi:10.1137/1.9781611978971 .[GSW25] Maximilian Gorsky, Michał T. Seweryn, and Sebastian Wiederrecht. Polynomial Bounds for the Graph Minor Structure Theorem, April 2025. arXiv:2504.02532 ,

doi:10.48550/arXiv.2504.02532 .[GSW26] Maximilian Gorsky, Michał T. Seweryn, and Sebastian Wiederrecht. The price of homogeneity is polynomial, February 2026. arXiv:2602.01882 , doi:10.48550/ arXiv.2602.01882 .[Huy09] Tony Huynh. The Linkage Problem for Group-Labelled Graphs . PhD thesis, University of Waterloo, 2009. [JMM96] M. Juvan, A. Malnič, and B. Mohar. Systems of Curves on Surfaces. Journal of Combinatorial Theory, Series B , 68(1):7–22, September 1996. doi:10.1006/jctb. 

159 1996.0053 .[Joh87] David S. Johnson. The NP-completeness column: An ongoing guide. Journal of Algorithms , 8(2):285–303, 1987. doi:10.1016/0196-6774(87)90043-5 .[Jun70] Heinz A Jung. Eine verallgemeinerung des n-fachen zusammenhangs für graphen. 

Mathematische Annalen , 187(2):95–103, June 1970. doi:10.1007/BF01350174 .[KK20] Ken-ichi Kawarabayashi and Yusuke Kobayashi. Linear min-max relation between the treewidth of an H-minor-free graph and its largest grid minor. Journal of Combinatorial Theory, Series B , 141:165–180, March 2020. doi:10.1016/j.jctb. 2019.07.007 .[KKM12] Ken-ichi Kawarabayashi, Stephan Kreutzer, and Bojan Mohar. Linkless and flat embeddings in 3-space. Discrete & Computational Geometry , 47(4):731–755, 2012. 

doi:10.1007/s00454-012-9413-9 .[KKR12] Ken-ichi Kawarabayashi, Yusuke Kobayashi, and Bruce A Reed. The disjoint paths problem in quadratic time. Journal of Combinatorial Theory, Series B ,102(2):424–435, March 2012. doi:10.1016/j.jctb.2011.07.004 .[KPS24a] Tuukka Korhonen, Michał Pilipczuk, and Giannos Stamoulis. Minor Containment and Disjoint Paths in almost-linear time, April 2024. arXiv:2404.03958 .[KPS24b] Tuukka Korhonen, Michał Pilipczuk, and Giannos Stamoulis. Minor containment and disjoint paths in almost-linear time. In 2024 IEEE 65th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science—FOCS 2024 , pages 53–61. IEEE Computer Soc., Los Alamitos, CA, [2024] ©2024. [KPS26] Tuukka Korhonen, Michał Pilipczuk, and Giannos Stamoulis. Personal Communi-cation, 2026. [KR20] Martin Krombholz and Michael Rathjen. Upper bounds on the graph minor theorem. In Peter M. Schuster, Monika Seisenberger, and Andreas Weiermann, editors, Well-Quasi Orders in Computation, Logic, Language and Reasoning , volume 53 of Trends in Logic , pages 145–159. Springer, Cham, 2020. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-30229-0_6 .[KTW18] Ken-ichi Kawarabayashi, Robin Thomas, and Paul Wollan. A new proof of the flat wall theorem. Journal of Combinatorial Theory, Series B , 129:204–238, March 2018. doi:10.1016/j.jctb.2017.09.006 .[KTW21] Ken-ichi Kawarabayashi, Robin Thomas, and Paul Wollan. Quickly excluding a non-planar graph, January 2021. arXiv:2010.12397 .[KW10] Ken-ichi Kawarabayashi and Paul Wollan. A shorter proof of the graph minor algorithm: The unique linkage theorem. In Proceedings of the Forty-Second ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing , pages 687–694, Cambridge Massachusetts USA, June 2010. ACM. doi:10.1145/1806689.1806784 .[LMP +20] Daniel Lokshtanov, Pranabendu Misra, Michał Pilipczuk, Saket Saurabh, and Meirav Zehavi. An exponential time parameterized algorithm for planar disjoint paths. In Proceedings of the 52nd Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing , pages 1307–1316, Chicago, IL, USA, June 2020. ACM. doi:10.1145/ 3357713.3384250 .160 [LSZ20] Daniel Lokshtanov, Saket Saurabh, and Meirav Zehavi. Efficient Graph Minors Theory and Parameterized Algorithms for (Planar) Disjoint Paths. In Treewidth, Kernels, and Algorithms , volume 12160, pages 112–128. Springer International Publishing, Cham, 2020. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-42071-0_9 .[LY25] Chun-Hung Liu and Youngho Yoo. Disjoint paths problem with group-expressable constraints. In STOC’25—Proceedings of the 57th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing , pages 1933–1943. ACM, New York, [2025] ©2025. doi: 10.1145/3717823.3718109 .[Maz13] Frédéric Mazoit. A single exponential bound for the redundant vertex Theorem on surfaces, September 2013. arXiv:1309.7820 , doi:10.48550/arXiv.1309.7820 .[Men27] Karl Menger. Zur allgemeinen Kurventheorie. Fundamenta Mathematicae , 10(1):96– 115, 1927. doi:10.4064/fm-10-1-96-115 .[MSST24] Laure Morelle, Ignasi Sau, Giannos Stamoul, and Dimitrios M. Thili. Faster param-eterized algorithms for modification problems to minor-closed classes. TheoretiCS ,3:Art. 19, 75, 2024. [MT01] Bojan Mohar and Carsten Thomassen. Graphs on Surfaces . Johns Hopkins Studies in the Mathematical Sciences. Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, 2001. [PPTW24a] Christophe Paul, Evangelos Protopapas, Dimitrios M Thilikos, and Sebastian Wiederrecht. Obstructions to Erdős-Pósa Dualities for Minors, July 2024. arXiv: 2407.09671 .[PPTW24b] Christophe Paul, Evangelos Protopapas, Dimitrios M. Thilikos, and Sebastian Wiederrecht. Obstructions to Erdös-Pósa Dualities for Minors. In 2024 IEEE 65th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS) , pages 31–52, Chicago, IL, USA, October 2024. IEEE. doi:10.1109/FOCS61266.2024.00013 .[PPTW25] Christophe Paul, Evangelos Protopapas, Dimitrios M. Thilikos, and Sebastian Wiederrecht. The local structure theorem for graph minors with finite index, 2025. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.02769 , arXiv:2507.02769 .[PTW25] Evangelos Protopapas, Dimitrios M. Thilikos, and Sebastian Wiederrecht. Colorful Minors, July 2025. arXiv:2507.10467 , doi:10.48550/arXiv.2507.10467 .[Ree97] Bruce A Reed. Tree Width and Tangles: A New Connectivity Measure and Some Applications. In Surveys in Combinatorics, 1997 , pages 87–162. Cambridge University Press, 1 edition, July 1997. doi:10.1017/CBO9780511662119.006 .[RS86] Neil Robertson and P. D. Seymour. Graph minors. V. Excluding a planar graph. J. Combin. Theory Ser. B , 41(1):92–114, 1986. doi:10.1016/0095-8956(86)90030-4.[RS90] Neil Robertson and Paul D Seymour. Graph minors. VIII. A Kuratowski theorem for general surfaces. Journal of Combinatorial Theory, Series B , 48(2):255–288, April 1990. doi:10.1016/0095-8956(90)90121-F .[RS95] Neil Robertson and Paul D Seymour. Graph Minors. XIII. The Disjoint Paths Problem. Journal of Combinatorial Theory, Series B , 63(1):65–110, January 1995. 

doi:10.1006/jctb.1995.1006 .[RS03] Neil Robertson and Paul D Seymour. Graph Minors. XVI. Excluding a non-planar graph. Journal of Combinatorial Theory, Series B , 89(1):43–76, September 2003. 161 doi:10.1016/S0095-8956(03)00042-X .[RS04] Neil Robertson and P. D. Seymour. Graph minors. XX. Wagner’s conjecture. J. Combin. Theory Ser. B , 92(2):325–357, 2004. doi:10.1016/j.jctb.2004.08.001 .[RS09] Neil Robertson and Paul D Seymour. Graph minors. XXI. Graphs with unique linkages. Journal of Combinatorial Theory, Series B , 99(3):583–616, May 2009. 

doi:10.1016/j.jctb.2008.08.003 .[RS12] Neil Robertson and Paul D Seymour. Graph Minors. XXII. Irrelevant vertices in linkage problems. Journal of Combinatorial Theory, Series B , 102(2):530–563, March 2012. doi:10.1016/j.jctb.2007.12.007 .[RW09] Bruce Reed and David R. Wood. A linear-time algorithm to find a separator in a graph excluding a minor. ACM Transactions on Algorithms , 5(4):1–16, October 2009. doi:10.1145/1597036.1597043 .[Sey80] Paul D Seymour. Disjoint paths in graphs. Discrete Mathematics , 29(3):293–309, 1980. doi:10.1016/0012-365X(80)90158-2 .[Shi80] Yossi Shiloach. A Polynomial Solution to the Undirected Two Paths Problem. 

Journal of the ACM , 27(3):445–456, July 1980. doi:10.1145/322203.322207 .[SSS +24] Nicole Schirrmacher, Sebastian Siebertz, Giannos Stamoulis, Dimitrios M. Thilikos, and Alexandre Vigny. Model checking disjoint-paths logic on topological-minor-free graph classes. In Proceedings of the 39th Annual ACM/IEEE Symposium on Logic in Computer Science , page 12. ACM, New York, [2024] ©2024. doi: 10.1145/3661814.3662089 .[SST20] Ignasi Sau, Giannos Stamoulis, and Dimitrios M. Thilikos. An FPT-algorithm for recognizing k-apices of minor-closed graph classes. In 47th International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming , volume 168 of LIPIcs. Leibniz Int. Proc. Inform. , pages Art. No. 95, 20. Schloss Dagstuhl. Leibniz-Zent. Inform., Wadern, 2020. [SST21] Ignasi Sau, Giannos Stamoulis, and Dimitrios M. Thilikos. A more accurate view of the Flat Wall Theorem. 2021. arXiv:2102.06463 .[SST22] Ignasi Sau, Giannos Stamoulis, and Dimitrios M. Thilikos. k-apices of minor-closed graph classes. II. Parameterized algorithms. ACM Trans. Algorithms , 18(3):Art. 21, 30, 2022. doi:10.1145/3519028 .[SST23] Ignasi Sau, Giannos Stamoulis, and Dimitrios M. Thilikos. k-apices of minor-closed graph classes. I. Bounding the obstructions. J. Combin. Theory Ser. B , 161:180–227, 2023. doi:10.1016/j.jctb.2023.02.012 .[SST24] Ignasi Sau, Giannos Stamoulis, and Dimitrios M. Thilikos. A more accurate view of the flat wall theorem. J. Graph Theory , 107(2):263–297, 2024. doi: 10.1002/jgt.23121 .[SST25] Ignasi Sau, Giannos Stamoulis, and Dimitrios M. Thilikos. Parameterizing the quan-tification of CMSO: model checking on minor-closed graph classes. In Proceedings of the 2025 Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA) , pages 3728–3742. SIAM, Philadelphia, PA, 2025. doi:10.1137/1.9781611978322.124 .[ST93] Paul D. Seymour and Robin Thomas. Graph searching and a min-max theorem for tree-width. J. Combin. Theory Ser. B , 58(1):22–33, 1993. doi:10.1006/jctb. 

162 1993.1027 .[Thi12] Dimitrios M. Thilikos. Graph minors and parameterized algorithm design. In Hans L. Bodlaender, Rod Downey, Fedor V. Fomin, and Dániel Marx, editors, 

The Multivariate Algorithmic Revolution and Beyond , volume 7370, pages 228–256. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2012. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-30891-8_13 .[Tho80] Carsten Thomassen. 2-Linked Graphs. European Journal of Combinatorics , 1(4):371– 378, December 1980. doi:10.1016/S0195-6698(80)80039-4 .[TW23] Dimitrios M. Thilikos and Sebastian Wiederrecht. The graph minors structure theorem through bidimensionality, June 2023. arXiv:2306.01724 , doi:10.48550/ arXiv.2306.01724 .[TW26] Dimitrios M. Thilikos and Sebastian Wiederrecht. Excluding surfaces as minors in graphs, 2026. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2601.19230 , arXiv:2601.19230 .[Wor81] Nicholas C. Wormald. The asymptotic connectivity of labelled regular graphs. 

Journal of Combinatorial Theory, Series B , 31:156–167, 1981. [WZ23] Michał Włodarczyk and Meirav Zehavi. Planar disjoint paths, treewidth, and kernels. In 2023 IEEE 64th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science—FOCS 2023 , pages 649–662. IEEE Computer Soc., Los Alamitos, CA, [2023] ©2023. doi:10.1109/FOCS57990.2023.00044 .163