Title: Automorphism-invariant refinements of weakly branch actions via overlap functions

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.26644v1

Published Time: Thu, 30 Jul 2026 00:38:12 GMT

Number of Pages: 19

Markdown Content:
AUTOMORPHISM-INVARIANT REFINEMENTS OF WEAKLY BRANCH ACTIONS VIA OVERLAP FUNCTIONS 

ARMANDO MARTINO 

Abstract. Let a finitely generated group G act weakly branch on a locally finite rooted tree T

with boundary ∂T . The rooted tree structure is encoded by the overlap function , which is our name for the Gromov product on the boundary: 

c(ξ, η ) = |ξ ∧ η|.

We axiomatise this function and show that when it is ‘admissible’, one can recover the rooted tree. By the boundary rigidity theorem of Lavreniuk and Nekrashevych, Aut( G) acts canonically on 

∂T . We therefore form the automorphism symmetrisation of the overlap function: ̂

c(ξ, η ) = inf 

> α∈Aut( G)

c(α · ξ, α · η).

We prove that ̂c is again an admissible G-invariant overlap function and that its associated tree ̂

T is locally finite. The action of G on ̂ T is faithful and weakly branch, and is branch if and only if the original action on T is branch. Moreover, 

NAut( ̂T ) (G) ∼= Aut( G).

In particular, Aut( G) is weakly branch. We also describe the finite weakly branch extensions of G:they are precisely the pullbacks of finite subgroups of Out( G). If G is branch, all these extensions are branch. In both cases, they act on the same tree ̂ T .

1. Introduction 

The goal of this paper is to elaborate on the fascinating result of Lavreniuk and Nekrashevych: 

Theorem 1.1 ( [13, Theorem 7.3]) . If G has a weakly branch action on the rooted tree T , then 

NHomeo( ∂T )(G) ∼= Aut( G).

That is, every automorphism of G induces and is induced by a homeomorphism of the boundary of T . Our result will be to show that, up to changing the underlying tree T to ̂ T , we can realise every automorphism of G as an automorphism of ̂ T , while the action remains weakly branch. Our methods require that G be finitely generated. As a consequence, Aut( G) will also be weakly branch in its action on ̂ T .This belongs to a broader circle of rigidity and reconstruction results for groups acting on rooted trees and their boundaries; see [4, 10]. Recall that an action of the group G on a rooted tree T is called weakly branch if G acts transitively on every level (the vertices at a given distance from the root) and every rigid stabiliser is non-trivial; equivalently, for every vertex v of T there is some non-trivial group element 1̸ = gv whose support lies entirely in the subtree below v. See Definition 2.2 and [1], [5]. Weakly branch groups form a large and varied class. They include all branch groups—in par-ticular, the classical Grigorchuk and Gupta–Sidki groups and the many families of GGS and spinal groups—but also genuinely non-branch examples such as the Basilica group. More broadly, they arise naturally among self-similar groups and have provided a rich source of finitely generated groups with striking algebraic, geometric and dynamical properties; see, for example, [1, 5]. The first Grig-orchuk group was the first known group of intermediate growth and is a finitely generated infinite  

> 1arXiv:2607.26644v1 [math.GR] 29 Jul 2026 2ARMANDO MARTINO

torsion group. It also provided the first example of an amenable group that is not elementarily amenable [7, 11]. Our construction is motivated by the use of length functions to encode group actions on trees. Based length functions and translation length functions play a central role in geometric group theory, notably in Chiswell’s theorem - see [3]. They are poorly suited, however, to actions on rooted trees. Every automorphism of a rooted tree fixes the root, and hence both its translation length and its displacement of the root are zero. Choosing a basepoint at level n gives information only about a finite truncation of the tree. The natural geometry instead lies on the boundary. Given two ends ξ, η ∈ ∂T , define 

c(ξ, η ) = |ξ ∧ η|,

where |ξ ∧ η| is the length of their maximal common intial segment, and ∞ if they are equal. This is precisely the Gromov product (ξ | η)o on the boundary of the rooted tree, although the term overlap function better reflects its elementary tree-theoretic meaning. For a fixed end ξ, the quantities 

c(ξ, gξ ), g ∈ G, 

measure how far along the ray ξ one travels before the action of g moves it elsewhere. This gives a natural replacement for a based length function. It nevertheless favours a chosen end and its orbit. We therefore consider the overlap function 

c : ∂T × ∂T −→ N ∪ {∞} .

The entire rooted tree can be reconstructed from this function: the vertices at level n are the equivalence classes for 

ξ ∼n η ⇐⇒ c(ξ, η ) ≥ n. 

See Proposition 3.7. The overlap-function description makes common refinements particularly transparent. Suppose that c1 and c2 are overlap functions on the same boundary. At level n, the equivalence relation associated to 

min {c1, c 2}

is the intersection of the equivalence relations associated to c1 and c2. Its classes are therefore precisely the nonempty intersections of a level-n cylinder for the first tree with a level-n cylinder for the second. Consequently, min {c1, c 2} encodes the common refinement of the two rooted trees, simultaneously at every level. By the theorem of Lavreniuk and Nekrashevych above, when G has a weakly branch action on 

T , Aut( G) acts canonically and faithfully on ∂T , and this action satisfies 

α · (gξ ) = α(g)( α · ξ)

for every α ∈ Aut( G), g ∈ G, and ξ ∈ ∂T .We define the twisted overlap function by 

cα(ξ, η ) = c(α · ξ, α · η).

Alternatively, one may pre-compose the original action of G on T by α, obtaining the twisted G-tree 

αT . We show that these two operations agree: the tree Tcα reconstructed from cα is naturally 

G-equivariantly isomorphic to αT .The central construction of the paper is the common refinement of all these twisted trees. In terms of overlap functions, it is given by the single formula ̂

c = inf  

> α∈Aut( G)

cα.AUTOMORPHISM-INVARIANT REFINEMENTS 3

By construction, ̂c is invariant under the canonical action of Aut( G) on the boundary. The principal difficulty is that an infinite common refinement of finite clopen partitions need not itself have finitely many parts. Thus it is not immediate that ̂c determines a locally finite tree. The key input is Lemma 4.3. It states that if a group G acts by homeomorphisms on a topological space and admits a dense orbit, then the number of G-invariant partitions into d clopen subsets is bounded by the number of subgroups of index d. In particular, only finitely many such partitions exist when G is finitely generated. This applies to the boundary action of any finitely generated group acting level-transitively on a rooted tree, since every orbit on the boundary is then dense. At level n, every twisted function cα gives a G-invariant clopen partition of ∂T with 

kn = |Tn|

parts. Only finitely many distinct such partitions can therefore occur. Although ̂c is defined as an infimum over all automorphisms, at each fixed level it is consequently determined by a finite common refinement. This gives our main result, Theorem 5.2, with the following consequences. Let G be a finitely generated group acting faithfully and weakly branch on a locally finite rooted tree T . We construct another locally finite rooted tree ̂ T such that: 

• G acts faithfully and weakly branch on ̂ T ;

• there is a natural level-preserving surjective simplicial G-map 

p :̂ T −→ T ;

• the action of G on ̂ T is branch if and only if its action on T is branch; 

• Aut( G) acts faithfully and weakly branch on ̂ T , and its restriction to Inn( G) ∼= G is the 

G-action; 

• conjugation induces an isomorphism 

NAut( ̂ T )(G) ∼= Aut( G).

We note that [13, Theorem 7.5] proves this for saturated actions. In that sense, our contribution is to remove the need for that hypothesis at the cost of changing the tree. In fact, in the case of saturated actions our construction would yield that ̂ T = T . We also construct toy examples showing that T̸ =̂ T in general, in Section 6. The construction also has consequences for finite extensions, Theorem 5.4. Suppose that G is finitely generated and weakly branch, and Γ contains G as a finite index normal subgroup. Then Γ

is weakly branch if and only if the natural conjugation map is injective: 

Γ ↪→ Aut( G).

Moreover, when this map is injective, Γ is branch if and only if G is branch. Hence, finite extensions of G that are (weakly) branch are all realised as pullbacks of finite subgroups of Out( G).Moreover, all of them act as (weakly) branch groups on the same tree ̂ T .Finally, we show how one might apply these techniques for the specific case of Grigorchuk’s group in Section 7, although this is mostly for interest and much of the material there is already known. 

Acknowledgements. I would like to thank Jorge Fariña-Asategui for an inspiring talk on his work from [4], which motivated me to think about this problem. I would also like to thank Laurent Bartholdi for encouraging comments on an earlier draft of this paper. 2. Rooted trees and branch actions 

Let T be a rooted tree with root o. For n ≥ 0, write 

Tn = {v ∈ T : d(o, v ) = n}4 ARMANDO MARTINO 

for the n-th level of T . If v ∈ T , the rooted subtree consisting of v and all its descendants is denoted by Tv .We shall assume that rooted trees are locally finite and have no leaves. The boundary ∂T is the set of (geodesic) infinite rays beginning at o. Here we consider a ray to be a non-backtracking infinite edge-path or vertex-path. This boundary has a natural topology whose basis is given by the cylinders: given a vertex v of 

T , the cylinder at v consists of all the (geodesic) infinite rays starting at o which pass through v.We shall denote the cylinder at the vertex v by Cyl( v).Cylinder sets are clopen. If T is locally finite, this topology makes ∂T a compact, metrisable and totally disconnected space. In particular, ∂T is Hausdorff. If, in addition, ∂T has no isolated points, for example, if every ray encounters branching infinitely often, then ∂T is a Cantor space. The group Aut( T ) consists of the graph automorphisms of T which fix the root. Every element of Aut( T ) preserves levels and induces a homeomorphism of ∂T .Let G ≤ Aut( T ). For a vertex v ∈ T , its stabiliser is 

St G(v) = {g ∈ G : gv = v}.

The rigid stabiliser of v is 

Rist G(v) = {g ∈ G : gw = w for every w / ∈ Tv }.

Thus an element of Rist G(v) acts trivially outside the subtree rooted at v.For n ≥ 0, the pointwise stabiliser of the n-th level is 

St G(n) = ⋂

> v∈Tn

St G(v),

and the rigid stabiliser of the n-th level is 

Rist G(n) = ⟨Rist G(v) : v ∈ Tn⟩.

Since the subtrees Tv , v ∈ Tn, are pairwise disjoint, the groups Rist G(v) commute pairwise, and hence 

Rist G(n) = ∏

> v∈Tn

Rist G(v).

Definition 2.1. The action G ↷ T is level-transitive if G acts transitively on Tn for every n ≥ 0.

Definition 2.2. A group G ≤ Aut( T ) is weakly branch on T if its action is level-transitive and 

Rist G(v)̸ = 1 

for every vertex v ∈ T .Equivalently, G is weakly branch if it is level-transitive and Rist G(v) is infinite for every v.For a level-transitive action, it is enough to require that one rigid stabiliser at each level be nontrivial. 

Definition 2.3. A group G ≤ Aut( T ) is branch on T if its action is level-transitive and 

[G : Rist G(n)] < ∞

for every n ≥ 0.Every infinite branch group is weakly branch. Indeed, if Rist G(n) has finite index, then it is nontrivial; by level-transitivity, all vertex rigid stabilisers at level n are conjugate, and hence each of them is nontrivial. 

Remark 2.4 . Every g ∈ G ≤ Aut( T ) induces a homeomorphism of the boundary, since cylinders are mapped to cylinders. Moreover, if Cyl( v) is the cylinder at v, then g ∈ Rist G(v) if and only if its action is supported in Cyl( v).AUTOMORPHISM-INVARIANT REFINEMENTS 5

We note some elementary results. 

Lemma 2.5. Let G be weakly branch. Then G is centreless. Thus, G ∼= Inn( G).Proof. If z ∈ Z(G) then, for any vertex, 

Rist G(v) = z Rist G(v)z−1 = Rist G(zv ).

Since rigid stabilisers are all non-trivial, and rigid stabilisers of distinct vertices at the same level intersect trivially, we deduce that z acts trivially on the tree and hence z = 1 , as the action is faithful. □

Lemma 2.6. Let G be weakly branch. Then any finite normal subgroup of G is trivial. Proof. Let N be a finite normal subgroup of G. Since the action is faithful, there is a level n such that 

N ∩ St G(n) = 1 .

Suppose that 1̸ = x ∈ N . Then x moves some vertex v at level n. Choose 

1̸ = r ∈ Rist G(v).

Since N is normal, 

[x, r ] ∈ N. 

Both r and xrx −1 fix level n pointwise, so 

[x, r ] ∈ St G(n).

It follows that 

[x, r ] ∈ N ∩ St G(n) = 1 .

Thus xrx −1 = r. But 

xrx −1 ∈ Rist G(xv ),

where xv ̸ = v, again contradicting the fact that rigid stabilisers of distinct vertices on the same level have trivial intersection. Therefore N = 1 . □

3. Overlap functions and rooted trees 

This section is concerned with encoding a locally finite rooted tree T via an ‘overlap function’. The idea here is that vertices of T give rise to cylinders, which are clopen subsets of ∂T . Vertices at level n then give a finite partition of ∂T into clopen subsets. Therefore, we can view the tree T as being (equivalent to) a nested sequence of finite clopen partitions of ∂T . An admissible overlap function - Definitions 3.1 and 3.5 - is just a single object for recording that data. Throughout this paper, the natural numbers N shall be assumed to contain 0.

Definition 3.1. Let X be a set. An overlap function on X is a function 

c : X × X −→ N ∪ {∞} 

such that, for all ξ, η, ζ ∈ X,(i) c(ξ, ξ ) = ∞;(ii) c(ξ, η ) = c(η, ξ );(iii) c(ξ, ζ ) ≥ min {c(ξ, η ), c (η, ζ )}.

Remark 3.2 . Note that this is just the Gromov product where X will be the boundary of a tree. Condition (iii) is then 0-hyperbolicity. 6 ARMANDO MARTINO 

We shall use overlap functions to re-construct trees. This is a well-understood idea. Indeed, with the convention 2−∞ = 0 , the function 

dc(ξ, η ) = 2 −c(ξ,η )

is the natural (pseudo) ultrametric on the boundary. The correspondence between rooted trees and ultrametric end spaces is developed systematically in [12]. 

Definition 3.3. Given an overlap function c on a set X we define for each n ≥ 0 an equivalence relation 

ξ ∼cn η ⇐⇒ c(ξ, η ) ≥ n. 

This is the level n partition of X via c.

Remark 3.4 . The third overlap function axiom is precisely what is needed for transitivity. 

Definition 3.5. Suppose that X is compact and totally disconnected. An overlap function c on X

is called admissible if: (i) every relation ∼cn has finitely many equivalence classes, each of which is clopen; (ii) c separates points: c(ξ, η ) = ∞ =⇒ ξ = η. 

Remark 3.6 . Note that a space which admits an admissible overlap function must be totally separated and hence totally disconnected. 

Proposition 3.7 (Reconstruction from an overlap function) . Let c be an admissible overlap function on a compact and totally disconnected space X. There is a locally finite rooted tree Tc whose vertices at level n are the classes of ∼cn, with adjacency given by containment of consecutive classes. The map 

πc : X −→ ∂T c, ξ πc

7−→ ([ξ]∼cn

)

> n≥0

,

is a homeomorphism. If a group G acts on X and 

c(gξ, gη ) = c(ξ, η )

for all g ∈ G, then G acts by rooted automorphisms on Tc, and the homeomorphism above is G-equivariant. Proof. The vertices of Tc are the equivalence classes of ∼cn, with n giving the distance from the root. The relations are nested: 

∼cn+1 ⊆ ∼ cn .

Hence every class at level n + 1 lies in a unique class at level n, which defines the edges of Tc.Finiteness of the classes at each level gives local finiteness. The displayed map is injective because the relations separate points. It is surjective because a ray in Tc gives a nested sequence of nonempty compact classes. Their intersection is nonempty by compactness and consists of exactly one point by separation. The map is continuous since the pre-image of a cylinder is precisely the equivalence class of some 

∼cn. The map is then a continuous bijection from a compact space to a Hausdorff space and hence a homeomorphism. If c is G-invariant, then G preserves every relation ∼cn and therefore acts on the correspond-ing rooted tree. Moreover, the homeomorphism above is clearly G-equivariant in this case since 

([ gξ ]∼cn ) = ( g[ξ]∼cn ). □

Corollary 3.8. Let X be a compact, totally disconnected space with admissible overlap function, c.Then the tree Tc constructed via Proposition 3.7 has no leaves. In particular the map, 

Aut( Tc) → Homeo( ∂T c),

is injective. AUTOMORPHISM-INVARIANT REFINEMENTS 7

Proof. Every vertex [ξ]∼cn has a child [ξ]∼cn+1 , so Tc has no leaves. The stated map is now clearly injective, since every vertex lies on some infinite ray from the root. □

Corollary 3.9. Let G ≤ Aut( T ), where T is a locally finite rooted tree without leaves. Then 

c : ∂T × ∂T −→ N ∪ {∞} , c(ξ, η ) := |ξ ∧ η|,

is an admissible G-invariant overlap function. For each n, the map 

Tn −→ ∂T / ∼cn, v 7 −→ Cyl( v),

is a G-equivariant bijection, mapping a vertex to the cylinder it defines. Consequently, these maps assemble to a G-equivariant isomorphism 

T −→ Tc.

Proof. The overlap axioms and G-invariance are immediate. For each n, two rays are ∼cn-equivalent precisely when they pass through the same vertex at level n. Thus the ∼cn-classes are exactly the level-n cylinders. They are finite in number and clopen, and the relations separate points, so c is admissible. Since T has no leaves, every vertex determines a nonempty cylinder, and hence the displayed map is a bijection on each level. Adjacency in both trees is given by containment of cylinders at consecutive levels. Finally, 

g Cyl( v) = Cyl( gv ),

so the resulting isomorphism is G-equivariant. □

Lemma 3.10. Let X be a compact totally disconnected space, and let 

c, d : X × X −→ N ∪ {∞} 

be admissible overlap functions satisfying 

c ≤ d. 

Then the following hold. (i) There is a natural level-preserving surjective simplicial map 

pc,d : Tc −→ Td

given on the vertices at level n by 

pc,d 

([ξ]∼cn

) = [ ξ]∼dn .

(ii) We have a commuting diagram, 

X

∂T c ∂T d 

> πcπd
> ∂p c,d

where ∂p c,d is the map induced on the boundaries by pc,d .(iii) If a group G acts on X, and both c and d are G-invariant, then pc,d and ∂p c,d are G-equivariant. Proof. Recall the definition of ∼cn from Definition 3.3. Since c ≤ d, we have 

ξ ∼cn η =⇒ ξ∼dnη. 

Thus every ∼cn-class is contained in a unique ∼dn-class. We may therefore define 

pc,d 

([ξ]∼cn

) = [ ξ]∼dn .

This is well defined, is surjective and preserves levels and edges. Hence pc,d is a level-preserving surjective simplicial map, establishing (i). The map ∂p c,d simply maps πc(ξ) to πd(ξ), hence we get a commuting diagram as in (ii). 8 ARMANDO MARTINO 

Finally, suppose that G acts on X and that both c and d are G-invariant. For g ∈ G, we have 

pc,d 

(g[ξ]∼cn

) = pc,d 

([gξ ]∼cn

)

= [ gξ ]∼dn

= g[ξ]∼dn

= g p c,d 

([ξ]∼cn

).

Thus pc,d is G-equivariant. Similarly, ∂p c,d will also be equivariant by Proposition 3.7. □

4. Boundary rigidity 

For the remainder of the paper, let 

G ≤ Aut( T )

be a finitely generated group acting faithfully and weakly branch on a locally finite rooted tree T .We use the following boundary rigidity theorem of Lavreniuk and Nekrashevych. 

Theorem 4.1 ( [13, Theorem 7.3 and Lemma 5.4]) . Let G ≤ Aut( T ) act faithfully and weakly branch on a locally finite rooted tree T . Then conjugation induces an isomorphism 

NHomeo( ∂T )(G) ∼= Aut( G).

Consequently, Aut( G) acts canonically and faithfully on ∂T , and this action satisfies 

α · (gξ ) = α(g)( α · ξ)

for every α ∈ Aut( G), g ∈ G, and ξ ∈ ∂T .Proof. Lavreniuk and Nekrashevych prove that every automorphism of G is induced by a homeo-morphism of ∂T , and that the centraliser of G in Homeo( ∂T ) is trivial. Thus conjugation gives a surjective homomorphism 

NHomeo( ∂T )(G) −→ Aut( G)

with trivial kernel. □

Remark 4.2 . Let c and d be admissible G-invariant overlap functions on ∂T . Then Tc and Td are 

G-equivariantly isomorphic if and only if c = d.Indeed, a G-equivariant isomorphism Tc → Td induces a G-equivariant homeomorphism of their boundaries. Under the natural identifications of both boundaries with ∂T , this homeomorphism centralises G, and is therefore the identity by Theorem 4.1. The isomorphism preserves lengths of common initial segments, so c = d. The converse is immediate. The following finiteness lemma will imply that the symmetrised overlap function is admissible; it is really the key technical lemma of this paper. 

Lemma 4.3. Let a group G act by homeomorphisms on a topological space X. Suppose that the action has a dense orbit. For every d ≥ 1, the number of G-partitions of X into exactly d clopen subsets is bounded above by the number of subgroups of index d in G.In particular, if G has only finitely many subgroups of index d, then there are only finitely many such partitions. This holds, in particular, when G is finitely generated. Proof. Suppose that the orbit of x ∈ X is dense. Now consider a G-partition into d clopen subsets. Let C be the part of the partition containing x and H = stab G(C). We claim that H has index d

and the partition is determined by H.First note that since the orbit of x is dense, the G orbit of C must cover X; hence the induced 

G action on the partition is transitive and hence H has index d. The closure Hx of Hx is clearly contained in C, as C is closed. The complement of Hx in C is open as C is open and so, if non-empty, contains some gx as Gx is dense. Since the partition is a G-partition, we get g ∈ H and therefore 

Hx = C. The other parts of the partition are given by gC = gHx .AUTOMORPHISM-INVARIANT REFINEMENTS 9

Therefore, the entire partition is determined by the index d subgroup H, namely the stabiliser of the part containing x. Thus the map which assigns to a G-partition the stabiliser of its part containing x is injective. This proves the claimed bound. If G has only finitely many subgroups of index d, it follows that there are only finitely many such partitions. In particular, this holds when G is finitely generated. 

□

Remark 4.4 . The boundary action of a level-transitive group acting on a rooted tree is clearly minimal; every orbit is dense, since the orbit of any point on the boundary meets every cylinder. 5. The automorphism symmetrisation 

In this section we show that the automorphism symmetrisation of an admissible overlap function is again an admissible overlap function. We begin by analysing the effect of twisting by a single automorphism. 

Proposition 5.1. Let G ≤ Aut( T ) act faithfully and weakly branch on a locally finite rooted tree 

T , and let 

c : ∂T × ∂T −→ N ∪ {∞} 

be the overlap function associated to T .Let α ∈ Aut( G), acting on ∂T via the canonical boundary action of Theorem 4.1. Define 

cα(ξ, η ) = c(α · ξ, α · η)

for ξ, η ∈ ∂T . Also, let αT denote the rooted tree T equipped with the precomposed G-action 

g ·αT v = α(g) ·T v. 

Then the following hold. (i) The function cα is a G-invariant admissible overlap function on ∂T .(ii) There is a natural G-equivariant isomorphism of rooted trees 

Φα : Tcα −→ αT. 

Proof. Note that cα is the pullback of c via the boundary homeomorphism given by α, so is an admissible overlap function. To prove G-invariance, let g ∈ G and ξ, η ∈ ∂T . Using the compatibility of the canonical boundary action with the automorphism α, we obtain 

cα(gξ, gη ) = c(α · (gξ ), α · (gη ))

= c(α(g)( α · ξ), α (g)( α · η))

= c(α · ξ, α · η)= cα(ξ, η ),

where the third equality follows from the G-invariance of c.Recall that the vertices of Tcα at level n are the ∼cα 

> n

-classes. Define 

Φα

([ξ]∼cαn

) = [ α · ξ]∼cn .

The definition of cα shows that this map is well defined and injective on every level. Since the action of α on ∂T is a bijection, it is also surjective on every level. Moreover, it preserves levels and the containment of cylinder sets, and hence preserves the parent relation. Therefore Φα is an isomorphism of rooted trees. 10 ARMANDO MARTINO 

Finally, for g ∈ G,

Φα

(g[ξ]∼cαn

) = Φ α

([gξ ]∼cαn

)

= [ α · (gξ )] ∼cn

= [ α(g)( α · ξ)] ∼cn

= g ·αT [α · ξ]∼cn

= g ·αT Φα

([ξ]∼cαn

).

Thus Φα is G-equivariant. □

We are now ready to fully symmetrise our admissible overlap functions. This is our main theorem. 

Theorem 5.2. Let 

G ≤ Aut( T )

be a finitely generated group acting weakly branch on a locally finite rooted tree T , and let 

c : ∂T × ∂T −→ N ∪ {∞} 

be the overlap function associated to T .For each α ∈ Aut( G), define 

cα(ξ, η ) = c(α · ξ, α · η),

where Aut( G) acts on ∂T via the canonical boundary action of Theorem 4.1. Define ̂

c(ξ, η ) = inf  

> α∈Aut( G)

cα(ξ, η ).

Then the following hold. (i) The function ̂c is an admissible G-invariant overlap function on ∂T . Moreover, it is invariant under the canonical action of Aut( G) on ∂T .Consequently, ̂c determines a locally finite rooted tree, which we denote by ̂

T = T̂c .

(ii) There is a natural level-preserving surjective simplicial G-map 

p :̂ T −→ T. 

Under the natural identification (given by Proposition 3.7) 

∂̂ T ∼= ∂T, 

the induced map on boundaries is the identity. (iii) The action of G on ̂ T is faithful and weakly branch. Moreover, the action of G on ̂ T is branch if and only if the action of G on T is branch. (iv) The canonical action of Aut( G) on ∂T is induced by a faithful action of Aut( G) on ̂ T by rooted tree automorphisms, and conjugation induces an isomorphism 

NAut( ̂ T )(G) ∼= Aut( G).

(v) The group Aut( G) is weakly branch in its action on ̂ T . The action of Inn( G) is simply the action of G under the isomorphism, G ∼= Inn( G).Proof. We first argue that ̂c is an overlap function. Note that conditions (i) and (ii) of Definition 3.1 are clear. For condition (iii), we note that for every α,

cα(ξ, ζ ) ≥ min {cα(ξ, η ), c α(η, ζ )},AUTOMORPHISM-INVARIANT REFINEMENTS 11 

since each cα is an overlap function. Taking infima gives ̂

c(ξ, ζ ) ≥ inf  

> α

min {cα(ξ, η ), c α(η, ζ )}≥ min 

{

inf  

> α

cα(ξ, η ), inf  

> α

cα(η, ζ )

}

= min {̂c(ξ, η ),̂c(η, ζ )}.

Hence ̂c is an overlap function. For n ≥ 0 and α ∈ Aut( G), let 

Pαn

denote the partition of ∂T into the equivalence classes of the relation ∼cα 

> n

. By Proposition 5.1, each 

cα is an admissible G-invariant overlap function, and 

Tcα ∼=G αT. 

In particular, if T has kn vertices at level n, then every partition Pαn has exactly kn parts. By Lemma 4.3, for each fixed n, only finitely many distinct partitions Pαn occur as α ranges over 

Aut( G). Moreover, ̂

c(ξ, η ) ≥ n ⇐⇒ c α(ξ, η ) ≥ n for every α ∈ Aut( G).

Thus the equivalence relation associated to ̂c at level n is the intersection of finitely many equiv-alence relations associated to admissible overlap functions. Its classes are therefore the nonempty intersections of finitely many clopen sets, and hence form a finite clopen partition of ∂T .Since the identity automorphism belongs to Aut( G), we have ̂

c ≤ c. 

Consequently, if ξ̸ = η, then ̂

c(ξ, η ) ≤ c(ξ, η ) < ∞.

It follows that ̂c is an admissible overlap function. Each cα is G-invariant, so ̂c is also G-invariant. Furthermore, for every β ∈ Aut( G),̂

c(β · ξ, β · η) = inf  

> α∈Aut( G)

c(α · (β · ξ), α · (β · η))

= inf  

> α∈Aut( G)

c((αβ ) · ξ, (αβ ) · η)

=̂c(ξ, η ),

since right multiplication by β permutes Aut( G). This proves the first assertion and allows us to define ̂

T = T̂c .

Since ̂c ≤ c, Lemma 3.10 and Corollary 3.9 give a natural level-preserving surjective simplicial map 

p :̂ T −→ T. 

Both ̂c and c are G-invariant, so p is G-equivariant. By Lemma 3.10, ∂p is simply π−1̂ 

> c

. Or, in other words, under the natural identification 

∂̂ T ∼= ∂T, 

the induced boundary map is the identity. This proves the second assertion. For the third assertion, we note that the existence of the map p shows that the action of G on ̂ T

is faithful, since the action on T is faithful. We next show that the action of G on ̂ T is weakly branch. Since the action of G on T is level-transitive, its action on ∂T is minimal: every G-orbit meets every cylinder and is therefore dense. Each level of ̂ T is a finite G-invariant clopen partition of ∂T . Minimality therefore implies that G

acts transitively on every level of ̂ T .12 ARMANDO MARTINO 

Let ̂v be a vertex of ̂ T , and let Cyl( ̂v) ⊆ ∂T be the corresponding cylinder. Since Cyl( ̂v) is open and the cylinders arising from T form a basis for the topology on ∂T , there is a vertex w of T such that 

Cyl( w) ⊆ Cyl( ̂v).

As the action of G on T is weakly branch, Rist TG(w)̸ = 1 . Every element of Rist TG(w) induces a homeomorphism of ∂T that is supported inside Cyl( w), and hence inside Cyl( ̂v). Therefore 

Rist TG(w) ≤ Rist ̂ TG(̂v),

so 

Rist ̂TG(̂v)̸ = 1 .

Thus G acts weakly branch on ̂ T .We now compare the branch properties of the two actions. For a rooted tree S, write 

Rist SG(n) = ∏

> v∈Sn

Rist SG(v)

for the rigid stabiliser of level n.Since the level-n partition associated to ̂c refines the level-n partition associated to c, every cylinder at level n of ̂ T is contained in a cylinder at level n of T . Hence 

Rist ̂ TG(n) ≤ Rist TG(n)

for every n. It follows that if the action on ̂ T is branch, then the action on T is branch. Conversely, fix n ≥ 0. Each level-n cylinder of ̂ T is clopen in ∂T , hence both compact and open. It is therefore a finite union of cylinders arising from T , since these form a basis for the topology. Since there are only finitely many vertices at level n of ̂ T , there is some m such that every level-m

cylinder of T is contained in a level-n cylinder of ̂ T . Therefore 

Rist TG(m) ≤ Rist ̂ TG(n).

If the action of G on T is branch, then Rist TG(m) has finite index in G, and hence so does Rist ̂ TG(n).Thus the action on ̂ T is branch. We have proved that the action on ̂ T is branch if and only if the action on T is branch. This proves the third assertion. Since ̂c is invariant under the canonical action of Aut( G) on ∂T , Aut( G) acts on ̂ T by rooted automorphisms, by Proposition 3.7. This action is faithful by Corollary 3.8, since its induced action on ∂̂ T ∼= ∂T is the faithful canonical boundary action. More precisely, Proposition 3.7 shows that 

π̂c : ∂T → ∂̂ T is an Aut( G)-equivariant homeomorphism. The compatibility relation 

α · (gξ ) = α(g)( α · ξ)

shows that this action normalises G, and that conjugation by the tree automorphism induced by α

restricts to the automorphism α of G. Hence conjugation gives a surjective homomorphism 

NAut( ̂ T )(G) −→ Aut( G).

Its kernel is the centraliser of G in Aut( ̂ T ). Every element of this centraliser induces a homeo-morphism of ∂̂ T ∼= ∂T which centralises G. By Theorem 4.1, the centraliser of G in Homeo( ∂T ) is trivial. The kernel is therefore trivial, and so 

NAut( ̂ T )(G) ∼= Aut( G).

This proves the fourth point. Finally, for the final point, Aut( G) contains G in its action on ̂ T , via the identification of G with 

Inn( G). The compatibility relation above immediately implies that the action of Inn( G) is the same as that of G, and this is also apparent from the normaliser equation. AUTOMORPHISM-INVARIANT REFINEMENTS 13 

Since G acts transitively on every level of ̂ T , so does Aut( G). Moreover, for every vertex ̂v,

1̸ = Rist ̂TG(̂v) ∼= Rist ̂T

> Inn( G)

(̂v) ≤ Rist ̂ T

> Aut( G)

(̂v).

Thus Aut( G) acts weakly branch on ̂ T . □

Remark 5.3 . The overlap function ̂c is characterised intrinsically as the greatest Aut( G)-invariant overlap function dominated by c. Indeed, if d is Aut( G)-invariant and d ≤ c, then 

d ≤ cα

for every α, and therefore d ≤̂c.We note that commensurability of branch groups has been studied in [6] and not all finite index subgroups need be (weakly) branch. For instance, if G is branch and |Tn| > 1 then Rist G(n) is a finite index subgroup admitting normal subgroups which intersect trivially, which implies that 

Rist G(n) is not branch by [6, Theorem 1.1 and Lemma 2.2(a)]. As an application of our main theorem, we study finite extensions of (weakly) branch groups and determine when they are (weakly) branch. 

Theorem 5.4. Let G be a finitely generated weakly branch group, and let 

1 −→ G −→ Γ q

−→ F −→ 1

be a short exact sequence, where F is finite. Let 

μ : F −→ Out( G)

be the monodromy homomorphism induced by conjugation in Γ, and let 

π : Aut( G) −→ Out( G)

be the natural quotient map. Conjugation induces a surjective homomorphism 

ρ : Γ −→ π−1(μ(F )) ≤ Aut( G)

whose kernel is naturally isomorphic to ker( μ). Consequently, the following are equivalent: (i) The monodromy homomorphism μ is injective. (ii) The homomorphism ρ is an isomorphism. (iii) The group Γ is weakly branch. If G is branch, these conditions are also equivalent to: (iv) The group Γ is branch. Whenever these conditions hold, every faithful weakly branch action G ↷ T gives rise to a weakly branch action Γ ↷̂ T , where ̂ T is the tree supplied by Theorem 5.2. In fact G ↷ T is branch if and only if Γ ↷̂ T is branch. Proof. Since G is weakly branch, it is centreless by Lemma 2.5. Conjugation therefore defines a homomorphism 

ρ : Γ −→ Aut( G)

whose restriction to G identifies G with Inn( G). Moreover, π(ρ(Γ) ) = μ(F ). It follows that 

ρ(Γ) = π−1(μ(F )).

Now let C = ker( ρ) = CΓ(G). Since C ∩ G = Z(G) = 1 , the restriction of q to C is injective. Its image is precisely ker( μ). Indeed, every element of C induces the trivial outer automorphism of G.Conversely, if γG ∈ ker( μ), then conjugation by γ on G is conjugation by some g ∈ G, and hence 

g−1γ ∈ C. Thus 

C ∼= q(C) = ker( μ).14 ARMANDO MARTINO 

In particular, μ is injective if and only if ρ is an isomorphism. This proves the equivalence of (i) and (ii). Suppose that these conditions hold. Choose a faithful weakly branch action G ↷ T , and let ̂ T be supplied by Theorem 5.2. Via ρ, the group Γ is a subgroup of Aut( G) containing G, and hence acts on ̂ T . Since G is level-transitive, so is Γ, and for every vertex v of ̂ T ,

1̸ = Rist G(v) ≤ Rist Γ(v).

Thus Γ acts weakly branch on ̂ T , proving (iii). Conversely, suppose that Γ is weakly branch. The subgroup 

C ∼= ker( μ)

is finite and normal in Γ. Since a weakly branch group has no non-trivial finite normal subgroups by Lemma 2.6, C = 1 , and hence μ is injective. This proves the equivalence of (i)–(iii). Finally, suppose that the equivalent conditions hold. By Theorem 5.2, the action G ↷ T is branch if and only if G ↷̂ T is branch. For every vertex v of ̂ T ,

Rist G(v) = Rist Γ(v) ∩ G, 

which has finite index in Rist Γ(v), since G has finite index in Γ. As every level is finite, it follows that Rist G(n) has finite index in Rist Γ(n). This implies that Rist G(n) has finite index in G if and only if Rist Γ(n) has finite index in Γ. Hence G ↷ T is branch if and only if Γ ↷̂ T is branch, proving the final assertion and the equivalence with (iv). 

□

6. A branch action which is not automorphism-invariant 

We give an example in which the automorphism-invariant refinement is strict. Let H be a finitely generated group acting faithfully and branch on a locally finite rooted tree T ,and let 

c : ∂T × ∂T −→ N ∪ {∞} 

be the associated overlap function. Let 

X = C22

and choose a subgroup U < X of order 2. Set 

W = H ≀ X = HX ⋊ X, 

where X acts regularly on itself and hence permutes the factors of HX . We write Hx for the copy of H indexed by x ∈ X.Consider the compact totally disconnected space (four copies of ∂T )

Y = X × ∂T 

and define 

cU : Y × Y −→ N ∪ {∞} 

by 

cU

((x, ξ ), (y, η )) =



0, x − y / ∈ U, 

1, x − y ∈ U \ { 0},

2 + c(ξ, η ), x = y. 

The corresponding level equivalence relations are particularly simple. At level 1,

(x, ξ ) ∼1 (y, η ) ⇐⇒ x + U = y + U, 

while at level 2,

(x, ξ ) ∼2 (y, η ) ⇐⇒ x = y. AUTOMORPHISM-INVARIANT REFINEMENTS 15 

More generally, for n ≥ 0,

(x, ξ ) ∼n+2 (y, η ) ⇐⇒ x = y and c(ξ, η ) ≥ n. 

Thus cU is an admissible overlap function. Its associated rooted tree, denoted by TU , has the form 

{∗} −→ X/U −→ X, 

with a copy of T attached below each x ∈ X.The wreath product W acts on Y in the usual way. The base group acts coordinatewise: 

(hz )z∈X · (x, ξ ) = ( x, h xξ),

and the top group acts by translations: 

q · (x, ξ ) = ( q + x, ξ ).

The function cU is invariant under these actions, so W acts faithfully on TU .This action is level-transitive. Moreover, 

HX ≤ Rist W (1) 

and, for every n ≥ 0,

Rist H (n)X ≤ Rist W (n + 2) .

Indeed, the product of the groups Hx over x in a fixed coset of U is supported inside the corresponding first-level cylinder, while the latter inclusions follow from the copies of the rigid stabilisers of H inside the subtrees below the vertices x ∈ X. Since H is branch, 

[W : HX ] = |X| < ∞

and 

[W : Rist H (n)X ] = |X| [H : Rist H (n)] |X| < ∞.

Consequently, W ↷ TU is branch. We now show that this action is not invariant under all automorphisms of W . Let V < X be another subgroup of order 2. Since 

Aut( X) = GL 2(F2) ∼= S3

acts transitively on the subgroups of order 2, there exists A ∈ Aut( X) such that 

A(V ) = U. 

The homeomorphism 

ΦA : Y −→ Y, ΦA(x, ξ ) = ( Ax, ξ ),

normalises W : it sends q ∈ X to Aq and relabels the base factor Hx as HAx . Thus conjugation by 

ΦA induces an automorphism 

αA ∈ Aut( W ).

For this automorphism, 

(cU )αA ((x, ξ ), (y, η )) = cU

((Ax, ξ ), (Ay, η ))

= cV

((x, ξ ), (y, η )),

where the second equality follows from A(V ) = U . Thus every partition of X into cosets of a subgroup of order 2 occurs as the level-one partition of an automorphic twist of cU .The three subgroups of order 2 in X = C22 determine the three partitions of X into two pairs, whose common refinement is the partition into singletons. Consequently, the automorphism-invariant refinement ̂ TU has at least four vertices at its first level, whereas TU has only two. In particular, ̂

c U̸ = cU and ̂ TU̸ = TU .16 ARMANDO MARTINO 

7. Finite branch extensions of the first Grigorchuk group 

The result of [8] realises the automorphisms of the first Grigorchuk group as automorphisms of the tree, so the discussion below is already implicit in the literature. In terms of our construction, 

T =̂ T in this case. However, it is an illustration of what one can do and, in principle, applies to any branch group in the following way. Given a finitely generated branch group G, its finite branch extensions are obtained from finite subgroups of Out( G) which are then pulled back to Aut( G). The isomorphism types of these finite extensions are given by conjugacy in the commensurator group of G, as below. We use Grigorchuk’s group to illustrate the method, as all the ingredients are already known. For further results on the automorphisms and automorphism tower of the first Grigorchuk group, see [2]. Related abstract commensurability properties were established in [9]. For now, we establish some elementary facts and notation. Recall that, given a group G, the commensurator group Comm( G) is the group of all isomorphisms between finite index subgroups of 

G, where two elements are considered equal if they agree on a finite index subgroup of G.We then have, 

Lemma 7.1. Let G be a weakly branch group. Then the natural map Aut( G) embeds into Comm( G).Equivalently, the only automorphism of G which is the identity on a finite index subgroup of G is the identity map. Proof. Let T be the locally finite tree on which G acts in a weakly branch way. By Theorem 4.1, 

Aut( G) has a canonical faithful action on ∂T , satisfying the compatibility relation above. Now suppose that α ∈ Aut( G) acts as the identity on some finite index subgroup, H. Further suppose that, for some ξ̸ = η ∈ ∂T , we have αξ = η. Then, as ∂T is Hausdorff, there exists an open 

U ⊆ ∂T such that αU ∩ U = ∅.Now U contains some cylinder Cyl( v), and we note that all the elements of Rist G(v) act on the boundary with support contained in Cyl( v). As G is weakly branch, Rist G(v) is infinite and hence 

H ∩ Rist G(v) is non-trivial since H has finite index. Therefore there is some 1̸ = h ∈ H whose support, supp ∂T (h), on the boundary is contained in 

U and non-empty. Now, compatibility and the fact that α fixes h imply that 

α · (hη ) = h(α · η) for all η ∈ ∂T. 

In particular, 

α(U ) ⊇ α(supp ∂T (h)) = supp ∂T (h) ⊆ U. 

Since supp ∂T (h)̸ = ∅, this is a contradiction which shows that α must act as the identity on the boundary and hence α is the identity as the action is faithful. 

□

We then have 

Proposition 7.2. Let G be a centreless group in which Aut( G) embeds into Comm( G) under the natural map. Let E, F ≤ Aut( G) be subgroups of the automorphism group of G, both of which contain Inn( G) as a (normal) subgroup of finite index. Then E and F are abstractly isomorphic if and only if they are conjugate as subgroups of 

Comm( G).Proof. For this proof we will write conjugation using exponentiation notation: namely, ab := b−1ab .We will also write Φ on the right to match our conjugation convention. The hypotheses give us that 

G ∼= Inn( G) ≤ Aut( G) ≤ Comm( G),

and we will argue by dealing with Inn( G) directly. AUTOMORPHISM-INVARIANT REFINEMENTS 17 

We write Ad( g) to denote the inner automorphism induced by conjugation by g, for g ∈ G. Now note that if ϕ is a commensuration and g is in the domain of ϕ, then Ad( g)ϕ = Ad( gϕ ). Hence if 

ϕ, ψ ∈ Comm( G) and uϕ = uψ for all u ∈ U , where U is some finite index subgroup of Inn( G), then 

ϕ = ψ in Comm( G). We shall use this below. Onto the argument; since conjugation induces an isomorphism, one direction is clear. For the other direction let us suppose that Φ : E → F is an isomorphism. Then there is a finite index subgroup U of Inn( G) such that U Φ is also a finite index subgroup of Inn( G). Thus Φ induces a commensuration of G, which we call ϕ. But note that U is a group of inner automorphisms which embeds into Comm( G). We therefore have that, 

uϕ = uΦ, for all u ∈ U. 

Then, for any e ∈ E,

(ue)Φ = ( uΦ) eΦ = uϕ·(eΦ) ,

for all u ∈ U .On the other hand, 

(ue)Φ = ue·ϕ,

as long as ue ∈ U .Hence, conjugation by ϕ · (eΦ) and e · ϕ agree on U ∩ U e−1

, which has finite index in Inn( G).Hence eϕ = eΦ as elements of Comm( G).This shows that E and F are conjugate by ϕ in Comm( G) □

Let G denote the first Grigorchuk group. Since G is centreless, we identify G with Inn( G) and write 

π : Aut( G) −→ Out( G)

for the natural quotient map. Grigorchuk and Sidki [8, Theorem 1] proved that 

Out( G) ∼=

⊕

> N

C2;

in particular, Out( G) is an elementary abelian 2-group of countably infinite rank. For every d ≥ 0,choose a d-dimensional subgroup 

Fd ≤ Out( G)

and set 

Ed = π−1(Fd).

By Theorem 5.4, the group Ed is branch and fits into an exact sequence 

1 −→ G −→ Ed −→ Fd −→ 1.

In particular, 

[Ed : G] = |Fd| = 2 d.

We show that the groups Ed are pairwise non-isomorphic. For this we recall the relative modular homomorphism of an abstract commensurator. Let G be a group. An element of Comm( G) is represented by an isomorphism 

θ : U −→ V

between finite-index subgroups U, V ≤ G. Define 

∆G(θ) = [G : V ][G : U ] ∈ Q×

> >0

.18 ARMANDO MARTINO 

This is independent of the chosen representative of the commensuration and defines a homomorphism 

∆G : Comm( G) −→ Q×

> >0

.

Indeed, restricting θ to a finite-index subgroup changes the numerator and denominator by the same factor, while multiplicativity follows by restricting two composable commensurations to suitable finite-index subgroups. We shall use the following elementary observation. 

Lemma 7.3. Let G be a group and let E and E′ contain copies of G as subgroups of finite index. If 

Φ : E −→ E′

is an isomorphism, then Φ induces a commensuration θ of G satisfying 

∆G(θ) = [E : G][E′ : G] .

Proof. Put 

U = G ∩ Φ−1(G) and V = G ∩ Φ( G).

Then Φ restricts to an isomorphism 

θ = Φ |U : U −→ V, 

and hence determines an element of Comm( G).Write 

m = [ E : G] and n = [ E′ : G].

Since Φ( G) has index m in E′, counting the index of V in E′ in two ways gives 

n[G : V ] = [ E′ : V ] = m[Φ( G) : V ].

Moreover, Φ induces an isomorphism from G to Φ( G) taking U to V , and therefore 

[Φ( G) : V ] = [ G : U ].

Consequently, 

[G : V ][G : U ] = mn ,

as required. □

Röver proved that the abstract commensurator Comm( G) is a non-abelian simple group [14, Theorem 1.3]. It follows that every homomorphism from Comm( G) to an abelian group is trivial. In particular, 

∆G = 1 .

Suppose now that Ed ∼= Ee. By Lemma 7.3, the corresponding commensuration θ ∈ Comm( G)

satisfies 

∆G(θ) = [Ed : G][Ee : G] = 2 d−e.

Since ∆G is trivial, we obtain 2d−e = 1 , and hence d = e. We have therefore proved the following. 

Corollary 7.4. The first Grigorchuk group has infinitely many pairwise non-isomorphic finite branch extensions. Remark 7.5 . The preceding argument distinguishes extensions arising from subgroups of Out( G) of different dimensions. It does not address whether two distinct d-dimensional subgroups of Out( G)

can give non-isomorphic extensions for a fixed value of d.AUTOMORPHISM-INVARIANT REFINEMENTS 19 

References 

[1] Laurent Bartholdi, Rostislav I. Grigorchuk, and Zoran Suni ´k. Branch groups. In Handbook of algebra, Vol. 3, volume 3 of Handb. Algebr., pages 989–1112. Elsevier/North-Holland, Amsterdam, 2003. [2] Laurent Bartholdi and Said N. Sidki. The automorphism tower of groups acting on rooted trees. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc., 358(1):329–358, 2006. [3] Ian Chiswell. Introduction to Λ-trees. World Scientific Publishing Co., Inc., River Edge, NJ, 2001. [4] Jorge Fariña-Asategui. Weakly branch actions: first-order theory, rigidity and Boston’s conjecture. arXiv:2507.22507 [math.GR], July 2025. [5] Alejandra Garrido. Aspects of Branch Groups. PhD thesis, University of Oxford, 2015. [6] Alejandra Garrido and John S. Wilson. On subgroups of finite index in branch groups. J. Algebra, 397:32–38, 2014. [7] R. I. Grigorchuk. Degrees of growth of finitely generated groups and the theory of invariant means. Izv. Akad. Nauk SSSR Ser. Mat., 48(5):939–985, 1984. [8] R. I. Grigorchuk and S. N. Sidki. The group of automorphisms of a 3-generated 2-group of intermediate growth. Internat. J. Algebra Comput., 14(5-6):667–676, 2004. International Conference on Semigroups and Groups in honor of the 65th birthday of Prof. John Rhodes. [9] R. I. Grigorchuk and J. S. Wilson. A structural property concerning abstract commensurability of subgroups. J. London Math. Soc. (2), 68(3):671–682, 2003. [10] R. I. Grigorchuk and J. S. Wilson. The uniqueness of the actions of certain branch groups on rooted trees. Geom. Dedicata, 100:103–116, 2003. [11] R. I. Grigorˇ cuk. On Burnside’s problem on periodic groups. Funktsional. Anal. i Prilozhen., 14(1):53–54, 1980. [12] Bruce Hughes. Trees and ultrametric spaces: a categorical equivalence. Adv. Math., 189(1):148–191, 2004. [13] Yaroslav Lavreniuk and Volodymyr Nekrashevych. Rigidity of branch groups acting on rooted trees. Geom. Dedicata, 89:159–179, 2002. [14] Claas E. Röver. Abstract commensurators of groups acting on rooted trees. In Proceedings of the Conference on Geometric and Combinatorial Group Theory, Part I (Haifa, 2000), volume 94, pages 45–61, 2002.