Title: Wideband Direct Satellite Uplink Enabled by Pilot-less Sparse Superposition Codes

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20702v1

Published Time: Thu, 23 Apr 2026 01:08:57 GMT

Number of Pages: 6

Markdown Content:
# Wideband Direct Satellite Uplink Enabled by Pilot-less Sparse Superposition Codes 

Alberto G. Perotti ∗, Branislav M. Popovi´ c and Renaud-Alexandre Pitaval 

Shannon Research Center, Huawei Technologies Sweden AB Email: {alberto.perotti@polito.it, branislav.popovic@huawei.com, renaud.alexandre.pitaval@huawei.com }

Abstract —Direct satellite uplink is severely constrained by limited link budgets, which hinder the exploitation of wideband resources, and ultimately limit the throughout. This paper presents a pilot-less coded modulation scheme based on sparse superposition coding (SSC) to enable efficient wideband usage in coverage-limited scenarios. This scheme leverages the structured Zadoff-Chu quasi-orthogonal (ZC-QO) dictionary to support scalable transmission. To address decoding complexity, the SSC transmitted signal embeds root index information via indicator sequences, allowing the receiver to restrict the decoding search space. In addition, a multi-codeword transmission framework with repetition and stop-feedback is developed, enabling reliable communication and better resource utilization. Simulation results show that the proposed scheme achieves throughput gains com-pared to a more conventional narrow-band multi-dimensional constellation-based approach. 

Index Terms —Satellite communications, NTN, multi-dimensional constellations, non-coherent transmission, sparse superposition coding, Zadoff-Chu sequences. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

In non-terrestrial networks (NTN), direct uplink (UL) trans-mission is fundamentally constrained by a limited link bud-get, resulting in poor coverage and low throughput. This is primarily due to the combination of low user equipment (UE) transmit power and antenna gain, large propagation distances, and mobility of both the UE and the satellite. In particular, the UE transmit power – typically around 23 dBm for commercial devices – is insufficient to compensate for the severe free-space path loss inherent to satellite links. As a result, the received signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) is generally very low and may further degrade under occasional deep fading. Ensuring reliable transmissions at relevant throughput under such conditions is thus highly challenging. In multicarrier systems such as orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing (OFDM), increasing the data rates can in principle be achieved by allocating larger bandwidth. Although satellite uplink bands may offer tens of megahertz of spectrum, power-limited UEs cannot fully exploit this resource. Expand-ing the bandwidth reduces the transmit power per frequency resource, and thus SNR. This is especially critical for cell-edge direct satellite links, where UEs inevitably operate at saturated power. Consequently, only narrowband transmission 

> ∗A. Perotti is now with the Department of Electronics and Telecommuni-cations of Politecnico di Torino, Italy.

is practical, limiting achievable throughput, whereas UEs with more favorable channel conditions or higher-power terminals such as very small aperture terminal (VSAT) can utilize wider bandwidth more effectively, and deliver larger throughput. Repetition is a widely used coverage enhancement tech-nique, and an important component of 5G NTN to cope with the severe path loss inherent to satellite links. With multiple retransmissions of the same data block, the receiver can combine their energy to enable decoding at very low SNR. Due to the large round-trip time in satellite systems, hybrid automatic repeat request (HARQ) feedback may lead to stalling, so a key adaptation made in 5G NTN was to allow disabling of the HARQ feedback and let the network rely directly on many blind repetitions [1]. In pilot-based schemes, maintaining accurate channel estimation at very low SNR requires increasing the number of pilot signals. With repeated transmission, demodulation reference symbols (DMRS) can be bundled across repetitions to perform joint channel estimation [2], improving estimation accuracy and thus decoding performance. However, for DMRS bundling to work, the UE must maintained a phase continuity across the bundled repetitions which is difficult to maintain in NTN due to Doppler shifts and timing drifts induced by satellite motion. In [3], we investigated pilot-less transmission for direct satellite access in coverage-limited scenarios using pilot-less multi-dimensional constellations (MDC) [4]–[8]. By avoiding explicit channel estimation, MDC eliminates the dependency on channel estimation accuracy and removes pilot overhead, allowing all time–frequency resources and transmit power to be allocated to data. In [3], [9], MDC was shown to bring performance gains in low-SNR scenarios of small bandwidths of a few physical resource blocks (PRBs) over a 5G-like transmission with LDPC code and QPSK modulation. How-ever, extending this MDC-based approach to wider bandwidths remains challenging. Maintaining spectral efficiency requires the MDC size and dimensionality to grow exponentially with bandwidth, leading to prohibitive decoding complexity. Con-sequently, MDC approach does not scale efficiently to large bandwidths. Large modulated block transmission is conventionally sup-ported using bit-interleaved coded modulation (BICM), which combines binary error correction coding with one-dimensional modulation. In BICM, channel coding and modulation are ef-

> arXiv:2604.20702v1 [cs.IT] 22 Apr 2026

fectively decoupled, and long block codes are easily decodable with conventional binary codes. As a result, BICM readily scales to wideband operation. However, the near-capacity performance of BICM relies on the existence of Gray labeling in the underlying modulation [10]. Such labeling generally does not exist for MDCs [7], making bit-interleaved coded MDC inefficient [11]. Coded modulation schemes that map information directly to sequences of symbols, without relying on bit-to-symbol labeling, have been developed prior to, and concurrently, to BICM. Among them, sparse superposition codes (SSC) were introduced in [12] and shown to achieve capacity in Additive White Gaussian Noise (AWGN) channel under maximum likelihood (ML) decoding. SSC have been considered for high-reliability transmission in [13], where sparse superpositions of MDC vectors are constructed using randomized dictionaries and decoded via matching pursuit (MP) algorithms. Moreover, SSC is amenable to non-coherent decoding [14], enabling pilot-less transmission. While deterministic dictionary con-structions, e.g., based on Reed–Muller sequences [15], were briefly discussed in [13], their performance was not evalu-ated. In [16], we introduced quasi-orthogonal SSC (QO-SSC), where the dictionary is structured as a collection of multiple orthogonal subsets, using constructions based on Kerdock codes and Zadoff-Chu sequences. QO-SSC demonstrated com-petitive performance for short codewords at low rates, outper-forming the best conventional coded modulation schemes such as polar-coded QPSK. However, conventional sparse decoding apporached based on full dictionary correlation as in MP-type algorithms leads again to prohibitive complexity as the dictionary grows. In this paper, we propose a pilot-less SSC scheme to enable wideband direct satellite uplink in coverage-limited scenarios. The proposed method overcomes scalability limitations of MDC while retaining the benefits of non-coherent transmis-sion. Specifically, we introduce a ZC-based QO-SSC (ZC-QO-SSC) scheme which leverages the structure of the ZC-QO dictionary. To address the inherent decoding complexity of long SSC codewords, we propose a novel mechanism that embeds root index information within the transmitted signal using superposed indicator ZC sequences. This allows the receiver to restrict the search space to the indicated orthog-onal subsets, significantly reducing decoding complexity. In addition, these indicator sequences are used to obtain coarse channel estimates that are exploited to improve decoding per-formance of the superposed data sequence. Furthermore, we extend the proposed scheme to a multi-codeword transmission framework with controlled repetitions. The coarse channel estimates is reused to enable coherent combining across rep-etitions, enhancing decoding performance. To avoid excessive repetition overhead, a stop-feedback mechanism is used to terminate transmissions once successful decoding is achieved, thereby improving throughput and avoiding HARQ stalling in NTN. Simulation results demonstrate that the proposed scheme enables efficient wideband operation and achieves up to the SSC      

> encoder
> [𝐦 𝓢
> → 𝐯 →𝐜 =𝐅𝐯 ]

𝐦 Punct. 

/ext. 

Map 

to REs 

OFDM 

mod. 

𝐜 𝐜′  

> Fig. 1. SSC transmitter.

50% throughput gain compared to the MDC-based narrowband solution in [3]. II. P RELIMINARIES ON SPARSE SUPERPOSITION CODING 

A. SSC Encoding 

The SSC encoder maps an information message m of length 

Ninfo bits to a SSC codeword c of P complex symbols according to the following: 

c = 1

√L Fv (1) where F is a P × N sparse superposition dictionary. v is a sparse binary column vector of length N and Hamming weight 

L ≪ N , where the positions of the L non-zero elements are determined by the information in m according to a certain sparse mapping S:

v = S(m). (2) The sparse mapping is not crucial for the performance – the only relevant property is its sparsity. As a simple practical mapping, we divide vectors m and v into L non-overlapping sections of equal lengths (assuming that both m and v have lengths multiple of L). The bit values in the lth section of m

are converted to decimal and used as the index of the single nonzero element in the corresponding section of v. Therefore, the number of information bits that can be mapped to a SSC codeword is 

Ninfo = L ⌊log 2(N/L )⌋ . (3) MDC can be seen as a special case of SSC with L = 1 for which then the message size is Ninfo = log 2(N ), correspond-ing to the size of the codebook. We are interested in OFDM transmission consisting of 

NOS OFDM symbols and NSC subcarriers; each group of 12 consecutive subcarriers is referred to as a PRB. The total number of time-frequency resource elements (REs) is therefore M = NOS NSC . The codeword c may be punc-tured/extended by removing/repeating some of its elements according to a predefined pattern if the number of available channel resources and the codeword length do not match. The punctured/extended codeword of length M is denoted as c′.The punctured/extended codeword c′ is mapped to the REs of the time-frequency resource grid, e.g., following a frequency-first order common in 5G NR. Figure 1 shows a block scheme of a SSC transmitter. B. SSC Decoder 

After demodulation, the received signal can be written as 

y = h ⊙ c + n (4) where h is a vector of fading coefficients, ⊙ is the Hadamard product, and n is an AWGN vector. Common SSC decoders based on variants of MP algorithms as in [13], [16] relies on correlations of the received vector with the SSC dictionary, typically through multiple iterations. Assuming a single iteration for simplicity of the discussion, the received codeword r is decoded by computing the correlations with all the columns of F as 

ξ = FHy. (5) Based on the correlation vector ξ, an estimated L-sparse vector ˆv is obtained whose entries equal 1 for the L largest correlation values, and zero otherwise. Finally, the decoded information word ˆm is obtained by inverse message-to-sparse vector mapping ˆm = S−1(ˆ v).

C. Long Codeword Decoding Complexity Issue 

The dictionary matrix F in (1) has P N elements, therefore the conventional decoder step (5) has a complexity that scales as O(P N ). Compared to MDC ( L = 1 ) in (3), superposition (L > 1) enables to transmit more information bits without increasing the dictionary size N . If L is small, this can be done at marginal additional decoder complexity and performance degradation. Reciprocally, for the same message size, SSC can provide smaller decoding complexity by decreasing N

compared to ML decoding of MDC, and can thus enable feasible decoding in a larger range of codeword lengths P .Nevertheless, for a fixed L, to maintain a constant code rate 

Ninfo /P as P increases, the dictionary size needs to grows exponentially with P , and so ultimately decoding of long codewords becomes prohibitive also with SSC. For illustration, if considering a transmission on 64 PRBs in a slot of 14 OFDM symbols, the codeword length is of the order of 

P ≃ 168 × 64 ≃ 10 4 complex elements, leading to typical overall complexity order of 10 8 ∼ 10 12 .III. W IDEBAND PILOT -LESS ZC-QO-SSC A dictionary is said to be a QO set if constructed as the union of multiple orthogonal subsets where the correlation between any vectors in different orthogonal subset sets is bounded [17]–[19]. In [19], we obtained a QO dictionary as the collection of different cyclic shift versions of ZC sequences and different root indices. In this section, we engineer multiple mechanisms based on ZC-QO-SSC to enable feasible decoding and good performance of long SSC codewords in wideband allocation. 

A. ZC-QO Dictionary 

A ZC sequence of prime length P and root index r is defined as 

zr (k) = e−jπ rP k(k+1) , k = 0 , . . . , P − 1 (6) where j = √−1 and r is any nonzero positive integer less than P .Prime-length ZC sequences have the following well known properties: i) the cyclic autocorrelation of (6) is zero for all non-zero lags; ii) two ZC sequences of same prime length and different root indices have a normalized correlation bounded by 1/√P . Hence, we construct F as 

[F]k,n = zr(n)(k + s(n) mod P ) (7) for k = 0 , . . . , P − 1, n = 0 , . . . , N − 1, where [F]k,n denotes the element of F at the kth row and nth column. The root index and cyclic shift, r(n) and s(n) respectively, depend of the nth column of F, defined as follows: 

r(n) = 1 + ⌊n/P ⌋,s(n) = n mod P. (8) With F defined as in (7) and (8), the message-to-sparse vector mapping S can be equivalently seen as mapping the in-formation word m to L pairs of integers (rl, s l), l = 1 , . . . , L ,where rl and sl are, respectively, root indices and cyclic shifts of the columns corresponding to non-zero values of v. Thus, the elements of the sparse vector v are defined as 

vn =

(

1 if ∃l such that r(n) = rl and s(n) = sl

0 otherwise . (9) The elements {c[p]}P −1 

> p=0

of the codeword c in (1) can thus be re-written as 

c[p] = 1

√L

> L

X

> l=1

zrl (k + sl mod P ), (10) i.e., the superposition of L sequences, each one being deter-mined by a root index rl and cyclic shift sl.With ZC-QO, simple decoding complexity reduction can be carried out by noticing that all columns in the same orthogonal subset with same root index are cyclic shifts of each other. Then, the correlations of a received codeword with an orthogonal subset can be computed all at once in the frequency domain. Since with ZC-QO, the order of the dictionary size is N ∼ P 2, this can bring down the complexity order from P 3 to P 2 log 2 P . Nevertheless, the complexity is still too large to make decoding affordable on bandwidths larger than, e.g., 100 PRBs. 

B. ZC-QO-SSC With Embedded Data Root Indication 

To significantly reduce the decoding complexity, we propose a modified ZC-QO-SSC scheme with embedded data root index indication. 1) Embedded Data Root Indication: First, as previously the information word m is mapped to L pairs of root indices and cyclic shifts (rl, s l), corresponding to L ZC data sequences. However here in addition, a second set of L indicator ZC sequences are selected, all from the same orthogonal subset with indicator root index ¯r. This root index ¯r can be predefined and reserved among the root indices as typically the message-to-sparse vector mapping S leaves few root indices unused. Then, the cyclic shifts of this indicator ZC sequences are chosen to match the data root indices, i.e. r1, . . . , r L.The above 2L sequences are superposed, possibly with imbalanced power between the L data sequences and the L

indicator sequences. The SSC codeword c = ( c[0] , . . . , c [P −

1]) T becomes 

c[k] = 1

√L

> L

X

> l=1

√α z rl (k + sl mod P )+√1 − α z ¯r (k + rl mod P ) (11) where α is a power-splitting factor between the data-carrying sequences and indicator sequences. 

2) Decoding: The decoding for ZC-QO-SSC with embed-ded data root index indication is performed a follows. First, the decoder determines the data-carrying orthogonal subset by periodic correlation with the ZC sequence with indicator root index ¯r and identifies cyclic shifts of this sequence returning the largest correlations. We select L′ ≥ L cyclic shifts to avoid error propagation and to increase the chance of successful decoding. For each set of L candidate data root indices among the L′

selected above, we use the corresponding indicator sequences 

{z(I) 

> l

}Ll=1 as pilots to perform a global channel phase estima-tion and use this estimation to improve detection of the data sequences. Note that the indicator sequences are not exactly pilots as we do not know them precisely, but they are known to belong to a small orthogonal set which facilitates their detection. We assume the channel approximately constant over a codeword such that if ignoring the noise, the received signal is y ≈ hc. We can thus have an estimate of the global channel as ˆh = PLl=1 yT z(I) 

> l

, up to a scaling factor. Even if the in-dication sequences would be perfectly estimated, this channel estimation would be corrupted by noise and interference from cross-correlation among ZC sequences with different roots. However the averaging over L indication sequences mitigates these impairments. We use only the phase of global channel estimate ∠ˆh, to rotate the received signal as ˆy = ye−j∠ˆh,to perform coherent detection of the data sequences, i.e. sequences would be found as the ones maximizing the real part of the innner product as arg max z ℜ zH ˆy , instead of its magnitude as arg max z|zH ˆy| [3]. After this, the L indicator sequences are canceled from the received signal, and for each candidate data root index the decoder identifies the cyclic shift that produces the largest correlation. When a data sequence is identified, it is sequen-tially canceled in the received signal before detection of the next one. Once all data sequences are detected, the detector determines the remaining received signal energy. The process is repeated for all possible subsets of L indi-cator sequences among the L′ detected indicator sequences, and final detector output is selected according to the smallest remaining received signal energy. The decoding complexity is reduced as for determining a data sequence, a search is performed only in an orthogonal set corresponding the indicated root index, for a complexity of P log 2 P compared to P 2. As only L′ data root indices are considered in addition to the indicator root index, the decoding complexity is (L′ + 1) P log 2 P .

C. Wideband Multi-Codeword 

Any wireless channel, even line-of-sight NTN channel, can experience frequent deep fading events. In order to mitigate the detrimental effects of deep fades, we transmit each SSC codeword R times – that is, a first transmission followed by 

(R − 1) repetitions – according to a repetition parameter R.Retransmissions are done in different, non-contiguous time slots according to a time pattern aimed at maximizing the decoding success by exploiting time diversity. For simplic-ity, we consider a pattern consisting of a set of uniformly spaced slots by a time interval TR [slots] between consecutive transmissions. Thus, at the tth slot we form a wideband SSC multi-codeword c(t) 

> W

by concatenating the last encoded code-word c(t) and repetitions of previously generated codewords as c(t) 

> W

= [ c(t), c(t−TR), · · · , c(t−(R−1) TR)]T . The wideband multi-codeword c(t) 

> W

is mapped to the REs of the OFDM time-frequency grid according to a frequency-first order as in 5G NR given that NTN channels are mostly frequency-flat, mapping codewords over the whole signal bandwidth. Time-first mapping could alternatively be considered for frequency-selective channels, mapping then each codeword to a sub-band. At the receiver, repetitions of the same codeword are col-lected and combined. To improve combining of the repetitions, we exploit the coarse channel estimation computed in the decoder of ZC-QO-SSC with embedded data root indication, discussed in the previous subsection. As such, the combiner performs maximum ratio combining based on the average channel phase and average received power of each transmis-sion. 

D. Stop-Feedback 

In order to further improve performance we complement the wideband repetition mechanism with a stop-repetitions feed-back message that informs the transmitter when a successful decoding occurred. Specifically, when the first transmission of a given codeword is in a non-faded slot, most likely the decoder will be able to perform successful decoding based on the first transmission alone. If decoding succeeds, the receiver sends back to the UE a stop-repetition feedback signal to indicate that the codeword has been successfully decoded and no further repetitions are needed. The UE, upon reception of that signal, stops transmission of further repetitions. Therefore, with stop feedback, each SSC codeword may be transmitted less than R times, thus making available the corre-sponding REs for possible reuse by other codewords, either a new codeword carrying new data or additionnal repetitions for other past codewords. The former would increase throughput while the latter would reduce block error rate (BLER). The above stop-feedback message, although having obvious similarities with the conventional HARQ, has differences that make it more suitable for satellite transmissions. HARQ is based on transmission of ACK/NACK feedback signals; NACK triggers transmission of repetitions or incremental codeword redundancy. However, due to long round-trip time in satellite links, this results in HARQ stalling where awaiting for NACK results in long transmission times. Unlike conventional ACK/NACK, here the repetitions is according to a planned pattern, without awaiting reception of NACK, making trans-mission faster. At the same time, by a stop-feedback signal, the transmitter avoids sending unnecessary repetitions of a codeword that was successfully decoded, improving overall the throughput. IV. P ERFORMANCE EVALUATIONS 

a) Simulation Assumptions: Performance evaluations were conducted via Monte Carlo simulations using the same simulation framework as in [3]. Transmit signal is assumed to be operated at 2 GHz carrier frequency with a subcarrier spacing of 15 kHz. The channel follows 3GPP NTN-TDL-C line-of-sight (LoS) model, with a delay spread of 3.5 ns and a UE velocity of 3 km/h. The proposed ZC-QO-SSC scheme employs L = 2 superpositions. The BLER is computed as the ratio of number of decoded blocks with errors over total number of transmitted blocks, the throughput Γ follows as: 

Γ = (1 − BLER )Ninfo [bits/s/Hz] .

The SNR is computed in accordance to a Carrier-to-Noise Ratio (CNR) of -2.15 dB. This corresponds to a coverage-limited scenarios with a LEO-600 satellite system with pa-rameter set 1 and elevation 30°, bandwidth 180 kHz (1 PRB), a UE TX power of 23 dBm [20]. As the TX power remains constant regardless of the bandwidth, the SNR is obtained as 

SN R = −2.15 − 10 log 10 NPRB [dB] where NPRB is the number of PRBs used for transmission. 

b) MDC versus ZC-QO-SCC: In Fig. 2, we compared the BLER and throughput of the pilot-less MDC approach in [3] and the proposed pilot-less ZC-QO-SSC. For each configurations, the codeword length is 168 × NPRB . For 

NPRB = 2 , 4, 8, 16 , 32 , the information message lengths are respectively K = 32 , 36 , 38 , 42 , 46 [bits]. Since a single MDC codeword is already leading to prohibitive complexity, as in [3], the K information bits are mapped to two MDC symbols – the first/second symbol is mapped to the initial/final 

NPRB /2 PRBs. Still, this approach in [3] was providing larger -18 -16 -14 -12 -10 -8 -6 -4     

> SNR [dB]
> 10 -2
> 10 -1
> 10 0
> BLER
> 4 PRBs 2 PRBs
> 8 PRBs
> ZC-QO-SSC 16 PRBs
> MDC ZC-QO-SSC
> ZC-QO-SSC 32 PRBs
> (a) BLER 10 1
> Bandwidth [#PRBs]
> 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42
> Throughput [kbits/s]
> ZC-QO-SSC, L=2
> MDC
> 816 232 5.76 MHz 4360 kHz
> (b) Throughput Fig. 2. Comparison of MDC and ZC-QO-SSC on NTN-TDL-C channel.

throughput than as 5G-like transmission with LDPC coding and QPSK constellation. With ZC-QO-SSC, all the REs are used by a single code-word carrying K information bits by the superposition two quasi-orthogonal ZC sequences. ZC-QO-SSC shows a 0.9-1 dB SNR gain over MDC, which is due to the fact that MDC needs to be segmented and ML decoding over the complete codeword dimension was not possible. For bandwidths of 16 PRBs and 32 PRBs, MDC was not evaluated because of its complexity. 

c) Wideband ZC-QO-SSC: Now, we considered wide-band transmission of 80 and 160 PRBs using the ZC-QO-SSC with embedded data root indication, repetition and stop-feedback, described in this paper. The power-splitting factor in (11) is set to α = 1/2, R = 2 repetitions are used, Fig. 3. BLER and throughput [kbits/s] of wideband ZC-QO-SSC with two repetitions. (a) no stop feedback; (b) Stop feedback with RE reuse. 

and the decoding for ZC-QO-SSC with embedded data root index employs L′ = 7 . Different repetition periods TR are considered. Results are reported in Fig. 3, with or without stop-feedback. Again, we aim at the largest achievable throughput satisfying 10 −1 BLER quality of service at the given CNR. The corresponding SNR is approximately -21 and -24 dB for 80 and 160 PRBs, respectively. It can be observed that wideband ZC-QO-SSC provides larger throughput with larger bandwidth. Thus, unlike con-ventional modulation and coding schemes whose performance degrades as the code rates decrease to very low values, wideband ZC-QO-SSC shows capability to maintain good performance, and even improve, as the rate drops. We attribute this behavior to smaller cross-correlation among superposed ZC sequences in long SSC codeword, in addition to better frequency diversity in larger bandwidth. Without stop-feedback, the maximum achieved throughput is only increased by 11% compared to the maximum through-put of Fig. 2. With stop-feedback, the throughput improvement is larger up to 54%. V. C ONCLUSIONS 

This paper proposed a pilot-less coded modulation scheme for coverage-limited direct satellite uplink based on sparse superposition coding (SSC). Exploiting the Zadoff–Chu quasi-orthogonal (ZC-QO) dictionary structure, its enables efficient decoding of long codewords. A superposition encoding with root indicator ZC sequences was introduced to facilitate de-coding while providing coarse channel estimates. In addi-tion, a multi-codeword transmission with repetition and stop-feedback was developed, enabling improved decoding without conventional pilot signaling. These mechanisms allows a scal-able SSC deployment, extending to wideband the pilot-less multi-dimensional constellation approach. Simulation results demonstrate that the proposed scheme significantly improves throughput by enabling wider bandwidth transmission com-pared to a multi-dimensional constellation scheme. ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

The authors are grateful to Dr. Erkai Chen of Huawei Technologies for developing the MDC NTN evaluation soft-ware and for his help in integrating the ZC-QO-SSC into the simulator. REFERENCES [1] M. S. Hassan, C. Saha, J. Lianghai, A. R. Alvarino, J. Ma, L. Liu, and Q. Wu, “NTN: from 5G NR to 6G,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Wireless Space Extreme Environ.(WiSEE) , 2023, pp. 173–178. [2] Z. Guo, D. Chen, and Y. Yuan, “5G NR uplink coverage enhancement based on DMRS bundling and multi-slot transmission,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. Technol. (ICCT) , 2020, pp. 482–486. [3] E. Chen, R.-A. Pitaval, B. M. Popovic, and Y. Qin, “Direct satellite access using multi-dimensional constellations,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Pers. Indoor Mobile Radio Commun. (PIMRC) , 2024, pp. 1–7. [4] G. Forney and L.-F. Wei, “Multidimensional constellations. I. Introduc-tion, figures of merit, and generalized cross constellations,” IEEE J. Sel. Area Comm. , vol. 7, no. 6, pp. 877–892, Aug. 1989. [5] B. Hochwald and T. Marzetta, “Unitary space-time modulation for multiple-antenna communications in Rayleigh flat fading,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory , vol. 46, no. 2, pp. 543–564, Mar. 2000. [6] R.-A. Pitaval and Y. Qin, “Grassmannian frames in composite dimen-sions by exponentiating quadratic forms,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT) , Jun. 2020, pp. 13–18. [7] Y. Qin and R.-A. Pitaval, “Structured quasi-Gray labelling for Reed-Muller Grassmannian constellations,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT) , Jun. 2020, pp. 1444–1449. [8] R.-A. Pitaval and Y. Qin, “Chirp reconstruction algorithm for generalized second-order Reed-Muller frames,” in Proc. IEEE Information Theory Workshop (ITW) , Oct. 2021, pp. 1–6. [9] Y. Qin and R.-A. Pitaval, “Enhanced 5G PUCCH using non-coherent constellations with low-complexity detection,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Pers. Indoor Mobile Radio Commun. (PIMRC) , 2021, pp. 348–353. [10] G. Caire, G. Taricco, and E. Biglieri, “Bit-interleaved coded modula-tion,” vol. 44, pp. 927–946, May 1998. [11] Y. Qin, B. M. Popovic, and R.-A. Pitaval, “Symbol-likelihood based successive-cancellation list polar decoding for short-packet non-coherent communications,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. (ICC) , Jun. 2023, pp. 148–153. [12] A. Joseph and A. R. Barron, “Least squares superposition codes of moderate dictionary size are reliable at rates up to capacity,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory , vol. 58, no. 5, pp. 2541–2557, 2012. [13] H. Ji, S. Park, and B. Shim, “Sparse vector coding for ultra reliable and low latency communications,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun. , vol. 17, no. 10, pp. 6693–6706, 2018. [14] H. Ji, W. Kim, and B. Shim, “Pilot-less sparse vector coding for short packet transmission,” IEEE Wireless Commun. Lett. , vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 1036–1039, 2019. [15] R. Calderbank, S. Howard, and S. Jafarpour, “Construction of a large class of deterministic sensing matrices that satisfy a statistical isometry property,” IEEE J. Sel. Top. Signal Process. , vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 358–374, Apr. 2010. [16] A. G. Perotti and B. M. Popovic, “Quasi-orthogonal sparse superposition codes,” in Proc. IEEE Global Commun. Conf. (GLOBECOM) , 2019, pp. 1–6. [17] K. Yang, Y.-K. Kim, and P. Vijay Kumar, “Quasi-orthogonal sequences for code-division multiple-access systems,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory ,vol. 46, no. 3, pp. 982–993, 2000. [18] R. Heath, T. Strohmer, and A. Paulraj, “On quasi-orthogonal signatures for CDMA systems,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory , vol. 52, no. 3, pp. 1217– 1226, 2006. [19] B. M. Popovi´ c, “Quasi-orthogonal supersets,” in Proc. IEEE Inf. Theory Workshop (ITW) , Oct 2011, pp. 155–159. [20] Huawei and HiSilicon, “R1-2205856 - discussion on coverage enhance-ment for NR NTN,” 3GPP, August 2022.