ShadowPath: Lookup-Private Credential Status
Verification over Authenticated State
Patrick Herbke
B†, Wolf Rieder
†, Christian Ren´e Sechting
†,
Huaning Yang
§, Sid Lamichhane
†, Philip Raschke
† and Axel K¨upper
†
†Technische Universit¨at Berlin, §Humboldt-Universit¨at zu Berlin
Abstract—Verifiable credentials let holders present digitally
signed claims without requiring the issuer to participate in every
presentation. Revocation complicates this privacy model because
a verifier must determine whether a credential remains valid.
Existing status checks may expose recurring identifiers, registry
positions, or request metadata. Such information can serve as
stable handles to link separate presentations. ShadowPath moves
the credential status lookup to the holder. For each presentation,
the holder proves, in zero-knowledge, that the credential has not
been revoked under the verifier-selected registry root. The verifier
learns the status result but not observable metadata. To the
best of our knowledge, we provide the first evaluation of Verkle
trees for credential revocation and compare them with sparse
Merkle trees to assess their applicability in real world applications.
The comparison tests whether reducing path depth with Verkle
trees offsets the higher cost of KZG-based authentication. Across
30 desktop trials, median Groth16 proving took 371.6 ms with
sparse Merkle and 2.11 s with Verkle. Verification took 3.70 ms
and 7.55 ms, respectively. Groth16 Verkle proving took about
3 s on both primary mobile devices. The results show that
shorter authenticated paths do not necessarily yield cheaper
zero-knowledge proofs. With fresh session randomness, verifier-
visible status data do not reveal whether two presentations use
the same credential under the stated assumption of session-value
independence. This guarantee excludes issuer–verifier collusion
and synchronization traffic.
I. Introduction
Credential-status verification must enforce revocation without
making private presentations linkable. Decentralized identity
supports issuer-independent presentation, limiting what is-
suers learn about credential usage [8], [64]. Status checks
weaken this boundary because verifiers need fresh revocation
information [30], [47], [58]. Retrieval or verification may
expose identifiers, deterministic registry positions, request paths,
or timing patterns [58]. We call such recurring metadata a
stable handle: an anchor allowing verifiers, issuers, or network
observers to link presentations of the same credential.
A traveler may present the same credential for mobility
and hotel check-in while disclosing different claims. Figure 1
illustrates how credential-status verification can create a link
between these presentations. In a conventional credential-
specific lookup, the verifier queries status information asso-
Conventional credential-specific lookup
Holder
Verifier
Status registry
Issuer / observer
1
2
3
1 presentation
2 credential-specific status query
3 observable request
Stable handles: identifier, registry position, and request metadata
ShadowPath: lookup-private status verification
Issuer-independent verification
Public epoch state
Holder
Verifier
Issuer / observer
1
2
3
Hidden: index, path, authentication witness ρ
1 public state sync
2 bound ZK proof
3 current-root verification
Fig. 1. Conventional credential-specific lookup versus ShadowPath’s holder-
local status verification. Credential-specific status traffic exposes recurring
identifiers and request metadata. ShadowPath derives status locally from
shared epoch state and sends a ZKP to the verifier.
ciated with the presented credential. The lookup may expose
an identifier, registry position, or request metadata that recurs
across presentations [58], [60]. ShadowPath shifts credential-
specific status lookup from the verifier to the holder. The holder
derives the credential status locally from public revocation state.
For each presentation, the holder sends a zero-knowledge proof
(ZKP) that binds the status result to the credential presentation.
The verifier checks the proof against the selected epoch root
without learning the registry index or traversal path.
Existing revocation mechanisms make different privacy trade-
offs across the status workflow. Online responders expose
presentation-time status requests [4], [61], while status lists
reveal registry positions to the verifier [68], [70]. Accumulator-
based schemes shift credential-specific work to witness mainte-
nance [9], [32], and Merkle-based zero-knowledge systems hide
tree membership within broader credential proofs [13], [59].
ShadowPath addresses the privacy problem across both state
acquisition and presentation. It separates credential-independent
state acquisition from credential-specific verification, keeps
the registry lookup at the holder, authenticates the hidden
lookup against the verifier-selected epoch root, and binds the
status result to the credential presented in the same session.
Sparse Merkle and Verkle backends realize the same protocol
with different path-authentication mechanisms. Their matched
comparison tests whether shorter authentication paths offset
higher per-level authentication cost.
Network and Distributed System Security (NDSS) Symposium 2027
22–26 March 2027, Seoul, Republic of Korea
ISBN 978-1-970672-09-1
https://dx.doi.org/10.14722/ndss.2027.[23|24]xxxx
www.ndss-symposium.org
arXiv:2608.19937v1  [cs.CR]  20 Aug 2026


We address the following research questions:
RQ1: How can a holder prove non-revocation from authen-
ticated registry state while hiding credential-specific
lookup information? (§III–§IV, §VI–§VIII)
RQ2: What proving, verification, and state-distribution costs
arise from hiding credential-status lookups? (§VII–
§VIII)
Our contributions are as follows:
• Stable-handle leakage analysis. Recurring credential-status
information is characterized as stable handles and mapped
to observation points at the issuer, verifier, and network
layers [32], [59], [68] (§III).
• Lookup-private credential-status protocol. ShadowPath
separates credential-independent acquisition of authenti-
cated epoch state from credential-specific status verifica-
tion. The holder reconstructs the required witness locally
and proves non-revocation against the verifier-selected
epoch root without exposing the registry lookup. The
same hidden credential identifier binds the status result
to the credential presented in the current session. No
credential-specific status query leaves the holder during
presentation (§IV, §VI).
• Authenticated-registry design and lifecycle evaluation.
Sparse Merkle and Verkle backends realize the same
ShadowPath protocol with different path-authentication
mechanisms. Their matched evaluation quantifies proving,
verification, state synchronization, reconstruction, and mo-
bile costs and exposes the trade-off between authentication-
path depth and per-level authentication cost (§VI–§VIII).
II. Preliminaries
Credential-status verification determines whether a presented
Verifiable Credential (VC) has been revoked [64]. The registry
evolves through immutable epochs e, each authenticated by a
public root Re. Holders obtain the corresponding state before
presentation, while verifiers use Re to verify status. Each
credential maps to a private registry index idx and fingerprint fp.
Non-revoked positions remain empty. Upon revocation, the
issuer stores fp at the corresponding position.
A. Authenticated Registry Trees
An authenticated tree organizes registry entries in a tree
and cryptographically binds the complete registry state to a
root value. Each registry position corresponds to a leaf, while
internal nodes authenticate the subtrees below them. Changing
a registry entry changes the authentication values along its path
and ultimately the root. In ShadowPath, an empty registry
position establishes non-revocation. If the position contains a
fingerprint, the credential is revoked if the stored fingerprint
matches fp. We evaluate ShadowPath with two authenticated
registry structures: a sparse Merkle tree (SMT) and a Verkle
tree. Both authenticate a private registry position against the
epoch root Re with different path-authentication mechanisms.
Sparse Merkle tree. An SMT is a binary authenticated tree
in which each parent node is computed by hashing its two
children [15]. The authentication path for one registry position
contains the leaf value and one sibling hash at each tree level.
Starting from the leaf, the sibling hashes are used successively
to recompute the parent nodes and then the root. A recomputed
root equal to Re authenticates the registry entry as part of
the selected epoch state. For an address space of size N, the
authentication path contains O(log2 N) sibling hashes.
Verkle tree. Compared with the binary SMT, a Verkle tree uses
a branching factor k [39]. Each internal node contains k child
positions whose values are bound by a compact cryptographic
commitment. The holder authenticates the selected child value
against the node commitment and repeats this step until reaching
the credential’s registry position. The resulting sequence of
authenticated child selections links the registry position to the
epoch root Re. At the selected registry position, the holder
establishes non-revocation from an empty entry or from a stored
fingerprint that differs from fp. In ShadowPath, the holder
performs these checks privately inside a ZKP. The verifier
checks the resulting proof against Re, verifying non-revocation
without learning the registry index, the traversed path, or the
authentication data. A Verkle tree covering N registry positions
has O(logk N) levels.
Our Verkle backend uses Kate–Zaverucha–Goldberg (KZG)
polynomial commitments [34]. A KZG commitment compactly
binds all child values of a Verkle node. For the child position
selected by the registry index, the holder provides a KZG
opening proving that the claimed child value is the value
committed at that position. One opening is required for each
traversed tree level. KZG commitments and openings have
constant size, but verification requires elliptic-curve pairings
and a structured reference string (SRS), a set of public
parameters generated during setup. The SMT and Verkle
backends expose the authentication trade-off evaluated in this
work: the SMT uses more computationally inexpensive hash-
based levels, whereas the Verkle tree uses fewer but more
expensive KZG-authenticated levels.
B. Zero-Knowledge Proofs
A ZKP allows a prover to convince a verifier that a
statement is true without revealing the private information
used to prove it. Formally, the prover shows that a public
statement x and a private witness w satisfy a relation R, i.e.,
R(x, w) = 1. Knowledge soundness ensures that an accepted
proof corresponds to a valid witness, while zero-knowledge
prevents the verifier from learning w beyond what follows from
the verified statement [28]. In ShadowPath, the holder acts
as the prover and the credential verifier checks the proof. The
private witness includes the credential’s registry index and the
authentication data required to establish its status under Re. The
holder proves that the selected registry position is authenticated
by Re and represents a non-revoked credential. The verifier
learns that the credential is not revoked without learning the
registry index or authentication path.
2


Issuer
Public state
Holder
Verifier
publish epoch state
state sync
bound status proof πstatus
resolve (e, Re)
Honest-but-curious issuer
Observes protocol traffic
No credential-specific
query at presentation
Network observer
Observes retrieval metadata
Residual IP/timing
leakage
Malicious holder
Attempts proofs for revoked
credentials or forged paths
Revoked/forged
proofs rejected
Colluding verifiers
Attempt cross-presentation
linking
Fresh session values;
lookup remains hidden
Fig. 2. Threat-model overview. The issuer publishes authenticated epoch state, the holder synchronizes the shared state and generates a bound status proof, and
the verifier independently resolves the selected epoch root. ShadowPath hides credential-specific lookup information from verifiers and avoids credential-specific
issuer queries during presentation. State synchronization remains observable to network observers.
III. Threat Model
ShadowPath considers the status-verification phase of a
decentralized credential system with issuers, holders, verifiers,
and a public state-distribution layer. Figure 2 shows the protocol
flow, the adversaries considered, and the information available
at their observation points.
A. System and Adversary Model
The issuer maintains the revocation registry as a sequence
of immutable epochs [47]. For each epoch e, the issuer
publishes authenticated registry state with root Re. The holder
synchronizes this shared state and derives the credential-specific
authentication data locally. During presentation, the verifier
independently resolves the selected epoch and root (e, Re)
according to its freshness policy. The holder generates a status
proof against Re, and the verifier checks the proof without
contacting an issuer-operated status responder [30].
Within an issuer domain, all credentials are evaluated under
the same epoch share Re. The root identifies the registry
state rather than an individual credential. Repeated credential
identifiers, registry indices, traversal paths, authentication
data, or retrieval metadata can become stable handles across
presentations. ShadowPath hides the credential-specific lookup
from the verifier, while the issuer domain and selected epoch
remain public. State-synchronization metadata remains outside
the cryptographic privacy guarantee.
We consider four computationally bounded adversaries [33].
An honest-but-curious issuer publishes correct registry state
but records visible protocol interactions and attempts to infer
credential usage [38]. ShadowPath removes the credential-
specific issuer query during presentation. Synchronization
traffic is considered separately at the network layer.
A passive network observer monitors state synchronization
and may correlate IP addresses, request timing and size,
provider discovery, or retrieval behavior [2], [16], [71]. A
just-in-time synchronization may expose timing information.
The observer cannot break encrypted transport or the assumed
cryptographic primitives.
A malicious holder controls the prover inputs and attempts
to obtain an accepting proof for a revoked credential or a forged
registry path [32]. A sound status proof must reject both cases.
Colluding verifiers retain and compare accepted presentations
in an attempt to determine whether the same credential was used
more than once. They observe the public presentation values
and proof, but not the hidden credential identifier, registry
index, traversal path, or authentication data.
B. Security Assumptions and Scope
Our guarantees rely on the following assumptions:
• Authenticated state and proof security. The issuer publishes
correct roots and revocation updates. The authenticated-
registry backend provides a binding root and sound path
authentication. The ZKP system provides completeness,
knowledge soundness, and zero-knowledge under sound
setup parameters [22], [23], [28]. A valid composition binds
the credential proof and status proof to the same hidden
credential identifier and presentation session.
• Fresh presentation values. Each presentation uses a fresh
verifier challenge and fresh holder randomness to derive
a new public session value. We assume independently
generated session values are pseudorandom when the hidden
credential identifier is unknown to the verifier. A verifier that
learns a candidate identifier may test it against the public
session value; issuer–verifier collusion is therefore excluded.
Accepted challenges are consumed to prevent replay.
• Observable state synchronization. State synchronization is
credential-independent but not anonymous. Network ob-
servers may learn IP addresses, timing, routing information,
and retrieval patterns. ShadowPath provides no private
retrieval, cover traffic, or anonymous transport.
Malicious issuer behavior, omitted or delayed revocation
updates, equivocation, availability, denial-of-service resistance,
endpoint compromise, registry governance, and global state
consistency are outside the threat model.
C. Security and Privacy Objectives
ShadowPath has one security objective, status correctness,
and three privacy objectives: lookup/path privacy, issuer-query
unobservability, and presentation unlinkability.
Status correctness. An accepted status proof must establish
that the presented credential is not revoked under the verifier-
selected epoch root Re [30], [47]. The proof must also bind
this status result to the credential presented in the same session.
A malicious holder must be unable to obtain an accepting proof
for a revoked credential or a forged registry path.
3


i
Lookup/path privacy. An accepted proof indicates that
the credential is not revoked but does not reveal the credential-
specific registry index, traversal path, or authentication data [58].
These values remain hidden inside the ZKP.
ii Issuer-query unobservability. Status verification requires
no credential-specific request to the issuer or an issuer-operated
status service during presentation [5]. State synchronization
may still be visible, but it is shared across credentials rather
than driven by a credential-specific lookup.
iii Presentation unlinkability. With fresh pseudorandom
session values, the verifier-visible status data do not reveal
whether two accepted presentations use the same credential.
Colluding verifiers receive no stable credential identifier,
registry position, path, or authentication data. This guarantee
excludes issuer–verifier collusion and does not cover state-
synchronization metadata [13].
IV. Problem Statement
ShadowPath addresses the following problem: a holder must
prove that a credential is not revoked without revealing which
registry entry was checked. The verifier must still establish
non-revocation under the selected registry state and bind the
result to the credential presented in the same session. Hiding
the registry index or traversal path alone does not establish
these bindings.
For each epoch e, the issuer publishes an authenticated
registry root Re. The holder uses the corresponding registry
state to determine the credential’s status locally and construct a
proof. The proof must reveal neither the registry position,
traversal path, nor authentication data. The status relation
uses the same binding and non-revocation semantics across
authenticated-registry backends. Path authentication depends
on the selected backend.
Each proof uses a hidden credential identifier V Cid. The
holder derives it from the link secret ls, issuer domain
I, and issuer-authenticated nonce ν. The same identifier
determines the credential fingerprint fp and private registry
index idx. Presentation binding adds a fresh verifier chal-
lenge c and holder randomizer r for the selected epoch
(e, Re). The credential and status proofs must use the same
hidden V Cid and enforce the public session-binding value
β = Hent(Hbind(V Cid, Hctx(c, e)) , r) .
▷public
Here, Hctx binds the verifier challenge to the epoch, Hbind
binds this context to the hidden credential identifier, and Hent
incorporates the holder randomizer. Fresh r produces a new β
even if (c, e) repeats. Binding to c prevents cross-challenge
reuse, while consuming accepted challenges prevents direct
replay. Presentation unlinkability relies on the session-value
pseudorandomness assumption from §III as collision resistance
alone does not provide this property.
The protocol must satisfy three requirements. First, an
accepted proof must establish non-revocation under the verifier-
selected root and bind the result to the credential presented
in the same session. Second, the protocol must provide the
three privacy objectives: lookup/path privacy, issuer-query
unobservability, and presentation unlinkability. Third, for fixed
registry and circuit parameters, proof size and verification work
must remain independent of the number of revoked credentials.
For a formal statement, fix an authenticated-registry backend D
and issuer domain I. Define:
x = (Re, e, c, r, β)
▷public statement
w = (ls, ν, V Cid, ρD)
▷complete private
circuit witness
z = (fp, idx)
▷private, derived
BI = BindI(ls, ν, V Cid, z;
e, c, r, β)
▷binding check
AD = AuthNonRevokedD(Re, ρD, z) ▷status check
RD(x, w) = 1 ⇐⇒∃z :
BI = 1 ∧AD = 1
▷status relation
The binding predicate BI verifies that V Cid is derived
from (ls, I, ν), derives the private lookup tuple z = (fp, idx),
and checks the public session-binding value β. The status
predicate AD authenticates the backend-specific witness ρD
under Re and checks that the authenticated registry state does
not revoke the credential identified by z. The relation RD
accepts when both checks succeed. Credential composition
additionally authenticates the issuer and requires the credential
proof and status proof to use the same hidden V Cid. Table I
summarizes the core notation used throughout the construction
(see full notation in Appendix Table VII).
TABLE I
Notation summary
Symbol
Description
e, Re
Epoch; authenticated registry root
c, r, β
Verifier challenge; holder randomizer; public session-
binding value
ls, ν, V Cid
Link secret; credential nonce; hidden credential identifier
fp, idx
Credential fingerprint; private registry index
D, ρD
Registry backend; private authentication witness
sume, ∆e
Complete summary; authenticated delta for epoch e
x, w, z
Public statement; complete private circuit witness; private,
derived lookup tuple
k, d
Registry branching factor; depth
Nrev, b
Revoked-entry count; update-batch size
F, F∗
Outer circuit field F = Fr(BW6-761); its nonzero ele-
ments
The registry path must be authenticated inside the proof
to preserve both soundness and lookup privacy. Verifier-side
path authentication would expose the path, while holder-side
authentication outside the proof would require a trusted-wallet
assumption and would not protect against a malicious holder.
V. Related Work
Credential-status mechanisms must keep revocation state
up-to-date without turning queries, authentication paths, or
proof transcripts into stable handles. Table II compares the
three privacy objectives from §III:
i lookup/path privacy, ii
issuer-query unobservability, and iii presentation unlinkability,
together with update/access modes, operational properties, and
state-transfer costs. Correctness and credential binding are
4


TABLE II
Comparison of revocation mechanisms
Revocation Mechanism
Privacy Objectives
Operational Distinction
Revocation Data
i
Lookup/Path
Privacy
ii
Issuer-Query
Unobservability
iii
Presentation
Unlinkabilityb
Holder Update/
Access
Shared Batch
Deltaa
Root-Authenticated
Hidden Path
With Prior
State
Without Prior
State
1 Status lists, compressed sets, and online responders
CRLs [46]
✗
✓
✗
Shared sync
✗
—
Full list
Full list
Bitstring Status List [68]
✗
✓
✗
Shared sync
✗
—
Full list
Full list
Let’s Revoke [67]
✗
✓
✗
Shared sync
✓
—
CRV delta
Full CRV
CRLite (Bloom cascade) [42]
✗
✓
✗
Shared sync
✓
—
580 kB/dayg
10 MBg
CRLite (clubcards) [62]
✗
✓
✗
Shared sync
✓
—
26.8 kB/6 hg
6.7 MBg
CTng [37]
✗
✓
✗
Shared sync
✓
—
CRV delta
Full CRV
OCSP responders [14]
✗
✗
✗
Online query
✗
—
One reply
One reply
2 Cryptographic accumulators and vector commitments
Dynamic Accumulators [9]
✓
(✓)f
✓
Witness refresh
✗
—
Witness update
One witness
Universal Accumulators [43]
✓
(✓)f
(✓)b
Witness refresh
✗
—
Witness update
One witness
Pointproofs [24]
—
—
—
Proof update
✗
—
—
—
ALLOSAUR [32]
✓
(✓)f
✓
Oblivious refresh
✗
—
Sublinear batchc
One witness
AccuRevoke [1]
✗
✓d
✗
Edge query
✗
—
One edge reply
One edge reply
EVOKE [50]
✗
✓
✗
Witness refresh
✗
—
Witness update
One witness
3 Ledger-based revocation and identity systems
Sora Identity [69]
✗
✓
✗
Ledger access
✗
—
One ledger record
One ledger record
CanDID [49]
✗
✓
✗
Public list
✗
—
—
—
zkRevoke [48]
✗
✓
✗i
Offline holder
✗
—
One status tokeni
One status tokeni
UPPR (AC mode) [58]
✓
✓
✓
Offline holder
✗
—
Verifier-sidee
Verifier-sidee
4 Zero-knowledge state trees and lookup arguments
V’CER [36]
✗
✓h
✗
Peer repair
✓
✗
Changed paths
One tree path
SMT + ZKP (Iden3) [3]
✓
✓
(✓)b
Path refresh
✗
✓
One tree path
One tree path
Merkle + ZKP (zk-creds) [59]
✓
✓
✓
Path refresh
✗
✓
One tree path
One tree path
Caulk (Lookup Argument) [74]
✓
—
—
Table access
✗
—
—
—
ShadowPath (Ours)
✓
✓
(✓)b
Shared sync
✓
✓
Authenticated delta Complete summary
The revocation-data columns report what the holder or verifier must obtain or access. “With prior state” assumes retained local state; “Without prior state” denotes bootstrap or
recovery. A dash denotes an inapplicable or undefined property. ✓denotes that the property is fulfilled. ✗denotes that the property is not fulfilled. a One authenticated delta updates
credential-independent shared holder state. b Presentation unlinkability requires fresh presentation randomness. c ALLOSAUR transfers sublinear data relative to the update batch. d
AccuRevoke avoids a CA query but exposes a credential-specific query to an ECP. e UPPR stores its Bloom-filter cascade at the verifier. f Privacy depends on the
witness-distribution channel. g CRLite values are representative transfer sizes. h V’CER avoids per-validation CA queries; a node may contact the CA when collaborative proof
repair fails. i zkRevoke requires no holder-side registry synchronization. Verifiers retrieve an epoch blocklist of O(Nrev) tokens. Its core protocol permits repeated verification
within a holder-selected period and does not provide presentation unlinkability. Abbreviations: AC, anonymous credential; CA, certificate authority; CRV, certificate revocation
vector; ECP, edge compute provider; OCSP, Online Certificate Status Protocol.
baseline requirements and therefore omitted. Proof size is not
normalized because distributed lists expose no holder-generated
status proof, V’CER [36] sends a logarithmic Merkle path, and
zkRevoke’s proof grows with the verification period [48].
1 Status lists and online responders. These mechanisms
answer a credential-specific query or distribute status state
before verification. OCSP [61] uses certificate-specific requests,
allowing direct-query responders to observe the certificate
and request timing [4], [14]. Certificate Revocation Lists [46]
distribute state instead. Bloom filters [6], [70], Bitstring Status
Lists [68], and CRLite [42] compress that state. H¨olzl et al. [30]
adapt private revocation to mobile eIDs. Let’s Revoke [67],
clubcards [62], and CTng [37] refine indexing or update
distribution. Related vehicular designs use list and Bloom-
filter models [29], [56]. Pre-presentation distribution avoids
credential-specific issuer queries, but the relying party may
still learn the checked index.
2 Cryptographic accumulators and vector commitments.
Accumulator schemes replace an explicit list with a digest and a
holder witness. Dynamic accumulators [9] update membership
witnesses, while universal accumulators [43] also support
non-membership. Ozdemir et al. [54] optimize an RSA set
accumulator for SNARK-based verifiable state updates as an
alternative to Merkle trees; their relation is not a credential-
status protocol. Privacy spans the presentation proof and the
refresh channel. Proof-side designs either hide accumulator
membership in anonymous-credential proofs [41] or update
credentials without persistent presentation identifiers [5]. Fraser
and Schneider [21] formally analyze this pattern in Hyperledger
AnonCreds while abstracting ledger access and witness refresh.
Refresh-side work reduces or relocates witness-maintenance
costs through oblivious sublinear updates [32], IoT or edge-
assisted refresh [1], [50], or updatable vector openings [24].
These interfaces separate state publication from privacy-
preserving session evidence.
3 Ledger-based and public-state systems. These systems
publish status records, tokens, or roots so that the holder need
not contact the issuer during presentation. Sora Identity [69]
uses a blockchain ledger. CanDID [49] uses committee-
maintained public state, and broader self-sovereign identity
(SSI) registries follow related publication models [38], [51].
Public availability addresses state distribution but does not
5


determine which evidence reaches the verifier. zkRevoke [48]
uses deterministic epoch tokens against a public list. Tokens
for a common epoch link overlapping presentations, while its
untraceability goal applies after the selected period. In UPPR’s
anonymous-credential mode [58], the holder proves an epoch
token and the verifier checks a public Bloom-filter cascade.
Anonymity-revocation systems enable authorized parties to
identify the holder of an anonymous credential and can make
this tracing process auditable through privacy-preserving smart
contracts [44]. Other verifier interfaces include private record
certification [19], modular keyed-verification credentials [53],
and smart-contract-backed credentials [11]. These interfaces
separate public-state publication from private session evidence.
4 Private lookup and zero-knowledge state trees. Private
information retrieval occupies a different point in the systems
design space. Checklist [35] privately queries a server-held
blocklist through two non-colluding servers. This avoids full-
list storage and holder-side proving but requires online server
computation. It does not produce a verifier-portable root-linked
status proof. Zero-knowledge state trees instead authenticate
private state against a public root. V’CER [36] sends its sparse-
Merkle path to the verifier or an assisting peer. Iden3 [3], [31]
and zk-creds [59] authenticate paths inside zero-knowledge.
Iden3 hides a sparse-Merkle path, whereas zk-creds proves
membership in a Merkle forest. ZEBRA [57] combines sparse-
Merkle non-membership with wallet authorization and account-
able tracing. ShadowPath does not claim to provide the first
private non-membership proof or to be the first system to hide a
tree path. Its contributions are the credential-independent epoch-
state lifecycle, the verifier-selected root interface, the same-
credential/session composition, and the measured lifecycle costs.
ZEBRA does not define private-witness retrieval or refresh, so
we use it as a proof-side comparison without inferring transfer
costs. Verkle trees [39] use vector commitments [10] to reduce
authentication-path length, while Caulk [74] and Lasso [65]
provide efficient lookup arguments that can be integrated into
larger protocols. These constructions can hide the lookup index
and authentication path within a circuit. End-to-end privacy
still depends on how holders obtain and update their witnesses.
Domain-specific and adjacent revocation. Domain-specific
work changes the revocation object or communication model,
so its privacy goals do not map directly to Table II. Sitouah et
al. [66] rerandomize affected Merkle subsets while presenting
a credential identifier and authentication data. Their notion
of untraceability differs from lookup/path privacy. Mobility-
oriented systems prioritize dissemination and timely enforce-
ment. V2X work covers pseudonym provisioning [7], distributed
revocation [52], trusted-component protocols [73], and bounded-
time self-revocation [63]. Mobile-gateway IoT work addresses
revocation of cooperation across a gateway topology [75]. Other
domains revoke TLS certificates [40], group-signing rights [12],
DNS delegations [45], or offline double-spenders [18].
Summary. The systems closest to ShadowPath fall into
two groups. Iden3 [3], zk-creds [59], and ZEBRA [57] are
closest to its root-authenticated hidden lookup. UPPR [58]
and zkRevoke [48] are closest to its presentation-independent
distribution of status evidence. The systems problem addressed
here is to preserve one privacy argument across credential-
independent state acquisition, root-linked non-revocation, and
binding to the current credential presentation.
ShadowPath addresses this task via a single protocol
interface. Holders synchronize credential-independent epoch
state. The circuit authenticates a hidden lookup under the
verifier-selected root, and session binding ties the status
proof to the current presentation. Together, these steps avoid
credential-specific traffic to the issuer during presentation with-
out exposing the registry position. Synchronization metadata
remains outside the cryptographic guarantee. The contribution
is this integrated workflow and its evaluated trade-offs, not
a new cryptographic primitive. Architecturally, ShadowPath
is closest to the zero-knowledge state-tree group, while its
credential-independent synchronization follows the shared-state
distribution model used by related systems.
VI. ShadowPath Protocol and Registry Backends
A. Protocol Execution and Composition
ShadowPath is independent of the authenticated-registry
backend. SMT and Verkle use the same protocol flow and
differ only in witness construction and path authentication.
The evaluated Verkle implementation provides the complete
prototype, including state publication, holder synchronization,
local witness reconstruction, and proof generation. The SMT
implementation is restricted to the controlled in-memory proof
comparison used to isolate path-authentication costs. The Verkle
prototype distributes authenticated epoch state through the
InterPlanetary File System (IPFS) and InterPlanetary Name
System (IPNS) [71]. IPFS stores content-addressed epoch
objects, while IPNS provides an authenticated pointer to the
current epoch. Algorithm 1 therefore presents the implemented
Verkle state-retrieval and witness-reconstruction workflow.
Algorithm 1 ShadowPath-Verkle State Retrieval and Local
Witness Reconstruction
Actor: Holder wallet
Require: Pinned issuer IPNS name Pipns, private registry index idx, holder
freshness state stH, freshness policy F
Ensure: (e, Re, ρVerkle) or ⊥
1: cide ←IPNS.ResolveVerified(Pipns)
▷Authenticate issuer
epoch pointer
2: obje ←IPFS.Fetch(cide)
▷Retrieve epoch object
3: if VerifyCID(cide, obje) = 0 then
4:
return ⊥
5: end if
6: (payloade, checksume) ←Deserialize(obje)
7: if Checksum(payloade)̸ = checksume then
8:
return ⊥
9: end if
10: (e, te, preve, sume) ←payloade
▷Extract epoch metadata and
shared state
11: (Re, statee) ←ParseSummary(sume)
12: if F(stH, e, te, preve, Re) = 0 then
13:
return ⊥
14: end if
15: ρVerkle ←ReconstructWitnessVerkle(idx, statee)
▷Derive private
authentication witness
16: StoreFreshnessState(stH, e, Re)
▷Record accepted epoch
17: return (e, Re, ρVerkle)
6


Algorithm 2 ShadowPath Non-Revocation Proof Generation
Actor: Holder wallet
Require: Registry backend D, link secret ls, issuer domain I, credential
nonce ν, verifier-selected epoch (e, Re), verifier challenge c, authentication
witness ρD, proving key pkP, proof backend P
Ensure: (πstatus, r, β) or ⊥
1: V Cid ←Hnonce(Hcred(ls, I), ν)
▷Hidden credential identifier
2: (fp, idx) ←Split(Haddr(V Cid))
▷Private lookup tuple
3: r
$
←−F∗
▷Fresh holder randomness
4: β ←Hent(Hbind(V Cid, Hctx(c, e)) , r)
▷Public session binding
5: x ←(Re, e, c, r, β)
6: w ←(ls, ν, V Cid, ρD)
7: πstatus ←P.Prove(pkP, RD, x, w)
▷Generate status proof
8: if πstatus = ⊥then
9:
return ⊥
10: end if
11: return (πstatus, r, β)
▷Return proof and session values
Algorithm 2 describes proof generation from synchronized
state after the verifier has selected (e, Re) and issued c.
The holder returns (πstatus, r, β) for verification. The verifier
runs neither algorithm. The verifier resolves the current root
independently and verifies the proof under Re.
Writing V and H for the verifier and holder, the logical
protocol statement is
V
(e,Re,c)
−−−−−→H
▷verifier-selected context
β = Hent
 Hbind(V Cid, Hctx(c, e)), r

. ▷public session binding
Acceptance requires the credential and status relations to
enforce this derivation and use the same hidden V Cid.
During
issuance,
the
holder
derives
V Cid
=
Hnonce(Hcred(ls, I), ν) and sends it to the issuer. Within
a well-formed registry, the credential is revoked when the
fingerprint stored at its registry position equals fp. An empty
position or a different fingerprint establishes non-revocation.
Issuance rejects fp = 0, reserves idx, and retries with a fresh ν
if the index is occupied. Index reservation ensures uniqueness,
while the fingerprint check provides defense-in-depth. We
scope this profile to at most 106 reserved indices per issuer
domain. Appendix Figure 12 records the bit allocation, and
Appendix C-A analyzes collisions and wider profiles. Because
the issuer learns V Cid, presentation unlinkability does not
hold under issuer–verifier collusion.
Both backends establish non-revocation from an authenti-
cated absent entry or an authenticated fingerprint different
from fp. The SMT circuit recomputes the root from a hidden
depth-50 path. The Verkle circuit verifies five KZG openings
and links the selected termination level to Re. Both hide the
registry index, traversal path, opened values, and backend-
specific authentication data. The Verkle implementation verifies
BLS12-377 pairings inside BW6-761 Groth16 and PLONK
circuits. The BLS12-377 base field equals the BW6-761
scalar field, avoiding generic foreign-field emulation. Appendix
Figure 10 illustrates the relation. See Appendices C-A and C-C
for equations, point validation, and implementation details.
Figure 3 shows the composition interface. The ShadowPath-
Verkle proof of concept verifies a private issuer signature σI
on V Cid together with the complete status relation. Both
TABLE III
Authenticated-registry backends evaluated in ShadowPath.
Property
ShadowPath-SMT
ShadowPath-Verkle
Path commitment
Poseidon hash nodes
KZG vector commitments
Geometry
Binary, d = 50
k = 1024, d = 5
Outer curve / field
BW6-761 / Fr
BW6-761 / Fr
Private path
50 sibling values
5 node openings
In-circuit check
Recompute hash root
Verify and link KZG openings
Tree-specific setup
None
KZG setupb
Proof backend
Groth16a
Groth16 and PLONK
Artifact scope
Standalone relation; in-memory
state control
Full service, composition proof
of concept, and mobile prototype
a The matched SMT–Verkle comparison uses Groth16 for both backends; the PLONK
evaluation covers Verkle. b Verkle uses BLS12-377 for KZG; its base field equals the
BW6-761 scalar field used by the outer proof circuit.
checks use the same hidden identifier and enforce the exact β
derivation. This artifact is not a production anonymous-
credential integration. Such an integration must preserve both
conditions within one sound composition mechanism. The
verifier consumes c after acceptance.
ShadowPath converts a credential-specific lookup over
authenticated epoch state into a session-bound zero-knowledge
proof of non-revocation. Figure 4 shows the protocol sequence.
Before presentation, holders synchronize shared state and recon-
struct their authentication witnesses locally. During presentation,
they prove under the epoch root selected by the verifier.
B. Relation and Registry Backends
The relation RD from §IV combines credential-identifier
derivation and session binding with backend-specific authen-
ticated non-revocation. Backend dependence is confined to
AuthNonRevokedD. It authenticates ρD under Re and estab-
lishes non-revocation from authenticated absence or fingerprint
mismatch. The backend also determines serialization, setup,
synchronization, and state distribution.
Table III compares the two backends. ShadowPath-SMT
recomputes a depth-50 Poseidon [26] path from 50 sibling
values. ShadowPath-Verkle uses a sparse KZG-authenticated
tree over BLS12-377 [34], [39]. With k = 1024 and d = 5, it
covers the same 250 positions with five openings. Both share
the lookup derivation, session binding, fingerprint check, and
absent-entry semantics. The comparison asks whether five KZG
openings cost less than 50 hash levels.
C. Security Arguments
We first consider the standalone status proof. Let D denote
the selected authenticated-registry backend, either SMT or
Verkle. We assume that Re is authenticated, policy-fresh, and
derived from a well-formed registry under the honest-issuer
lifecycle. The shared Poseidon derivations must be collision-
resistant. The selected registry backend must provide complete
and sound path authentication, while the outer proof system
must provide completeness, knowledge soundness, and zero-
knowledge under sound setup parameters.
For the SMT backend, path authentication relies on collision-
resistant Poseidon hashing and correct root recomputation. For
the Verkle backend, it additionally relies on KZG binding and
7


1. Issuer
Epoch root
(e, Re)
complete
summary or
authenticated ∆e
credential-
independent
synchronization
2. Holder-local privacy boundary
Public: x = (Re, e, c, r, β)
Private: w = (ls, ν, V Cid, ρD)
Private lookup
V Cid 7→z
z = (fp, idx)
Local witness
(sume, idx)
7→ρD
Status proof
Prove(RD; x, w)
7→πstatus
Composition:
same hidden V Cid and exact β derivation
3. Verifier
resolve root (e, Re)
independently
verify proofs under Re
verify shared binding
Accept / Reject
hidden: w, z
Fig. 3. ShadowPath holder-local architecture. Blue marks authenticated epoch state and public values. Pale green marks the hidden lookup and backend-specific
witness ρD. The credential-authentication and status relations use the same hidden V Cid and exact β derivation. The verifier receives the proofs and declared
public values; w and z remain hidden.
Issuer
Public state
Holder / wallet
Verifier
publish e, Re, sume, ∆e
Verkle prototype: IPFS/IPNS
pin CID; publish authoritative name
resolve / fetch
e, Re, complete summary or authenticated delta
Update local state; reconstruct ρD
(sume, idx) 7→ρD
resolve current epoch metadata
authenticated (e, Re)
challenge (e, Re, c)
Generate the status proof locally
Prove(RD; x, w) 7→πstatus
πstatus, r, β
Verifier decision
verify πstatus under x
accept / reject
Registry index, traversal path, and authen-
tication witness ρD remain holder-local
Fig. 4. ShadowPath protocol sequence. The Verkle prototype distributes state
through the IPFS and IPNS. Holder-local boxes show state update, witness
reconstruction, and proof generation. Here, CID denotes a content identifier.
evaluation soundness, collision resistance of the commitment
encoding Enc, a sound KZG setup, and valid in-circuit curve
and subgroup checks for all prover-supplied KZG points.
Under these assumptions, an honestly generated proof for
a non-revoked credential is accepted. Knowledge soundness
ensures that any accepted proof corresponds to a valid
(V Cid, fp, idx, ρD) that authenticates non-revocation under Re.
Zero-knowledge hides the private registry lookup and authen-
tication data in w, including ρD, beyond what follows from
the public statement x. These guarantees are relative to the
authenticated root Re and do not imply registry completeness,
timeliness, or global consistency.
Argument. An honest witness satisfies both predicates in RD.
Knowledge extraction yields a witness whose lookup tuple,
authenticated path, and terminal condition satisfy the relation.
Poseidon hashing binds an SMT path to Re, while KZG
soundness and commitment linking provide the Verkle binding.
Zero-knowledge hides the private witness in each accepted
proof, while the session-value pseudorandomness assumption
prevents independently generated session values from providing
a stable credential handle. Together, these properties support
presentation unlinkability as defined in §III. This guarantee
excludes issuer–verifier collusion and synchronization metadata.
Credential-composition argument. Assume the standalone
status conditions, an authenticated issuer key, and a sound
credential-authentication predicate. A knowledge-sound, zero-
knowledge composition proves that the issuer authenticated the
hidden V Cid and that the same V Cid satisfies RD under Re.
Both checks enforce the exact session-binding derivation for β.
Acceptance therefore binds non-revocation under Re to the
credential authenticated in that presentation. Zero-knowledge
hides V Cid and the private registry witness beyond the public
statement.
Argument. Knowledge soundness extracts both witnesses.
Identifier equality and the exact β derivation bind them to the
same credential, epoch, and challenge. Binding to c prevents
cross-challenge use. Consuming accepted challenges prevents
replay, whereas joint zero-knowledge hides both witnesses.
D. Artifact and Distribution Boundaries
The ShadowPath-Verkle prototype combines a Rust issuer
and registry with Go/gnark services. Its Groth16 and PLONK
circuits verify all KZG openings internally, and negative tests
exercise point validation. The controlled SMT artifact is limited
to the standalone Groth16 relation with in-memory state. It
excludes composition, IPFS/IPNS distribution, and the mobile
prototype. The two columns of Table III are not equivalent
deployments. Appendix B specifies setup and the Rust–Go
encoding bridge.
The Verkle prototype publishes complete summaries and
authenticated deltas as content-addressed IPFS objects. The
pinned issuer IPNS name identifies the current epoch object.
Kubo verifies the signed IPNS record and cryptographically
binds each content identifier to its referenced object. A delta
is not signed separately; publisher authentication follows from
the signed epoch head and CID. Delta acceptance additionally
requires the predecessor metadata and recomputed root to
match the authenticated epoch object. The holder rejects stale
or rolled-back epochs under its local policy.
8


A holder without prior state retrieves the complete summary.
A synchronized holder authenticates and applies ∆e. For b
changes and fixed k, this authenticated delta transfers O(b)
bytes and requires O(bd) local operations. A complete sum-
mary stores materialized nodes and revoked leaves, requiring
O(Nrevd) space, or O(Nrev) for fixed d (see Appendix
Figure 11). §IX covers trust on first use and offline root
pinning. Synchronization remains separate from presentation
as its metadata lies outside the unlinkability guarantee.
VII. Evaluation Methodology
RQ1 asks how holders can prove non-revocation without
exposing credential-specific lookup information that could serve
as stable handles. §III defines the adversaries, assumptions, and
security objectives, while §VI presents the construction and
security arguments. Functional validation complements these
arguments with checks of forged paths, state reconstruction, and
credential-status binding. Network synchronization metadata
remains outside the cryptographic privacy guarantee. §VIII-A
reports the corresponding functional validation results.
RQ2 asks which proving, verification, and state-distribution
costs arise from hiding credential-status lookups. The evaluation
first compares SMT and Verkle under matched Groth16 condi-
tions, then compares Groth16 and PLONK on the same Verkle
construction. Additional experiments measure state acquisition
and updates, mobile proving and verification, and cross-system
proof costs. §VIII-B–§VIII-E report these quantitative results.
A. Functional Validation
Functional validation addresses RQ1 at the implementation
level and follows the malicious-holder cases from §III. Five
valid cases exercise non-revocation across all Verkle levels,
including early termination at an authenticated empty child.
Thirteen negative cases cover revocation, forged commitments
and paths, invalid selectors, inconsistent secrets, mismatched
public statements, and invalid KZG points. State tests require
bootstrap reconstruction and incremental updates to reproduce
each epoch root. Composition tests enforce a shared V Cid
and reject mismatched identifiers, issuer keys, and signatures.
The deployed Verkle service processes ten valid requests per
proof backend and rejects malformed, unsupported, corrupted,
and revoked requests. The tests provide implementation-level
evidence for status correctness and credential-status binding.
B. Desktop Proof and Verification Costs
RQ2 first measures proof and verification costs under con-
trolled desktop conditions. A matched SMT–Verkle experiment
compares registry backends over the same 250-position address
space. Both backends use the same circuit field, Groth16
proof system, hardware, and trial protocol. ShadowPath-SMT
authenticates a depth-50 Poseidon path, while ShadowPath-
Verkle authenticates five KZG levels with k = 1 024.
A second experiment compares Groth16 and PLONK on the
same Verkle construction with k = 1024 and d = 5. A separate
PLONK sweep varies k ∈{256, 512, 1 024} and d ∈{3, 4, 5}.
Each configuration contains 1 000 credentials and covers an
address space between 224 and 250 positions.
Proof measurements. Measured quantities include witness
construction, proof generation, verification, and proof size.
Proof-generation timing starts when the selected proof backend
is invoked and excludes compilation, setup, key loading,
and witness construction. Witness construction is measured
separately. Verification timing covers the backend proof check,
and reported proof sizes exclude public inputs. Composition
overhead follows the same Groth16 desktop protocol.
The evaluation generates the Verkle KZG SRS and the
Groth16/PLONK parameters locally using operating-system
randomness. Setup and key derivation are excluded from
all reported timings. Local parameter generation leaves the
corresponding setup secrets known to the evaluator; these
parameters are therefore restricted to evaluation. Deployment
requires parameters generated through a sound ceremony.
Desktop protocol. Desktop experiments were run on an
Apple M2 Pro with 16 GB of RAM, with one configuration
active at a time. Each configuration was preceded by two
CPU-idle measurements above 75 %, sampled 30 s apart.
Each configuration comprised 30 sequential retained trials;
no separate untimed warm-up was discarded. Medians and
interquartile ranges summarize the repeated measurements.
Single-proof verification latency does not capture verifier
behavior when multiple presentations arrive concurrently. A
separate microbenchmark evaluates the verification endpoint
under parallel request load.
Verifier load. Each proof backend processed 300 requests at
concurrency 32, where concurrency denotes the number of
verification requests processed in parallel. One run was executed
per backend. The benchmark reused a single valid proof
across requests, so a benchmark flag disabled normal challenge
consumption. The measurements characterize verification-
endpoint processing under concurrent load rather than end-
to-end protocol throughput. Because each configuration was
executed once, the experiment does not support estimates of
between-run variance. Holder-local lookup requires authenti-
cated registry state before proof generation. RQ2 measures the
cost of acquiring and maintaining that state.
C. State-Distribution Costs
State experiments distinguish bootstrap from synchronized
operation. A bootstrapping holder reconstructs the registry
from the complete published summary, whereas a synchronized
holder retains prior state and applies authenticated deltas.
Registry reconstruction and updates. The deployed Verkle
experiment started with 50 revoked credentials and applied
two five-entry updates, producing populations of 50, 55, and
60. A separate network-free experiment compared SMT and
Verkle at 102, 103, and 104 revocations with update batches
of 1, 5, 20, and 100 entries. Network transfer and IPFS/IPNS
resolution were excluded. Each configuration was repeated five
times and summarized by the median. Every reconstructed or
updated root was checked for correctness.
9


The SMT and Verkle registry backends use different native
summary serializers. Their summary sizes serve as descriptive
measurements. Separate Verkle growth measurements cover
102–105 revocations. Larger values are linearly extrapolated
from the measured uncompressed bytes per revoked entry at
105. The largest measured registry population is additionally
used to evaluate complete-summary transfer under controlled
network conditions.
Complete-summary transfer. Transfer was measured at
100 000 revoked credentials using raw and gzip-compressed
complete summaries. Thirty HTTP transfers were executed over
a controlled link with a 300 Mbit s−1 downlink, 500 ms round-
trip time, 40 ms jitter, and 0.001 % configured packet loss.
Timing includes network transfer but excludes IPNS resolution,
integrity checking, local reconstruction, and proof generation.
The network profile represents a controlled high-latency stress
condition rather than a measured cellular trace.
D. Mobile Proving Costs
Desktop and state experiments characterize the costs of proof
generation, verification, and state acquisition. This experiment
evaluates proof generation on mobile devices that can run
wallets. Primary measurements were taken using an iPhone 17
Pro and a Galaxy S25. Each device executed both Groth16–
PLONK and PLONK–Groth16 orders with five trials per
backend, followed by a 60 s cooldown after each proof. Artifacts
and proving keys were cached before measurement.
Eight additional devices followed the same protocol. Proof
generation and verification were recorded together with memory
and thermal telemetry. Memory values are not compared
across operating systems because iOS and Android expose
different metrics. The 1 s and 10 s levels are illustrative proof-
generation thresholds, not measured usability limits. Proof
timing excludes state retrieval, registry reconstruction, and the
surrounding credential protocol. Geekbench 6 scores provide
descriptive hardware context [55]. Mobile SMT proving and
registry reconstruction are excluded from the evaluation. A final
experiment compares the measured proof costs with those of
related systems, without treating their protocols as equivalent.
E. Prior Work Comparison
Pinned revisions of zk-creds [59], UPPR [58], and zkRe-
voke [48] were measured independently on the same desktop
host. The same CPU-idle criterion and 30-trial protocol were
applied. Compilation, setup, key loading, and witness con-
struction preceded timing, while fresh clones and clean builds
checked build-level reproducibility. ZEBRA [57] contributes
source-reported measurements and was not reproduced on the
evaluation host. Because the compared systems prove different
statements and use different constructions, the measurements
provide proof-cost context rather than a normalized protocol
ranking. §VIII-E reports the comparison.
VIII. Experimental Results and Analysis
Section VII defines the evaluation protocol. Functional
validation addresses RQ1. Desktop, state-distribution, mobile,
and prior-work results address RQ2.
TABLE IV
Measured proof and verification costs (30-trial medians).
Relation
Proving (ms)
Verification (ms)
Proof (B)
Groth16
ShadowPath-SMT
371.6
3.70
388
ShadowPath-Verkle
2109.5
7.55
484
PLONK
ShadowPath-Verkle
25619.8
9.60
1352
The root-linked ShadowPath relations share a 250-position address space:
SMT uses k = 2, d = 50, whereas Verkle uses k = 1024, d = 5. The
matched SMT–Verkle comparison fixes Groth16; PLONK is evaluated for
Verkle. Proof bytes exclude public inputs.
A. Functional Validation
The Verkle implementation accepted all five valid witnesses,
one at each termination level, and rejected all 13 negative
cases. Rejections covered revocation, forged commitments
and path mutations, invalid selectors, inconsistent secrets,
mismatched public statements, and invalid KZG points. The
deployed service additionally completed ten valid requests
per proof backend and rejected malformed, unsupported,
corrupted, or revoked requests. Bootstrap reconstruction and
incremental updates reproduced the expected authenticated
roots; Section VIII-C reports the corresponding state costs.
The composition proof of concept accepted the shared-V Cid
case and rejected a different credential identifier, a mismatched
issuer key, and a tampered signature. These outcomes pro-
vide implementation-level evidence for status correctness and
credential-status binding. Cryptographic soundness and privacy
are addressed by Section VI. The remaining results address
RQ2, beginning with controlled desktop proof and verification
costs.
Takeaway 1: Functional validation accepted all five valid cases,
rejected all 13 negative cases, and reproduced the expected
epoch roots. The results provide implementation-level evidence
for status correctness and credential-status binding.
B. Desktop Proof and Verification Costs
Table IV reports the matched SMT–Verkle comparison.
Under Groth16, median proving times were 371.6 ms for
ShadowPath-SMT and 2 109.5 ms for ShadowPath-Verkle,
a 5.68× difference. Median verification times were 3.70 ms
and 7.55 ms, respectively, a 2.04× difference. Verification-time
IQRs were 0.09 ms for SMT and 0.17 ms for Verkle.
The Groth16 proof measured 388 B for ShadowPath-
SMT and 484 B for ShadowPath-Verkle. The additional 96 B
reflects one extra gnark prover commitment introduced by the
deferred emulated-field checks. The corresponding BW6-761
G1 element affects both proof serialization and verifier work.
The verification difference therefore cannot be attributed solely
to circuit size.
For ShadowPath-Verkle, median proving increased from
2 109.5 ms with Groth16 to 25 619.8 ms with PLONK, a
12.14× difference. Median verification increased from 7.55 ms
to 9.60 ms, while proof size increased from 484 B to 1 352 B
10


101
102
103
104
Latency (ms, log scale)
Witness construction
Proof generation
Verification
Proof phase
0.9£
12.1£
1.3£
Groth16
PLONK
Fig. 5. ShadowPath-Verkle latency by proof phase at k = 1 024 and d = 5.
Labels show the PLONK-to-Groth16 ratio for each phase; the latency axis is
logarithmic.
k = 256
k = 512
k = 1024
15
20
25
Prover latency (s)
selected
d = 3
d = 4
d = 5
Fig. 6. PLONK proving latency across Verkle geometries. The annotation
marks the selected 250-position profile at k = 1 024 and d = 5.
(2.79×). Proving-time IQRs were 74.5 ms and 1 202.9 ms,
respectively. Adding credential authentication to the Verkle
status relation increased the R1CS from 74 649 to 86 034
constraints (15.3 %). Across 30 Groth16 trials, median proving
and verification times were 2.207 s (IQR 77.6 ms) and 7.645 ms
(IQR 0.210 ms), respectively. Proving latency was 4.6 % above
the standalone Verkle relation.
Figure 5 shows that proof generation dominates the holder-
side computation. Median witness construction required
26.1 ms with Groth16 and 24.5 ms with PLONK, whereas proof
generation required 2 109.5 ms and 25 619.8 ms, respectively.
Proof generation accounted for more than 98 % of the combined
witness-construction and proof-generation latency for both
proof backends.
Figure 6 isolates the effect of Verkle geometry on PLONK
proving. Across nine configurations, median proving times
ranged from 15.05 s to 25.92 s. Depths three and four remained
within 15.05 s to 15.62 s, whereas every depth-five configura-
tion required at least 25.01 s. At depth five, the circuit crosses
the next PLONK evaluation domain and the proving key grows
from 50.5 MB to 100.8 MB. Branching factor had a smaller,
non-monotonic effect at fixed depth.
The selected k = 1 024, d = 5 profile required 25.92 s in
the geometry sweep and 25.62 s in the independent measure-
ment. The profile was selected because five levels cover the
matched 250-position address space, not because it minimizes
proving latency. At that address space, the Verkle relation
102
103
104
105
Revoked credentials Nrev
10−3
10−1
101
103
Payload (MB, log scale)
Groth16 proof (484 B)
PLONK proof (1352 B)
Complete summary (k = 1024, d = 5)
Fig. 7. Complete-summary growth for ShadowPath-Verkle at k = 1 024 and
d = 5. Summary size grows with the number of revoked credentials, whereas
the Groth16 and PLONK proof sizes remain fixed at these circuit parameters.
contains 74 649 constraints, compared with 15 303 for SMT.
Five independently verified KZG openings therefore did not
reduce proof-generation cost relative to 50 Poseidon levels in
the evaluated construction. Different geometry or aggregated
openings could change this ordering.
Verifier-side processing remained substantially faster than
proof generation. At concurrency 32, the 300-request runs
sustained 346.8 accepted requests per second with Groth16
and 284.1 with PLONK. Median and 95th-percentile request
latencies were 73.2 ms and 214.07 ms for Groth16, and
99.54 ms and 225.32 ms for PLONK. Because each backend
was measured once at this concurrency level, the result
characterizes endpoint behavior but does not support between-
run variance estimates.
Takeaway 2: Under matched Groth16 conditions, Shadow-
Path-Verkle required 5.68× the proving latency of Shadow-
Path-SMT despite reducing path depth from 50 hash levels to
five KZG levels. Within Verkle, PLONK required 12.14× the
proving latency of Groth16.
C. State-Distribution Costs
State-acquisition cost separates bootstrap or recovery from
synchronized operation. Figure 7 shows that the Verkle com-
plete summary grows from 0.118 MB at 102 revocations to
93.95 MB at 105. Under the controlled high-latency profile,
30 raw-summary transfers yielded a median of 24.86 s (IQR
10.08 s). Gzip reduced the payload to 38.09 MB and the median
transfer time to 13.76 s (IQR 8.22 s).
Synchronized operation required less transfer. At 50 revoca-
tions, the complete summary occupied 48 459 B, whereas each
subsequent five-update authenticated delta occupied 1 385 B.
Both updates therefore transferred 2 770 B across two epochs
and reproduced the corresponding authenticated roots. Linear
extrapolation from the measured uncompressed bytes per
revoked entry at 105 gives approximately 0.94 GB at 106
revocations and 9.4 GB at 107. These values are projections
for bootstrap or recovery, not measured per-epoch transfer.
The network-free comparison isolates local state processing.
All 24 combinations of registry backend, population, and update
11


TABLE V
ShadowPath-Verkle latency on the two primary mobile devices.
Backend
Proving ˜µ [range] (s)
Verification ˜µ (ms)
iPhone 17 Pro (iOS 26.6)
Groth16
3.11 [3.05–3.23]
5.31
PLONK
39.12 [38.43–42.19]
8.08
Galaxy S25 (Android 16)
Groth16
2.93 [2.88–3.36]
19.08
PLONK
55.29 [43.73–63.98]
17.05
Brackets denote observed proving ranges. Each row pools ten trials across
both counterbalanced backend orders. Appendix Table VI reports the results
for all tested devices.
batch reproduced their expected roots. At 104 revocations, the
native complete-summary encodings occupied 7.82 MB for
Verkle and 43.75 MB for SMT. Different serializers preclude a
comparison of normalized storage. Reconstruction required
427.18 s for Verkle and 23.44 s for SMT. Their common
authenticated-delta format produced payloads of 400 B to
7 033 B for batches of 1–100 updates; applying and verifying
100 updates required 6.77 s for Verkle and 240.53 ms for SMT.
The measurements therefore separate registry-sized bootstrap
or recovery costs from update-batch-sized costs during syn-
chronized operation. Proof size remains independent of registry
population at fixed circuit parameters.
Takeaway 3: Synchronized holders receive update-batch-sized
authenticated deltas, whereas bootstrap and recovery require the
complete summary. At 104 revocations, Verkle reconstruction
required 427.18 s versus 23.44 s for SMT.
D. Mobile Proving Costs
On the two primary devices, median Groth16 proving
required 3.11 s on the iPhone 17 Pro and 2.93 s on the Galaxy
S25. Both exceeded the 1 s threshold but remained below 10 s.
PLONK required 39.12 s and 55.29 s, respectively, exceeding
10 s on both devices. Table V reports the underlying 40 trials.
Across ten physical devices, 200 ShadowPath-Verkle trials
were completed. Groth16 remained below 10 s on nine devices.
The Galaxy A54 reached 10.46 s. No device remained below
1 s, and PLONK exceeded 10 s on every device. Figure 8 sum-
marizes the results. PLONK runs also showed higher resource-
use indicators on several devices. Peak OS-reported PLONK
memory use reached approximately 5.0 GB, and several runs
reached serious or severe thermal states. iOS application
footprint and Android resident-set size use different metrics,
so memory values are not compared across operating systems.
Mobile SMT proving and holder-side state reconstruction were
not evaluated.
Takeaway 4: Mobile proving is viable for attended credential
presentations, but current proving costs remain incompatible
with latency-sensitive interactions. Proof-system choice therefore
directly constrains the interaction model.
1 000
1 500
2 000
2 500
3 000
3 500
4 000
103
104
105
representative Geekbench 6 single-core scores
Proof-generation latency (ms, log scale)
Galaxy A54
Galaxy S25 Ultra
Galaxy S25
iPhone 12
iPhone 13 Pro
iPhone 15 Plus
iPhone 14 Pro Max
iPhone 15 Pro Max
iPhone 17
iPhone 17 Pro
OS:
iOS
Android
Backend:
Groth16
PLONK
Fig. 8. Proof-generation latency for ShadowPath-Verkle across ten tested
mobile devices. Points show pooled ten-trial medians per device and proof
backend. Shaded bands show observed min–max ranges. Solid and dashed lines
distinguish iOS and Android, while circles and triangles denote Groth16 and
PLONK. The 1 s and 10 s levels mark illustrative proof-generation thresholds.
Appendix Table VI reports the complete measurements.
E. Prior Work Comparison
Figure 9 compares proof costs with related artifacts. Different
proof statements preclude a normalized ranking. Among the
same-host measurements, ShadowPath-Verkle had the highest
proving and verification latencies. ShadowPath-SMT proved
in 371.6 ms versus 419 ms for zk-creds and produced a 388 B
versus 744 B proof. UPPR and zkRevoke were faster and
smaller, but prove different token-based statements.
Takeaway 5: ShadowPath-SMT achieved proof-generation
cost close to zk-creds while producing a smaller proof; Shadow-
Path-Verkle was the most expensive same-host design. UPPR
and zkRevoke were faster and smaller but prove different token-
based statements, so the comparison is contextual rather than a
normalized ranking.
IX. Discussion
A. Deployment and Security Boundaries
The EUDI Wallet Architecture and Reference Framework
carries a status-list URL and credential-specific identifier or
index [20, Sec. 6.6.3.7]. ShadowPath targets this lookup-
privacy boundary; it is neither a drop-in ARF profile nor
evidence of regulatory compliance. Similar needs arise in
national wallets [25], [72].
The Verkle proof of concept composes status with an EdDSA
credential relation. Production composition must preserve
the same hidden identifier and exact session binding and
derive the session value with a formally analyzed PRF keyed
by a credential-bound holder secret; its circuit cost remains
unmeasured. Fresh, consumed challenges prevent replay, and
issuer–verifier collusion remains excluded.
ShadowPath does not guarantee complete, timely, or
globally consistent publication. First-use and offline verifiers
12


30
100
300
1k
3k
latency (ms, log scale)
ShadowPath-Verkle
ShadowPath-SMT
zk-creds
ZEBRA
UPPR
zkRevoke
(a) Generation latency
2.11 s
372 ms
419 ms
465 ms
2.00 s
49.6 ms
33.7 ms
47.1 ms
30.4 ms
0.7 1
2
5
10
latency (ms, log scale)
(b) Verification latency
7.55 ms
3.70 ms
3.42 ms
3.00 ms
1.54 ms
0.90 ms
0.90 ms
0.73 ms
0
200 400 600 800
bytes
(c) Proof size
484 B
388 B
744 B
744 B
576 B
164 B
164 B
164 B
same-host reproduction
source-reported value
Fig. 9. Proof-cost context for ShadowPath and related artifacts. Filled markers denote same-host measurements; open markers denote source-reported values.
ZEBRA was not reproduced on the evaluation host, so all ZEBRA values shown are source-reported: 2 s proof generation, a 576 B proof, and an estimated
1.54 ms verification time [57]. UPPR provides no comparable source-reported verification latency or serialized proof size. This figure only provides cost
context as the systems prove different statements.
lack a trusted reference, and IPNS cannot exclude split views.
Out-of-band pinning, transparency-published epoch heads, or
anonymous retrieval could strengthen consistency or metadata
privacy but remain unevaluated.
B. Backend Trade-offs and Evaluation Scope
At the matched 250 point, SMT had lower proving, verifica-
tion, local-processing, and proof-size costs than the evaluated
Verkle construction. Five independently verified KZG openings
did not offset the cost advantage of the 50-level Poseidon path.
This artifact ordering may change with geometry, opening
aggregation, or hashes such as Poseidon2 [27]. Both proofs
are fixed-size at compiled parameters, while recovery requires
reconstruction from a complete summary. Incompatible encod-
ings preclude a normalized size comparison.
The primary mobile-device study measures Verkle proof-
generation cost: Groth16 remained below the illustrative 10 s
threshold but exceeded 1 s, while PLONK exceeded 10 s
on both devices. Mobile SMT and state processing were
not evaluated, so these results do not establish end-to-end
mobile feasibility. Aggregated openings or circuit-friendly
commitments could reduce Verkle costs; authenticated sharding
or checkpoints could bound recovery time. These designs
remain unimplemented and may add assumptions.
Wallets can apply authenticated deltas and cache witnesses
before presentation, but fresh challenges prevent complete-proof
precomputation. Delegated proving exposes private witness
material unless the prover is trusted or isolated.
Status mechanisms shift cost among downloads, witness
maintenance, and holder proving [3], [9], [32], [42], [57],
[59], [68]. Comparisons must therefore state the proved
relation and report lifecycle costs separately. We omit Verkle
aggregation, mobile reconstruction, Internet-scale availability,
wallet integration, and alternative synchronization.
X. Conclusion
ShadowPath hides the credential registry lookup during
presentation. It separates credential state distribution from
credential-specific verification. The holder reconstructs the
witness locally and proves non-revocation under a verifier-
selected epoch root while hiding lookup metadata. This provides
lookup/path privacy and issuer-query unobservability because
no credential-specific status query reaches the issuer. Fresh
session values provide presentation unlinkability by preventing
verifier-visible status data from linking separate presentations.
Together, these properties realize the three privacy objectives
under the stated threat model.
Three lessons emerge from the evaluation. First, hiding
the lookup inside a ZKP addresses only one part of the
privacy problem. State acquisition and witness maintenance
must also avoid credential-specific information. Second, shorter
authentication paths do not necessarily reduce proof cost.
The SMT backend was substantially more efficient than
Verkle, despite using 10 times as many tree levels. Third,
holder-side Groth16 proving is feasible on current mobile
devices, although registry and proof backends strongly affect
performance. Credential-status mechanisms should therefore be
evaluated across the full lifecycle. ShadowPath characterizes
these trade-offs and provides an empirical basis for future
lookup-private credential-status systems.
Future research should extend the integration of private prov-
ing and distributed authenticated state. Aggregated openings,
alternative bilinear-pairing constructions, multiparty compu-
tation, and circuit-friendly commitments may reduce proof
costs while preserving distributed authenticated state. Post-
quantum-secure commitments and proof systems provide a
complementary direction beyond pairing-based constructions.
Future work should also evaluate mobile device proving and
integrate privacy-preserving synchronization mechanisms to
reduce computational costs and leakage of network metadata.
13


Acknowledgment
We thank from the Technische Universit¨at Berlin, Thomas
Cory for his valuable feedback and support for the Figures. This
work was conducted at the SNET research group, which is part
of T-Labs – a public-private partnership between Technische
Universit¨at Berlin and Deutsche Telekom AG.
Ethics Considerations
Following the Menlo principles [17], we consider the ethical
implications of conducting, publishing, and potentially deploy-
ing ShadowPath. The relevant stakeholders and their principal
benefits, harms, and risks are:
• Holders may benefit from reduced status-layer linkability.
Still, they bear the costs of computation, storage, and
synchronization and may experience delays or exclusion when
policy-fresh state or timely proof generation is unavailable.
• Verifiers gain locally verifiable status evidence without
presentation-time issuer queries, but they bear the conse-
quences of false acceptance, false rejection, and unavailable
or stale state.
• Issuers and registry operators avoid credential-specific
presentation queries, but they must publish authentic and
available state; visible publication or synchronization inter-
actions may still reveal metadata.
• The general public may benefit from less traceable credential
verification and reliable revocation, but may bear harms from
credential fraud, unjustified exclusion, service disruption, or
weakened accountability.
• The research community gains auditable evidence, im-
plementation artifacts, and reproducibility material, but
premature or uncritical reuse of an experimental system
could propagate design or implementation weaknesses.
Benefits, Harms, and Respect for Persons. People who
present credentials may benefit when status checks reveal
less information that issuers or verifiers could use to link
their activities across contexts. This can support privacy
and autonomy, particularly when using credentials reveals
sensitive aspects of a person’s life. However, people and
organizations that rely on credential decisions also need timely,
accurate revocation information. Stale or inconsistent state,
implementation errors, compromised setup parameters, or
unavailable updates could cause false acceptance or false
rejection. False acceptance may expose others to fraud, safety
risks, or financial harm, whereas false rejection may wrongfully
deny an honest holder access to a service. Verifiers should apply
risk-proportionate freshness policies and distinguish unavailable
status from confirmed revocation.
Within its stated assumptions, ShadowPath authenticates non-
revocation under a verifier-selected epoch root and binds the
result to the same hidden credential and presentation session.
It does not, however, ensure complete, timely, or globally
consistent publication of registry state. Reduced status-layer
observability may also limit legitimate investigations of misuse
despite the intended privacy benefit.
Credential verification may affect access to employment,
education, travel, financial services, or other important areas
of everyday life. Deployments should explain what presenta-
tion and synchronization metadata remains observable, how
transcripts are retained, and which parties may collude. They
should also provide authenticated alternative procedures during
a transition period, as well as bounded retry, recovery, and
appeal mechanisms when policy-fresh state cannot be obtained
or a device cannot complete a proof in time. A failed or delayed
proof must not by itself be treated as holder misconduct.
Justice. Holder-side proving costs are not distributed equally. A
device’s computational resources, connectivity, battery capacity,
accessibility features, and available technical support may
determine whether a person can complete verification within the
required time. Holders with constrained devices, unreliable or
expensive connectivity, accessibility needs, or limited technical
support may experience disproportionate delay or exclusion.
Our evaluation identifies this risk, but neither estimates the
affected population nor evaluates usability.
Future studies should include older and entry-level devices,
varied network conditions, accessibility requirements, and
application-specific latency budgets. Deployments should offer
authenticated, privacy-preserving alternatives so that access
does not depend on owning high-end hardware.
Respect for Law and Public Interest. Societal, ethical, and
legal responsibility is shared among the identified stakeholders
to ensure that privacy protection does not undermine ac-
countability or applicable legal obligations. Credential-specific
status queries can allow issuers, verifiers, or network observers
to link a person’s activities across contexts. ShadowPath
reduces this risk by moving credential-specific lookup to the
holder’s device. Fresh challenges and challenge consumption
prevent direct replay, while the presentation randomizer avoids
a deterministic transcript handle under the stated session-value
pseudorandomness assumption. This protection does not cover
issuer–verifier collusion.
State synchronization remains outside the cryptographic privacy
guarantee and may expose IP addresses, object sizes, timing,
cache behavior, and routing metadata. Deployments requiring
network-layer privacy must add separate mechanisms such as
anonymous communication, private retrieval, or traffic-analysis
resistance. Deployments must also comply with applicable
data protection, accessibility, credential governance, and sector-
specific requirements.
Decision to Proceed. We did not recruit or observe people,
use real identities or personal data, or test live services. The
study involved no research participants and required no human-
subject consent. The evaluation used synthetic credentials
and controlled infrastructure. This limits the study’s direct
risks but does not remove our responsibility to consider how
later deployment could affect people. Residual risks include
premature deployment, misuse of reduced traceability, and
leakage outside the proof transcript.
Although a future use of ShadowPath by the general public
may lead to several potential consequences, we argue that
the contributions of ShadowPath outweigh the identified
14


risks. We adhered to the principles of Respect for Persons,
Justice, Beneficence, and Respect for Law and Public Interest.
Furthermore, we publish the artifacts of this study to allow
independent verification by our research community and
potential future use in live services. After considering the
ethical principles outlined by the Menlo Report, we conclude
that conducting and publishing this study is ethically justified.
References
[1] M. R. Ala Muid, T. Chung, and T. Hoang, “AccuRevoke: Enhancing
Certificate Revocation with Distributed Cryptographic Accumulators,”
in IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP), 2025. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/SP61157.2025.00129
[2] L. Balduf, M. Korczy´nski, O. Ascigil, N. V. Keizer, G. Pavlou,
B. Scheuermann, and M. Kr´ol, “The Cloud Strikes Back: Investigating the
Decentralization of IPFS,” in Internet Measurement Conference (IMC),
2023. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3618257.3624797
[3] M. Bell´es-Mu˜noz, J. Baylina, V. Daza, and J. L. Mu˜noz-Tapia, “New
Privacy Practices for Blockchain Software,” IEEE Software (IEEE Softw.),
2021. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/MS.2021.3086718
[4] D. G. Berbecaru and A. Lioy, “An Evaluation of X.509 Certificate
Revocation and Related Privacy Issues in the Web PKI Ecosystem,”
IEEE Access, 2023. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCE
SS.2023.3299357
[5] J. Bl¨omer, J. Bobolz, D. Diemert, and F. Eidens, “Updatable Anonymous
Credentials and Applications to Incentive Systems,” in ACM SIGSAC
Conference on Computer and Communications Security (CCS), 2019.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3319535.3354223
[6] B. H. Bloom, “Space/Time Trade-offs in Hash Coding with Allowable
Errors,” Communications of the ACM (CACM), 1970. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1145/362686.362692
[7] B. Brecht, D. Therriault, A. Weimerskirch, W. Whyte, V. Kumar,
T. Hehn, and R. Goudy, “A Security Credential Management
System for V2X Communications,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent
Transportation Systems (T-ITS), 2018. [Online]. Available: https:
//doi.org/10.1109/TITS.2018.2797529
[8] C. Brunner, U. Gallersd¨orfer, F. Knirsch, D. Engel, and F. Matthes,
“DID and VC: Untangling Decentralized Identifiers and Verifiable
Credentials for the Web of Trust,” in International Conference on
Blockchain Technology and Applications (ICBTA), 2021. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3446983.3446992
[9] J. Camenisch and A. Lysyanskaya, “Dynamic Accumulators and
Application to Efficient Revocation of Anonymous Credentials,” in
Annual International Cryptology Conference (CRYPTO), 2002. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/3-540-45708-9 5
[10] D. Catalano and D. Fiore, “Vector Commitments and their Applications,”
in International Workshop on Public Key Cryptography (PKC), 2013.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-36362-7 5
[11] H. Cheng, X. Li, H. Zhao, T. Zhou, B. Yu, and N. Sheng, “S-Cred:
An accountable anonymous credential scheme with decentralized
verification and flexible revocation,” Journal of Information Security
and Applications (JISA), 2024. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1
016/j.jisa.2024.103735
[12] C.-K. Chu, J. K. Liu, X. Huang, and J. Zhou, “Verifier-Local Revocation
Group Signatures with Time-Bound Keys,” in ACM Asia Conference on
Computer and Communications Security (ASIA CCS), 2012. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/2414456.2414470
[13] L.
Chuat,
A.
Abdou,
R.
Sasse,
C.
Sprenger,
D.
Basin,
and
A. Perrig, “SoK: Delegation and Revocation, the Missing Links
in the Web’s Chain of Trust,” in IEEE European Symposium
on Security and Privacy (EuroS&P), 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1109/EuroSP48549.2020.00046
[14] T. Chung, J. Lok, B. Chandrasekaran, D. Choffnes, D. Levin, B. M.
Maggs, A. Mislove, J. Rula, N. Sullivan, and C. Wilson, “Is the Web
Ready for OCSP Must-Staple?” in Internet Measurement Conference
(IMC), 2018. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3278532.3278
543
[15] R. Dahlberg, T. Pulls, and R. Peeters, “Efficient Sparse Merkle Trees,”
in Nordic Conference on Secure IT Systems (NordSec), 2016. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-47560-8 13
[16] E. Daniel, G. Michel, and F. Tschorsch, “Improving Kademlia
Lookup
Privacy
through
Query
Obfuscation,”
in
ACM/SIGAPP
Symposium on Applied Computing (SAC), 2025. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1145/3672608.3707703
[17] D. K. Dittrich and E. Kenneally, “The Menlo Report: Ethical Principles
Guiding Information and Communication Technology Research,” U.S.
Department of Homeland Security, Science and Technology Directorate,
Cyber Security Division, Technical Report DHS–CSD–CP–12–0001,
2012. [Online]. Available: https://www.dhs.gov/sites/default/files/publica
tions/CSD-MenloPrinciplesCORE-20120803 1.pdf
[18] A. Dmitrienko, D. Noack, and M. Yung, “Secure Wallet-Assisted Offline
Bitcoin Payments with Double-Spender Revocation,” in ACM Asia
Conference on Computer and Communications Security (ASIA CCS),
2017. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3052973.3052980
[19] K. Edalatnejad, S. Faust, J. Hofmann, P.-F. Lehwalder, and T. Schneider,
“Do You Need a Receipt? Anonymous Credential Revocation at
Continental Scale via Private Record Certification,” in USENIX Security
Symposium (USENIX Security), 2026. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.usenix.org/conference/usenixsecurity26/presentation/edalatnejad
[20] European Digital Identity Cooperation Group, “European Digital
Identity Wallet Architecture and Reference Framework,” European
Commission, Technical Specification Version 3.0.0, 2026. [Online].
Available: https://github.com/eu-digital-identity-wallet/eudi-doc-archite
cture-and-reference-framework/releases/tag/v3.0.0
[21] A. Fraser and S. Schneider, “A Formal Security Analysis of Hyperledger
AnonCreds,” in IEEE European Symposium on Security and Privacy
(EuroS&P), 2025. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/EuroSP63
326.2025.00052
[22] A. Gabizon, Z. J. Williamson, and O. Ciobotaru, “PLONK: Permutations
over Lagrange-bases for Oecumenical Noninteractive arguments of
Knowledge,” Cryptology ePrint Archive, 2019. [Online]. Available:
https://eprint.iacr.org/2019/953
[23] S. Goldwasser, S. Micali, and C. Rackoff, The Knowledge Complexity of
Interactive Proof-systems.
Association for Computing Machinery, 2019.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3335741.3335750
[24] S. Gorbunov, L. Reyzin, H. Wee, and Z. Zhang, “Pointproofs:
Aggregating Proofs for Multiple Vector Commitments,” in ACM SIGSAC
Conference on Computer and Communications Security (CCS), 2020.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3372297.3417244
[25] Government Technology Agency of Bhutan, “Introducing Bhutan’s
National Digital Identity (NDI): A Secure and Trusted Digital
Future,” 2025, Accessed: 2026-08-12. [Online]. Available: https:
//tech.gov.bt/9707-2/
[26] L. Grassi, D. Khovratovich, C. Rechberger, A. Roy, and M. Schofnegger,
“Poseidon: A New Hash Function for Zero-Knowledge Proof Systems,”
in USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security), 2021. [Online].
Available: https://www.usenix.org/conference/usenixsecurity21/presentat
ion/grassi
[27] L. Grassi, D. Khovratovich, and M. Schofnegger, “Poseidon2: A Faster
Version of the Poseidon Hash Function,” in International Conference
on Cryptology in Africa (AFRICACRYPT), 2023. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-37679-5 8
[28] J. Groth, “On the Size of Pairing-based Non-interactive Arguments,”
in Advances in Cryptology (EUROCRYPT), 2016. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-662-49896-5 11
[29] J. J. Haas, Y.-C. Hu, and K. P. Laberteaux, “Design and Analysis
of a Lightweight Certificate Revocation Mechanism for VANET,” in
International Workshop on Vehicular Inter-networking (VANET), 2009.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/1614269.1614285
[30] M. H¨olzl, M. Roland, O. Mir, and R. Mayrhofer, “Bridging the Gap in
Privacy-preserving Revocation: Practical and Scalable Revocation of
Mobile eIDs,” in ACM Symposium on Applied Computing (SAC), 2018.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3167132.3167303
[31] Iden3, “Iden3 Protocol Specifications (Version 0),” Iden3 Documentation,
2024, Accessed: 2026-08-12. [Online]. Available: https://docs.iden3.io/pr
otocol/spec/
[32] S. Jaques, H. Montgomery, and M. Lodder, “ALLOSAUR: Accumulator
with Low-Latency Oblivious Sublinear Anonymous credential Updates
with Revocations,” in ACM Asia Conference on Computer and
Communications Security (ASIA CCS), 2024. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1145/3634737.3637641
[33] S. A. Kakvi, K. M. Martin, C. Putman, and E. A. Quaglia, “SoK:
Anonymous Credentials,” in Security Standardisation Research (SSR),
2023. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-30731-7 6
15


[34] A.
Kate,
G.
M.
Zaverucha,
and
I.
Goldberg,
“Constant-size
Commitments to Polynomials and their Applications,” in International
Conference on the Theory and Application of Cryptology and
Information Security (ASIACRYPT), 2010. [Online]. Available: https:
//doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-17373-8 11
[35] D. Kogan and H. Corrigan-Gibbs, “Private Blocklist Lookups with
Checklist,” in USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security), 2021.
[Online]. Available: https://www.usenix.org/conference/usenixsecurity21
/presentation/kogan
[36] D. Koisser, P. Jauernig, G. Tsudik, and A.-R. Sadeghi, “V’CER:
Efficient Certificate Validation in Constrained Networks,” in USENIX
Security Symposium (USENIX Security), 2022. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.usenix.org/conference/usenixsecurity22/presentation/koisser
[37] J. Kong, J. Damon, H. Leibowitz, E. Syta, and A. Herzberg,
“CTng: Secure Certificate and Revocation Transparency,” in Network
and Distributed System Security Symposium (NDSS), 2026. [Online].
Available: https://www.ndss-symposium.org/ndss-paper/ctng-secure-certi
ficate-and-revocation-transparency/
[38] E. Krul, H. Paik, S. Ruj, and S. S. Kanhere, “SoK: Trusting Self-
Sovereign Identity,” Privacy Enhancing Technologies Symposium (PETS),
2024. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.56553/popets-2024-0079
[39] J.
Kuszmaul,
“Verkle
trees,” MIT
PRIMES Computer Science
Conference, 2019, accessed: 2026-05-02. [Online]. Available: https://ma
th.mit.edu/research/highschool/primes/materials/2018/Kuszmaul.pdf
[40] H. Kwon, D. Kim, H. Kim, C. Hahn, and J. Hur, “Certificate Revocation
in the TLS Ecosystem: A Survey,” ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR),
2026. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3785653
[41] J. Lapon, M. Kohlweiss, B. De Decker, and V. Naessens, “Analysis
of Revocation Strategies for Anonymous Idemix Credentials,” in
Communications and Multimedia Security (CMS), 2011. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-24712-5 1
[42] J. Larisch, D. Choffnes, D. Levin, B. M. Maggs, A. Mislove, and
C. Wilson, “CRLite: A Scalable System for Pushing All TLS Revocations
to All Browsers,” in IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP),
2017. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/SP.2017.17
[43] J. Li, N. Li, and R. Xue, “Universal Accumulators with Efficient
Nonmembership Proofs,” in International Conference on Applied
Cryptography and Network Security (ACNS), 2007. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-72738-5 17
[44] R. Li, D. Galindo, and Q. Wang, “Auditable credential anonymity
revocation based on privacy-preserving smart contracts,” in International
Workshop on Cryptocurrencies and Blockchain Technology (CBT), 2019.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-31500-9 23
[45] X. Li, B. Liu, X. Bai, M. Zhang, Q. Zhang, Z. Li, H. Duan,
and Q. Li, “Ghost Domain Reloaded: Vulnerable Links in Domain
Name Delegation and Revocation,” in Network and Distributed
System
Security
Symposium
(NDSS),
2023.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.ndss-symposium.org/ndss-paper/ghost-domain-reloaded-v
ulnerable-links-in-domain-name-delegation-and-revocation/
[46] Y. Liu, W. Tome, L. Zhang, D. Choffnes, D. Levin, B. Maggs,
A.
Mislove,
A.
Schulman,
and
C.
Wilson,
“An
End-to-End
Measurement of Certificate Revocation in the Web’s PKI,” in
Internet Measurement Conference (IMC), 2015. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1145/2815675.2815685
[47] W.
Lueks,
G.
Alp´ar,
J.-H.
Hoepman,
and
P.
Vullers,
“Fast
Revocation of Attribute-based Credentials for Both Users and Verifiers,”
Computers & Security (Comput. Secur.), 2017. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2016.11.018
[48] P. Manimaran, M. Raikwar, T. Garrett, A. F. da Conceic¸˜ao, L. Jehl,
and R. Vitenberg, “zkRevoke: Configurable Untraceability for Verifiable
Credentials using ZKPs,” Privacy Enhancing Technologies Symposium
(PETS), 2026. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.56553/popets-202
6-0086
[49] D. Maram, H. Malvai, F. Zhang, N. Jean-Louis, A. Frolov, T. Kell,
T. Lobban, C. Moy, A. Juels, and A. Miller, “CanDID: Can-Do
Decentralized Identity with Legacy Compatibility, Sybil-Resistance, and
Accountability,” in IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP),
2021. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/SP40001.2021.00038
[50] C. Mazzocca, A. Acar, S. Uluagac, and R. Montanari, “EVOKE: Efficient
Revocation of Verifiable Credentials in IoT Networks,” in USENIX
Security Symposium (USENIX Security), 2024. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.usenix.org/conference/usenixsecurity24/presentation/mazzocca
[51] C. Mazzocca, A. Acar, S. Uluagac, R. Montanari, P. Bellavista, and
M. Conti, “A Survey on Decentralized Identifiers and Verifiable
Credentials,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials (IEEE COMST),
2025. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/COMST.2025.3543197
[52] S. Naskar, C. Brunetta, G. Hancke, T. Zhang, and M. Gidlund,
“A Scheme for Distributed Vehicle Authentication and Revocation
in Decentralized VANETs,” IEEE Access, 2024. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2024.3400530
[53] M. Orr`u, L. Tulloch, V. Snyder-Graf, and I. Goldberg, “sigma-rs: A
Modular Approach for Keyed-Verification Anonymous Credentials,”
in USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security), 2026. [Online].
Available: https://www.usenix.org/conference/usenixsecurity26/presentat
ion/orru
[54] A. Ozdemir, R. Wahby, B. Whitehat, and D. Boneh, “Scaling Verifiable
Computation Using Efficient Set Accumulators,” in USENIX Security
Symposium (USENIX Security), 2020. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.usenix.org/conference/usenixsecurity20/presentation/ozdemir
[55] Primate Labs, “Geekbench 6 cpu results,” https://browser.geekbench.co
m/v6/cpu, Primate Labs Inc., Tech. Rep., 2026, accessed: 2026-08-19.
[56] J. Qi and T. Gao, “A Privacy-Preserving Authentication and Pseudonym
Revocation Scheme for VANETs,” IEEE Access, 2020. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2020.3027718
[57] D. Rathee, G. V. Policharla, T. Xie, R. Cottone, and D. Song,
“ZEBRA: SNARK-based Anonymous Credentials for Practical, Private
and Accountable On-chain Access Control,” Cryptology ePrint Archive,
2022. [Online]. Available: https://eprint.iacr.org/2022/1286
[58] L. Rometsch, P.-F. Lehwalder, A.-T. Hoang, D. Kaaser, and S. Schulte,
“UPPR: Universal Privacy-Preserving Revocation,” in IEEE International
Conference on Blockchain (Blockchain), 2025. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1109/Blockchain67634.2025.00030
[59] M. Rosenberg, J. White, C. Garman, and I. Miers, “zk-creds:
Flexible Anonymous Credentials from zkSNARKs and Existing Identity
Infrastructure,” in IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP), 2023.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/SP46215.2023.10179430
[60] H. Saidi, N. Labraoui, A. A. A. Ari, L. A. Maglaras, and J. H. M. Emati,
“DSMAC: Privacy-Aware Decentralized Self-Management of Data Access
Control Based on Blockchain for Health Data,” IEEE Access, 2022.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2022.3207803
[61] S. Santesson, M. Myers, R. Ankney, A. Malpani, S. Galperin, and D. C.
Adams, “X.509 Internet Public Key Infrastructure Online Certificate
Status Protocol - OCSP,” RFC 6960, accessed: 2026-05-02. [Online].
Available: https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6960
[62] J. M. Schanck, “Clubcards for the WebPKI: Smaller Certificate
Revocation Tests in Theory and Practice,” in IEEE Symposium
on Security and Privacy (SP), 2025. [Online]. Available: https:
//doi.org/10.1109/SP61157.2025.00128
[63] G. Scopelliti, C. Baumann, F. Alder, E. Truyen, and J. T. M¨uhlberg,
“Efficient and Timely Revocation of V2X Credentials,” in Network
and Distributed System Security Symposium (NDSS), 2024. [Online].
Available: https://www.ndss-symposium.org/ndss-paper/efficient-and-tim
ely-revocation-of-v2x-credentials/
[64] J. Sedlmeir, R. Smethurst, A. Rieger, and G. Fridgen, “Digital identities
and verifiable credentials,” Business & Information Systems Engineering
(BISE), 2021. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/s12599-021-0
0722-y
[65] S. Setty, J. Thaler, and R. Wahby, “Unlocking the Lookup Singularity
with Lasso,” in Advances in Cryptology (EUROCRYPT), 2024. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-58751-1 7
[66] N. Sitouah, F. Bruschi, F. L. Pallotta, R. Mencucci, and D. Sciuto,
“An Untraceable Credential Revocation Approach Based on a Novel
Merkle Tree Accumulator,” in IEEE International Conference on
Blockchain and Cryptocurrency (ICBC), 2024. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1109/ICBC59979.2024.10634387
[67] T. Smith, L. Dickinson, and K. Seamons, “Let’s Revoke: Scalable Global
Certificate Revocation,” in Network and Distributed System Security
Symposium (NDSS), 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.ndss-sympo
sium.org/ndss-paper/lets-revoke-scalable-global-certificate-revocation/
[68] M. Sporny, D. Longley, M. Prorock, M. Alkhraishi, and O. Steele,
“Bitstring Status List v1.0,” World Wide Web Consortium (W3C), W3C
Recommendation, 2025, Accessed: 2026-08-12. [Online]. Available:
https://www.w3.org/TR/vc-bitstring-status-list/
[69] M. Takemiya and B. Vanieiev, “Sora Identity: Secure, Digital Identity
on the Blockchain,” in Computer Software and Applications Conference
(COMPSAC), 2018. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/COMP
SAC.2018.10299
16


[70] S.
Tarkoma,
C.
E.
Rothenberg,
and
E.
Lagerspetz,
“Theory
and Practice of Bloom Filters for Distributed Systems,” IEEE
Communications Surveys & Tutorials (COMST), 2012. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/SURV.2011.031611.00024
[71] D. Trautwein, A. Raman, G. Tyson, I. Castro, W. Scott, M. Schubotz,
B. Gipp, and Y. Psaras, “Design and Evaluation of IPFS: A Storage
Layer for the Decentralized Web,” in ACM Special Interest Group
on Data Communication (SIGCOMM), 2022. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1145/3544216.3544232
[72] Utah Division of Technology Services, “Verifiable Digital Credentials,”
2026, Accessed: 2026-08-12. [Online]. Available: https://dts.utah.gov/w
hat-we-are-doing/our-initiatives/verifiable-digital-credentials/
[73] J. Whitefield, L. Chen, F. Kargl, A. Paverd, S. Schneider, H. Treharne,
and S. Wesemeyer, “Formal Analysis of V2X Revocation Protocols,” in
International Workshop on Security and Trust Management (STM), 2017.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-68063-7 10
[74] A. Zapico, V. Buterin, D. Khovratovich, M. Maller, A. Nitulescu, and
M. Simkin, “Caulk: Lookup Arguments in Sublinear Time,” in ACM
SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security (CCS),
2022. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3548606.3560646
[75] X. Zhou, J. Guan, L. Xing, and Z. Qian, “Perils and Mitigation of
Security Risks of Cooperation in Mobile-as-a-Gateway IoT,” in ACM
SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security (CCS),
2022. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3548606.3560590
Appendix A
Generative AI Considerations
In accordance with the NDSS guidelines regarding generative
AI, the authors disclose the use of AI software tools during the
preparation of this manuscript and its supporting materials.
The foundational research, system design, and underlying
intellectual contributions of ShadowPath were developed
independently during a one-year research project. We used
the listed models to support our research for the following use
cases:
• Claude Opus (v4.8): To assist with programming (inc.
debugging); and artifact packaging and reproducibility
checks.
• Gemini and Gemini Pro (v3.1): For editorial purposes
throughout the paper.
• ChatGPT (v5.6sol): For editorial purposes throughout the
paper and paper organization. In addition, we used these
models to help with LATEX commands (such as tables) and
to debug LATEX errors and warnings.
These tools did not synthesize, fabricate, or select benchmark
outcomes. All reported measurements were produced by execut-
ing the documented evaluation under the stated measurement
protocol. The authors have thoroughly reviewed, edited, and
verified all AI-assisted outputs. The resulting work represents
our novel intellectual contribution, and the authors take full
responsibility for the accuracy and correctness of this paper.
Appendix B
ShadowPath-Verkle Setup and Initialization
Algorithm 3 summarizes the initialization of the evaluated
Verkle prototype. It creates the registry and proof-system
parameters, publishes the initial complete summary through
IPFS, and signs the IPNS binding to its content identifier.
Implementation scope. Groth16 requires circuit-specific pa-
rameters, whereas PLONK supports universal, updatable param-
eters. The evaluated prototype generates the inner Verkle KZG
SRS and both outer proof-system parameter sets locally with
operating-system randomness. Consequently, the party running
setup knows the resulting toxic-waste secrets. Setup and key
derivation are excluded from timed proving and verification.
Deployment must replace these development parameters with
ceremony-derived sound parameters. The deterministic Rust–Go
bridge imports arkworks little-endian encodings and reproduces
the issuer commitment and root bit-for-bit.
Algorithm 3 ShadowPath-Verkle Initialization
Require: Security parameter λ, public issuer domain I, address space
N = kd, Verkle branching factor k, depth d, proof backend
P ∈{Groth16, PLONK}
Ensure: Public parameters pp, issuer state stiss, initial root R0,
authoritative IPNS name Pipns
1: (skI, pkI) ←Credential.KeyGen(1λ)
▷Generate the
issuer-signing key pair
2: (skipns, pkipns) ←IPNS.KeyGen(1λ)
▷Generate the
state-publication key pair
3: grp ←GroupSetup(1λ) ▷Initialize the required pairing groups
4: srsVerkle ←KZG.Setup(1λ, k)
▷Generate evaluation KZG
parameters for arity k
5: T0 ←EmptyVerkleTree(N, k, d, srsVerkle) ▷Initialize the sparse
revocation registry
6: R0 ←RootCommitment(T0)
7: (pkP, vkP) ←P.Setup
 1λ, RVerkle

▷Generate keys for the
complete status relation
8: sum0 ←ExtractSummary(T0)
▷Serialize the materialized
registry state
9: t0 ←Clock.Now(); prev0 ←⊥
10: µ0 ←(0, t0, prev0, sum0) ▷Construct the initial epoch payload
11: χ0 ←Checksum(µ0)
12: blob0 ←Serialize(µ0, χ0)
▷Construct the versioned epoch
object
13: cid0 ←IPFS.Publish(blob0)
▷Publish the content-addressed
object
14: Pipns ←IPNS.Name(pkipns)
15: IPNS.Publish(skipns, Pipns, cid0)
▷Sign and publish the
authoritative CID binding
16: pp ←
 I, N, k, d, grp, srsVerkle, pkI, pkipns, pkP, vkP, Pipns

17: stiss ←
 skI, skipns, T0, 0, R0, cid0

18: return (pp, stiss, R0, Pipns)
Appendix C
ShadowPath-Verkle Construction Details
A. Verkle Relation Derivation
Figure 10 relates the private authentication witness, the in-
circuit KZG checks, and the outer proof used by the evaluated
Verkle relation.
The circuit derives
u = Hcred(ls, I),
V Cid = Hnonce(u, ν),
h = Haddr(V Cid),
(fp, idx) = Split(h),
γ = Hctx(c, e),
β = Hent(Hbind(V Cid, γ), r).
These Poseidon invocations use disjoint leading tags:
credential-base, credential-nonce, address, context, binding,
entropy, and commitment encoding use 101, . . . , 107, respec-
tively. Rust–Go conformance tests fix the derived field elements
and root bit-for-bit. The circuit decomposes the BW6-761 scalar
h into 377 little-endian bits and enforces that the reconstructed
17


1. Epoch state and authentication witness
2. KZG opening and in-circuit check
3. Bound ShadowPath proof
e −1
Re−1
e
Re
e + 1
Re+1
Re = C0
C1
...C4
fp′ or
empty
j0
j1, . . . , j3
j4
Public summary
k = 1024, d = 5
N = 250
nonzero entries
Authentication
witness ρD
(ji, Ci, yi, Wi)4
i=0
termination
selector and
inverse witness
Node
vector
(aj)1023
j=0
Interpolate
f(ωj) = aj
Commitment
C = [f(τ)]1
Hidden
claim
ζi = ωji
y = f(ζi)
Quotient
q(X) =
f(X) −y
X −ζi
Opening
witness
W = [q(τ)]1
In-circuit pairing check
e(C −yG1, G2) = e(W , [τ −ζi]2)
authenticates y = f(ζi) under C
Public
statement x
(Re, e, c, r, β)
Circuit witness w
(ls, ν, V Cid, ρD)
RD(x, w)
=
1
derives (fp, idx) and β;
verifies five openings and non-revocation
BLS12-377
KZG checks
BW6-761
Groth16
/ PLONK
πstatus
native field match
Fig. 10. ShadowPath-Verkle relation: private path, in-circuit KZG check, and bound outer proof.
integer is below the scalar-field modulus. This reducedness
constraint rejects the congruent non-canonical representation
h + q. Bits 0–127 form fp, bits 128–177 form the five 10-
bit digits (j0, . . . , j4), and bits 178–376 are unused by the
evaluated 50-bit profile; wider allocations are analyzed below.
For an affine BLS12-377 commitment C = (XC, YC), the
circuit encodes the corresponding child commitment as
uC = HPoseidon(Denc, XC, YC),
Enc(C) = low252(uC) ∈Fr(BLS12-377).
▷commitment encoding
Before the private termination level, the circuit recomputes
this coordinate hash and constrains yi = Enc(Ci+1). The
truncation is canonical in the BLS12-377 scalar field; path
binding assumes that this encoding is collision-resistant.
Each KZG opening has three conceptual components: C
commits to one node, (ζi, y) claims that the node stores value y
at hidden position ζi, and W authenticates that claim. For
one Verkle node, let (aj)1023
j=0 be its evaluation vector and let
f(ωj) = aj. Registry construction commits to C = [f(τ)]1.
For hidden position ζi = ωji and claimed value y, the holder
constructs
q(X) = f(X) −y
X −ζi
,
W = [q(τ)]1.
▷KZG quotient witness
If y = f(ζi), the numerator is divisible by X −ζi, and W
commits to the resulting quotient. The Verkle circuit binds
(ζi, y) to the private path and verifies the resulting opening
equation.
In Equation (1), the first line is the KZG opening check,
while the second constructs its verifier-side G2 term:
e(C −yG1, G2) = e(W, [τ −ζi]2) ,
[τ −ζi]2 = [τ]2 −ζiG2.
▷KZG opening verification
(1)
Under KZG binding, Equation (1) authenticates y as the value
committed at ζi. The implementation evaluates this identity
over BLS12-377 inside a BW6-761 outer circuit, using the
two-chain equality
Fq(BLS12-377) = Fr(BW6-761).
▷two-chain field match
The field match removes generic foreign-base-field emulation
but not the five pairing-based opening checks.
With uniformly sampled 50-bit candidate indices, the birth-
day estimate for at least one collision among n issuance
attempts before rejection sampling is
pcoll(n) ≈1 −exp

−n(n −1)
251

.
▷50-bit collision estimate
It yields 4.44×10−6 at 105, 4.44×10−4 at 106, and 4.34×10−2
at 107. Rejection sampling gives next-issuance retry probability
n/250, which is 8.88 × 10−10 at n = 106. With k = 1024,
64- and 128-bit indices require depths d = 7 and d = 13. The
circuit must constrain the six unused bits of the 70-bit path and
the two unused bits of the 130-bit path to zero. At n = 108,
their birthday estimates are 2.71 × 10−4 and 1.47 × 10−23.
Relative to d = 5, they add two and eight KZG openings (40%
and 160% more commitments, proofs, points, and subgroup
checks), whereas root-link checks increase from four to six
and twelve. Proof size remains backend-constant per compiled
profile, but circuits, keys, complete circuit-witness size, and
proving work grow. The observed PLONK domain transitions
preclude linear extrapolation of mobile latency. Alternatively,
retaining five levels for at least 64 bits requires k ≥213, thus
requiring eight-times-wider node vectors and SRS.
The lifecycle store reserves indices across issuances and
retries an occupied index with a fresh authenticated credential
nonce. We scope the evaluated 50-bit profile to at most 106
reserved indices per issuer domain as an operating-profile
boundary, not as a correctness limit from collisions: rejection
sampling preserves uniqueness, and the next-issuance retry
probability is still 8.88 × 10−10 at that boundary. We make
no performance or anonymity-set claim beyond it. Larger
18


deployments can use a wider profile, a committed collision
bucket, authenticated re-salting, or multiple-choice hashing;
these extensions are not implemented.
B. Sparse Summary and Address Mapping
To support the holder-side non-revocation proof described in
Section VI, the issuer distributes a compressed representation of
the revocation state. Figure 11 illustrates this sparse encoding.
Sparse Verkle registry
Re
C1
∅
C3
∅
va
vb
∅
level 0
level 1
leaves
Published complete summary
[ ], Re, {1:Enc(C1), 3:Enc(C3)}
[1], C1, {2:va}
[3], C3, {0:vb}
[1, 2]:va
[3, 0]:vb
Legend
Registry symbols
Summary notation
Re
epoch root
Ci
internal commitment
vi
revoked-leaf value
∅
absent/zero child
[i, . . .]
tree path
{j:x}
stored child entry
Enc(C)
child-commitment encoding
Stored leaf = revoked
Omitted child = non-revoked
Fig. 11. Sparse encoding of the complete Verkle summary. Stored leaves are
revoked; omitted children are non-revoked.
The complete summary used for bootstrap or recovery
contains materialized nodes and revoked leaves. Omitting
empty subtrees reduces its size to O(Nrev) for fixed depth d;
this compression does not make state retrieval anonymous.
Figure 12 shows how the circuit decomposes the canonical
Poseidon output into a 128-bit fingerprint fp and a 50-bit
registry index idx. Figure 13 then connects this index to the
registry structure: each 10-bit digit ji of idx selects one of the
k = 1024 children at level i, so the five digits define exactly
one root-to-leaf route.
canonical h ∈Fr(BW6-761)
fp
idx
unused by evaluated profile
bits 0–127
bits
128–177
bits 178–376
path digits:
j0
128–137
j1
138–147
j2
148–157
j3
158–167
j4
168–177
little-endian decomposition; j0 selects the root child
Fig. 12. Poseidon allocation: 128-bit fingerprint, five 10-bit path digits, and
unused high bits.
C. Point Validation and Backend Configuration
The commitments and quotient witnesses form the authentica-
tion witness ρD and therefore the circuit witness w. Before each
pairing check, the Verkle circuit enforces BLS12-377 group
membership for every commitment and quotient point. Inte-
gration tests reject both off-curve and on-curve non-subgroup
idx 7→(j0, j1, j2, j3, j4)
ji ∈{0, . . . , 1023}
level 0: Re
j0
y0 = f0(ωj0)
Enc(C1) or 0
level 1: C1
j1
y1 = f1(ωj1)
Enc(C2) or 0
...
...
level 4: C4
j4
y4 = f4(ωj4)
fp′ or 0
authenticated 0 before the leaf
⇒early non-revocation
terminal fp′̸ = fp
⇒non-revocation
Fig. 13. Verkle path authentication for the evaluated k = 1024, d = 5 profile.
Each digit selects one child, and the circuit verifies one KZG opening per
level. An authenticated zero child establishes early non-revocation; subsequent
levels use valid dummy openings. Otherwise, a terminal fingerprint mismatch
establishes non-revocation.
opening witnesses. SRS import separately checks canonical
coordinates, curve and prime-order subgroup membership, the
τ-power structure, and the cross-language conformance com-
mitment. These checks enforce the point-validity assumptions
used by the standalone status argument in Section VI.
The authenticated relation uses the BLS12-377→BW6-761
curve chain with either Groth16 or PLONK.
The EdDSA composition proof of concept pins the issuer
public key and verifies an issuer signature with gnark v0.14 over
twistededwards.BW6_761 using MiMC_BW6_761. The
signer encodes V Cid as a canonical fixed-width big-endian
scalar. The circuit verifies the signature and the complete
Verkle relation over the same private V Cid. Its witness
contains the issuer signature and status witness w, including
authentication witness ρD. Tests reject identifiers authenticated
by one check, mismatched issuer keys, and tampered signatures.
The construction enforces hidden-identifier equality but is not
a production credential-wallet integration.
Appendix D
Supplemental Mobile Results
Table VI reports the complete physical-device matrix under-
lying the primary mobile-device results in Section VIII-D.
19


TABLE VI
ShadowPath-Verkle results on mobile devices.
Device
Order
Backend
Proving median [range] (s)
Verification (ms)
Proof (B)
OS memory (MB)
Max OS thermal label
SM-A546B (Galaxy A54 5G)
P→G
PLONK
125.05 [124.37–128.31]
39.88
1352
3627
light
P→G
Groth16
10.46 [9.88–10.57]
29.48
484
3624
none
G→P
Groth16
10.41 [9.88–10.45]
27.60
484
3417
none
G→P
PLONK
124.00 [117.76–174.74]
47.38
1352
3675
none
SM-S931B (Galaxy S25)
P→G
PLONK
49.03 [43.73–55.89]
14.57
1352
3664
moderate
P→G
Groth16
2.95 [2.92–3.36]
25.99
484
3519
moderate
G→P
Groth16
2.90 [2.88–3.06]
17.87
484
3009
moderate
G→P
PLONK
58.04 [46.27–63.98]
18.63
1352
3673
severe
SM-S938B (Galaxy S25 Ultra)
P→G
PLONK
44.45 [39.80–48.17]
20.61
1352
4999
light
P→G
Groth16
3.13 [3.02–3.15]
19.66
484
4890
light
G→P
Groth16
3.07 [3.04–3.16]
23.99
484
4345
none
G→P
PLONK
43.94 [38.23–49.42]
18.97
1352
5040
light
iPhone13,2 (iPhone 12)
P→G
PLONK
75.73 [72.42–85.80]
20.62
1352
2196
serious
P→G
Groth16
5.37 [5.26–7.24]
9.80
484
486
serious
G→P
Groth16
5.33 [5.28–5.83]
8.85
484
490
fair
G→P
PLONK
83.67 [73.90–95.56]
28.28
1352
2187
serious
iPhone14,2 (iPhone 13 Pro)
P→G
PLONK
56.04 [55.06–67.84]
15.78
1352
3447
serious
P→G
Groth16
4.58 [4.57–5.95]
8.53
484
469
serious
G→P
Groth16
4.61 [4.58–5.66]
8.61
484
491
nominal
G→P
PLONK
65.10 [55.40–73.60]
22.32
1352
3589
serious
iPhone15,3 (iPhone 14 Pro Max)
P→G
PLONK
51.30 [49.00–51.76]
15.21
1352
3567
fair
P→G
Groth16
4.06 [4.05–4.13]
7.21
484
474
nominal
G→P
Groth16
4.07 [4.02–4.09]
6.98
484
487
nominal
G→P
PLONK
51.28 [49.01–54.35]
15.28
1352
3549
fair
iPhone15,5 (iPhone 15 Plus)
P→G
PLONK
52.54 [52.49–56.98]
12.55
1352
3516
nominal
P→G
Groth16
4.16 [4.10–5.10]
7.34
484
481
nominal
G→P
Groth16
4.13 [4.10–4.41]
7.46
484
489
nominal
G→P
PLONK
53.17 [52.12–54.04]
12.39
1352
3473
fair
iPhone16,2 (iPhone 15 Pro Max)
P→G
PLONK
49.68 [48.88–68.17]
11.09
1352
3588
serious
P→G
Groth16
4.10 [4.02–4.71]
7.19
484
467
serious
G→P
Groth16
4.28 [4.20–4.47]
7.72
484
472
nominal
G→P
PLONK
51.26 [50.38–60.71]
12.31
1352
3597
serious
iPhone18,1 (iPhone 17 Pro)
P→G
PLONK
38.85 [38.43–42.19]
8.15
1352
3590
nominal
P→G
Groth16
3.10 [3.05–3.19]
5.35
484
462
nominal
G→P
Groth16
3.12 [3.06–3.23]
5.27
484
486
nominal
G→P
PLONK
39.51 [38.57–39.68]
8.01
1352
3604
nominal
iPhone18,3 (iPhone 17)
P→G
PLONK
44.90 [40.89–46.75]
9.35
1352
3599
fair
P→G
Groth16
3.13 [3.11–3.23]
5.50
484
502
fair
G→P
Groth16
3.17 [3.11–3.40]
5.33
484
521
nominal
G→P
PLONK
41.63 [40.29–42.97]
8.70
1352
3612
fair
Proof-generation time is reported as the median [observed range] over five trials for each backend order. P→G denotes PLONK followed by Groth16;
G→P denotes Groth16 followed by PLONK. Memory denotes iOS application footprint or Android process RSS and is comparable within each platform,
not across platforms; thermal labels are operating-system telemetry.
Provenance. Each row contains five retained trials. The importer rejects legacy circuits, simulated devices, incomplete counterbalancing, unexpected proof
sizes, duplicate exports, cancellations, and background suspensions. Source identifiers and SHA-256 digests appear in result_e11_mobile.csv;
Memory and thermal values are operating-system telemetry.
20


TABLE VII
Expanded notation and data representations for the ShadowPath algorithms.
Object / symbol
Representation / type
Role and use
Common protocol objects
e
Non-negative integer
Epoch identifier selected by the verifier and bound into the status proof.
Re
Backend-specific authenticated root
Public root for epoch e; binds the registry state used by the status relation.
c
Challenge / field element
Fresh verifier challenge used for session binding and replay protection.
r
Random nonzero field element
Fresh holder randomizer sampled for each presentation.
β
Field element
Public session-binding value derived from V Cid, c, e, and r.
I
Issuer-domain identifier
Public issuer-domain value used when deriving the hidden credential identifier.
ls
Secret field element
Holder link secret used to derive V Cid.
ν
Issuer-authenticated nonce
Credential nonce used with ls and I to derive V Cid.
V Cid
Private field element
Hidden credential identifier shared by credential authentication and status
verification.
fp
128-bit integer
Credential fingerprint derived from Haddr(V Cid).
idx
50-bit integer
Private registry index derived from Haddr(V Cid).
D
Registry backend, {SMT, Verkle}
Selects the authenticated-registry backend.
ρD
Backend-specific authentication witness
Private authentication data used to establish non-revocation under Re.
x
Tuple (Re, e, c, r, β)
Public statement supplied to the zero-knowledge proof system.
w
Tuple (ls, ν, V Cid, ρD)
Complete private circuit witness.
πstatus
Zero-knowledge proof
Verifier-facing proof of authenticated non-revocation and session binding.
⊥
Failure value
Returned when an algorithm rejects malformed, stale, inconsistent, or otherwise
invalid input.
Algorithm 1: State retrieval and local witness reconstruction
Pipns
IPNS name / public identifier
Pinned issuer-controlled name used to resolve the authenticated current epoch
object.
stH
Holder freshness state
Locally retained state used to detect rollback and enforce freshness policy.
F
Freshness-policy predicate
Evaluates epoch number, timestamp, predecessor metadata, and root against
stH.
cide
IPFS content identifier
Content-addressed identifier of the epoch object resolved through IPNS.
obje
Byte string
Serialized epoch object fetched from IPFS.
payloade
Epoch payload tuple
Deserialized epoch payload extracted from obje.
checksume
Digest / checksum
Integrity value checked before accepting the epoch payload.
te
Timestamp
Publication time associated with epoch e.
preve
Epoch-predecessor reference
Reference to the preceding epoch used for freshness and rollback checks.
sume
Complete registry summary
Credential-independent serialized state used for bootstrap or recovery.
statee
Parsed registry state
Local registry representation reconstructed from sume.
ρVerkle
Verkle authentication witness
Credential-specific witness reconstructed locally from statee and idx.
Algorithm 2: Non-revocation proof generation
P
Proof backend, {Groth16, PLONK}
Selects the outer proof system; the matched SMT evaluation uses Groth16.
pkP
Proving key
Circuit-specific proving material for proof backend P.
(fp, idx)
Tuple (128-bit, 50-bit)
Private lookup tuple derived inside the proof from V Cid.
Algorithm 3: Verkle setup and initialization
λ
Security parameter
Controls cryptographic parameter generation.
N
Positive integer, N = kd
Registry address-space size. The evaluated profile uses N = 250.
k
Positive integer
Verkle branching factor; k = 1024 in the evaluated profile.
d
Positive integer
Verkle depth; d = 5 in the evaluated profile.
(skI, pkI)
Credential-signing key pair
Issuer key pair used by the composition proof of concept.
(skipns, pkipns)
IPNS signing key pair
Authenticates the mutable binding from the issuer IPNS name to the current
CID.
grp
Pairing-group parameters
Public group parameters required by the BLS12-377/BW6-761 construction.
srsVerkle
KZG structured reference string
Public setup parameters used for Verkle node commitments and openings.
T0
Sparse Verkle tree
Initial empty authenticated revocation registry.
R0
Verkle root commitment
Root commitment of the initial empty registry.
(pkP , vkP )
Proof-system key pair
Proving and verification keys for the complete status relation.
sum0
Complete registry summary
Serialized initial sparse registry state.
µ0
Epoch payload tuple
Initial epoch metadata and summary before serialization.
χ0
Checksum / digest
Integrity value associated with µ0.
blob0
Byte string
Serialized initial epoch object published through IPFS.
cid0
IPFS content identifier
Content identifier returned for blob0.
pp
Public-parameter tuple
Public system parameters distributed to protocol participants.
stiss
Issuer-state tuple
Private issuer state containing signing material, registry state, and current epoch
metadata.
21


Appendix E
Artifact Appendix
This appendix describes how reviewers obtain, configure,
and evaluate the artifact. The retained relation suite contains
five accepting and thirteen rejecting cases.
A. Description & Requirements
The anonymous artifact 1 contains the Rust issuer and
registry, the self-contained Go/gnark ShadowPath-Verkle
prover and verifier, Docker deployment files, the controlled
SMT relation, the evaluation harness, and raw provenance.
The following requirements define the supported evaluation
environment.
1) How to access: The anonymous repository URL is
supplied through the submission system. The artifact root
contains README.md, LICENSE, MANIFEST.sha256, and
the single entry point artifact.sh. If the Available badge
is awarded, the AEC-approved version will be deposited in
DOI-backed permanent storage and that DOI will replace this
review-access statement in the camera-ready appendix.
2) Hardware dependencies: Desktop reproduction requires
an x86-64 or ARM64 Linux or macOS host. We recommend
16 GB of RAM and 5 GB of free disk space. Physical-device
reruns require one of the named iOS or Android devices and
are outside the requested desktop Reproduced scope.
3) Software dependencies: The artifact uses Bash, Git,
shasum or sha256sum, Go 1.25 or newer, Rust 1.89 or
newer, and Python 3.10 or newer. Network access is required
for the initial dependency build. Docker with Compose is
needed for IPFS/IPNS and controlled-network experiments.
Platform-specific mobile builds additionally require Xcode 16
and XcodeGen or the Android SDK and NDK.
4) Benchmarks: The self-contained proof workflow takes
approximately 2–4 hours, and the full k = 1024, d = 5
registry-growth workload takes approximately 2–3 hours on
the reference desktop. Together they remain below one day.
Mobile, external-artifact, service, and Linux-netem workflows
are retained or optional because they require named devices,
network downloads, containers, or specialized network control.
B. Artifact Installation & Configuration
From a fresh checkout, reviewers run:
$ ./artifact.sh doctor
$ ./artifact.sh verify
$ ./artifact.sh smoke
These commands check the toolchain and release manifest,
build and test both implementations, exercise the composed
credential/status relation, and run a one-sample SMT control.
The smoke test is functional rather than timed, provides paper
evidence, and ends with SMOKE PASS.
1ShadowPath artifact: https://anonymous.4open.science/r/shadowpath-5097,
Accessed: 2026-08-16
C. Major Claims
(C1) The Verkle relation accepts five completeness cases and
rejects thirteen selected invalid statements or witnesses
(Section VIII; E1 and E2).
(C2) Experiment E2 supports Section VIII and Table IV by
reproducing proof and verification costs for both proof-
system backends for ShadowPath-Verkle, the address-
space-matched SMT control, authenticated state recon-
struction and updates, and executable credential/status
composition.
(C3) Experiments E3 and E4 support Section VIII and Figures 7,
8, and 9: the full registry-growth workload is reproducible,
and retained or optional evidence covers IPFS/IPNS
synchronization, verifier concurrency, external-system
context, and physical-device results.
D. Evaluation
1) Experiment (E1): Functional Validation: [Time] About
30–60 minutes on a fresh host; warm caches shorten the run.
[Preparation] In an unmodified artifact checkout, run the
doctor and verify subcommands.
[Execution] Run ./artifact.sh smoke.
[Results] The command ends with SMOKE PASS, exercises
both implementations, and supports functional inspection of
C1; its one-sample timing is not paper evidence. The retained
suite has five accepting and thirteen selected rejecting cases.
2) Experiment (E2): Desktop Reproduction: [Time] About
2–4 compute-hours and 10 human-minutes.
[Preparation] Reserve 5 GB and close competing workloads.
[Execution] Run ./artifact.sh reproduce. If ex-
port
or
plot
generation
is
interrupted,
resume
with
./artifact.sh finalize.
[Results] Five completeness cases are accepted, and 13
selected invalid cases are rejected; all 24 authenticated state
configurations reproduce their expected roots. Reference prov-
ing/verification medians are 2109.52/7.553 ms with a 484-byte
proof for Verkle Groth16, 25619.79/9.595 ms with a 1352-byte
proof for Verkle PLONK, and 371.645/3.703 ms with a 388-
byte proof for SMT Groth16. Proof sizes and logical outcomes
must match exactly. Absolute latency is host-dependent and
has no cross-host percentage bound; the expected same-host
ordering is SMT Groth16, Verkle Groth16, then Verkle PLONK
by proving latency. This experiment supports C1 and C2.
3) Experiment (E3): Registry Growth: [Time] About 2–3
compute-hours and 5 human-minutes.
[Preparation] Close competing workloads and reserve 5 GB
of free disk space.
[Execution]
Run
./artifact.sh registry.
The
scaled REGISTRY_COUNTS=100,1000 form is a kick-the-
tires workflow check.
[Results] The full command evaluates 100, 1,000, 10,000,
and 100,000 revoked entries at k = 1024, d = 5. Complete-
summary size grows from approximately 0.118 MB to
93.95 MB in decimal units. The result supports C3 and Figure 7;
timing remains host-dependent.
22


4) Experiment (E4): Retained and Optional Evidence:
[Time] Plot validation takes about 5 minutes; README.md
lists times for optional external, Docker, and device workflows.
[Preparation] Consult README.md for Docker, Linux-
netem, external-artifact, and mobile prerequisites; supplied
mobile exports can be validated unchanged.
[Execution] Run ./artifact.sh plots to regener-
ate retained-CSV plots or ./artifact.sh mobile to
re-import retained device exports into a separate tree;
README.md covers optional Docker and external artifacts.
[Results] These workflows validate retained synchronization,
cross-system, and device evidence supporting C3. They remain
outside the requested desktop Reproduced scope.
Physical-device rerun (optional). The shared Go bridge
is in go-verkle-zk/mobilebench; ios_evaluator
and android_evaluator contain the platform apps and
detailed READMEs. Both apps must report circuit identifier
shadowpath-mode-b-hardened-v3.
[iOS build] On macOS with Go 1.25, Xcode 16, XcodeGen,
and an Apple signing team, run:
$ cd ios_evaluator
$ bash build_xcframework.sh
$ xcodegen generate
$ open ZKPEvaluator.xcodeproj
Select the ZKPEvaluator scheme, configure local signing,
and install a Release build on a physical iOS 16-or-newer
device.
[Android build] With Go 1.25, JDK 17, Android SDK 35,
and NDK 30.0.14904198, run:
$ cd android_evaluator
$ bash build_aar.sh
$ ./gradlew assembleDebug
$ cd app/build/outputs/apk/debug
$ adb install -r app-debug.apk
This build checks functionality; use an Android Studio Release
build without an attached debugger for timed measurements
on a physical device running Android 7 or newer.
[Measurement] Uninstall older builds, install the current
Release build, reboot the phone, connect power, disable Low
Power/Battery Saver, close other apps, and keep the evaluator
in the foreground. Without a bundled seed cache, the first
launch generates and persists public proving parameters before
the timed loops; the platform READMEs describe optional
host-side seeding. In the app, select Bench (5 iters) and
Full benchmark. This runs PLONK–Groth16 and Groth16–
PLONK with five trials per backend/order and a 60-second
cooldown. Export the dated trials.csv, results.json,
telemetry.csv, and log.txt files from Records; pre-
serve them unchanged and confirm both key-set digests and the
circuit identifier. From the repository root, ./artifact.sh
mobile validates retained exports and regenerates normalized
CSV and LATEX outputs. Simulator and emulator results are
functional checks, not paper evidence.
23
