Title: Segment-driven Structural Induction and Semantic Alignment for Heterogeneous Tabular Representation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.01890v1

Published Time: Tue, 02 Jun 2026 02:19:44 GMT

Number of Pages: 20

Markdown Content:
# Segment-driven Structural Induction and Semantic Alignment for Heterogeneous Tabular Representation 

Woojun Jung 1 Susik Yoon 1

# Abstract 

Real-world domains often contain heterogeneous tables whose headers vary while their underly-ing attribute semantics are shared, making it dif-ficult to induce domain-specialized semantics from table-local evidence alone. Existing en-coders model parts of this problem, but often underuse column-level value distributions and apply uniform objectives across attributes with different semantic roles. We propose NAVI, a segment-centric pretraining framework that treats each header–value pair as the unit for aggregat-ing schema-level structural evidence and column-level distributional evidence. We realize this design through Masked Segment Modeling and Entropy-driven Segment Alignment, which jointly enforce structured header–value coupling and semantic alignment across stable and instance-specific attributes. Experiments on heteroge-neous in-domain tables show improved recon-struction, semantic consistency, and downstream utility across evaluation settings overall. The source code of NAVI is available at: https: //github.com/woojoonjung/NAVI/ .

# 1. Introduction 

Tables are among the most prevalent modalities in a modern society, serving as the primary interface for structured in-formation in diverse domains, ranging from e-commerce to media platforms. Real-world tabular data in these domains is rarely confined to a single table; rather, it usually spans a collection of heterogeneous tables that collectively define shared domain knowledge. While these in-domain tables differ in their schema, they are frequently analyzed jointly to support downstream, domain-specific applications. 

> 1

Department of Computer Science & Engineering, Korea Uni-versity, Seoul, South Korea. Correspondence to: Susik Yoon <susik@korea.ac.kr>. 

Proceedings of the 43 rd International Conference on Machine Learning , Seoul, South Korea. PMLR 306, 2026. Copyright 2026 by the author(s). Product domain  

> Movie domain
> 1. Popular Movies
> 2. Filmography, Masterpiece
> 3. Mobile Devices

Figure 1. Semantically similar attributes may appear under differ-ent headers, while identical headers may correspond to different attribute semantics across domains. 

Unlike unstructured text, where semantics are primarily conveyed through token composition and linguistic context, tables organize semantics around attributes that are typically realized through table headers. Within a domain, attribute se-mantics should be understood as domain-specialized seman-tic posteriors inferred from evidence accumulated across heterogeneous tables. The primary challenge in this setting is that these semantics cannot be treated as fixed lexical meanings inferred directly from header names alone. Instead, such semantics emerge from two complementary sources of contextual evidence. First, schema context pro-vides structural evidence through co-occurring headers. For example, headers such as TITLE , DIRECTOR , and GENRE 

collectively indicate a movie-related schema. Second, col-umn context provides distributional evidence through empir-ical value realizations accumulated across rows and tables. In Figure 1, the interpretation of CATEGORY depends on whether its values correspond to movie genres (e.g., Drama) or product types (e.g., Phone). Moreover, attributes can assume heterogeneous semantic roles across tables. Some attributes correspond to stable domain-coherent properties, while others primarily distin-guish individual entities. For example, DIRECTOR acts as a shared domain property in ‘Popular Movies’, but behaves more like an entity-identifying attribute in ‘Filmography’. This suggests that column-level evidence should not con-tribute uniformly when refining attribute semantics. 1

> arXiv:2606.01890v1 [cs.LG] 1 Jun 2026 Segment-driven Structural Induction and Semantic Alignment for Heterogeneous Tabular Representation

Existing tabular learning methods only partially address these challenges. Structure-aware encoders (Herzig et al., 2020; Yin et al., 2020; Iida et al., 2021; Deng et al., 2022) primarily focus on contextual interactions within individual tables, but often assume that header semantics are locally recoverable from table structure alone. More recent ap-proaches (Ye et al., 2024; Yan et al., 2024; Jung & Yoon, 2025) improve robustness to heterogeneous feature types or schema variation, yet still treat headers largely as surface-level schema tokens without explicitly modeling how at-tribute semantics emerge jointly from schema-level and column-level evidence accumulated across tables. Further-more, existing methods apply uniform representation objec-tives across columns, overlooking the heterogeneous seman-tic roles that attributes may assume across tables. Motivated by these limitations, we propose NAVI (E N tropy-driven A lignment with Header– V alue I nduction), a dual-context pretraining framework for heterogeneous tabular representation learning. The core abstraction of NAVI is the 

segment , a symbolic header–value realization that serves as the fundamental unit for aggregating structural and dis-tributional evidence across tables. NAVI instantiates this idea through (i) Masked Segment Modeling , which captures schema-level structural context from co-occurring header– value realizations, and (ii) Entropy-driven Segment Align-ment , which models column-level distributional context through role-aware contrastive alignment. To our knowledge, NAVI is the first segment-centric frame-work to jointly leverage schema-level structural evidence and column-level distributional evidence, enabling attribute semantics to be refined into domain-specialized representa-tions across heterogeneous in-domain tables. Furthermore, NAVI introduces a conceptual framework that explicitly dis-tinguishes latent attribute semantics, domain attributes, and table-specific header realizations, providing a principled basis for interpreting semantic consistency across hetero-geneous schemas. Extensive experiments demonstrate that NAVI consistently improves semantic consistency, robust-ness, and downstream representation quality over existing table representation methods. 

# 2. Related Work 

Existing works have studied tabular learning from diverse perspectives, ranging from tree-based learners (Chen & Guestrin, 2016), pretrained neural architectures for predic-tion (Hollmann et al., 2023), and language model (LM)-based feature engineering (Lim & Yoon, 2025). Recently, the symbolic and lexical information prevalent in many real-world tables has accelerated the adaptation of Transformer-based LMs to tabular data (Fang et al., 2024; Badaro et al., 2023), leveraging contextual semantic priors learned from unstructured text (Vaswani et al., 2017; Devlin et al., 2019). 

2.1. Structure-aware Table Encoders 

Early attempts to represent tables with LMs addressed the structural discrepancy between natural language and tables by adapting Transformer architectures like BERT to navi-gate spatial hierarchies. Initial efforts such as TAPAS and TaBERT (Herzig et al., 2020; Yin et al., 2020) inject table structure into LMs through role embeddings or vertical at-tention, enabling joint contextualization of natural language and tabular inputs. Subsequent works such as TABBIE, TUTA, and TURL (Iida et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2021; Deng et al., 2022) further emphasize intrinsic table struc-ture, modeling row–column dependencies or relational con-straints. However, these methods infer header semantics strictly within individual tables. Consequently, they fail to distinguish latent domain attributes from table-specific header realizations, limiting their ability to refine stable attribute semantics across heterogeneous in-domain tables. 

2.2. Feature-oriented Table Encoders 

A prominent paradigm focuses on modeling tabular seman-tics at a unified feature level. On one hand, TP-BERTa (Yan et al., 2024) addresses data type heterogeneity, employ-ing magnitude tokenization and intra-feature attention to map continuous numerical values alongside textual cate-gorical data into a shared discrete embedding space. Con-versely, CM2 (Ye et al., 2024) prioritizes cross-table scala-bility, mapping headers and cells directly into unified text phrases for permutation-invariant masked table modeling. Despite such improvements, these methods still do not ex-plicitly distinguish domain-level attribute semantics from their table-specific header semantics, limiting their ability to refine domain-specialized semantics across heterogeneous tables. Moreover, they apply uniform representation objec-tives across columns, overlooking the heterogeneous seman-tic roles that attributes may assume across tables. 

2.3. Domain-aware Table Encoders 

Recent work moves toward domain-aware representations, emphasizing transferable attribute semantics across in-domain tables rather than treating headers as table-confined semantic units. Specifically, HAETAE (Jung & Yoon, 2025) introduces header-anchored pretraining, treating schemas as shared global structures within a domain. It models tabular semantics primarily through schema context and separately encodes headers to preserve stable schema priors. While this improves semantic stability, it does not explicitly accumu-late column-level evidence across tables to refine domain-specialized attribute semantics, nor does it account for the heterogeneous semantic roles attributes assume. These limi-tations motivate a framework that jointly models schema and column context while selectively aligning column signals according to their semantic role. 2Segment-driven Structural Induction and Semantic Alignment for Heterogeneous Tabular Representation TITLE TITLE                    

> Tenet
> High -entropy Low -entropy
> TITLE DIRECTOR GENRE
> -Attributes -
> -Realization -
> TITLE DIRECTOR GENRE
> MASK Star Wars
> TITLE Tenet
> TITLE Interstellar
> DIRECTOR Spielberg Sci -fi
> DIRECTOR Nolan MASK
> DIRECTOR MASK GENRE Sci -fi
> Masked Segment Modeling for Schema Context
> TITLE
> GENRE
> GENRE
> GENRE
> Segment Embedding
> ……
> Entropy -driven Segment Alignment for Column Context
> Segment

Figure 2. Overall procedure of NAVI. We jointly optimize NAVI with masked segment modeling and entropy-driven segment alignment. 

# 3. Methodology 

As shown in Figure 2, NAVI models heterogeneous tabu-lar semantics through two complementary segment-centric learning processes. The upper branch captures schema con-text via masked segment modeling over schema-preserving row serialization, enabling structural dependencies among co-occurring header–value realizations to be learned. The lower branch captures column context through entropy-driven segment alignment, where segment embeddings are contrastively aligned according to the empirical distribu-tional characteristics of their associated attributes. Together, these components refine attribute semantics through struc-tural schema evidence and distributional column evidence accumulated across heterogeneous tables. 

3.1. Dual-context Representation Framework 

We distinguish between domain attributes, their contextual realizations, and the latent semantic concepts they represent in heterogeneous tables. Let A denote the set of domain attributes, where each attribute a ∈ A is represented by a canonical textual identifier shared across tables. Headers are viewed as table-specific schema realizations of domain attributes. Our objective is to recover latent domain concepts from contextual evidence accumulated across tables. 

Schema and Column Contexts. We model attributes through two complementary contexts. Schema context 

refers to contextual evidence involving schema elements (i.e., headers). In this work, we operationalize schema con-text through row-wise header–value co-occurrence patterns. For each table t ∈ T , let Ht = {h1, . . . , h K } denote its observed schema. Each header hk ∈ H t is associated with an attribute ak ∈ A . A row r ∈ t represents an entity as: 

r = {(hk, v r,k )}Kk=1 ,

where vr,k denotes the value associated with header hk in row r. By jointly modeling headers and their corresponding value realizations within rows, schema context provides structural evidence for refining attribute semantics. 

Column context captures semantic regularities induced from empirical value distributions accumulated across rows and tables. For a domain attribute ak ∈ A observed in table t,we define the corresponding column context as: 

Ct(ak) = {vr,k | r ∈ t}.

Together, schema and column contexts provide complemen-tary structural and distributional evidence for understanding attribute semantics in heterogeneous tables. 

Segment Formulation. To operationalize schema and col-umn contexts, we define a segment as the fundamental sym-bolic unit corresponding to a header–value pair within a table. Segments serve as the basic units through which structural and distributional evidence are aggregated across rows and tables. Unlike isolated cells, segments preserve the functional dependency between headers and values, en-abling them to be modeled jointly. We denote by x(·) a tokenization function that maps an input text into a sequence of tokens. In particular, x(r) denotes the serialized token sequence constructed from row r.

Definition 3.1 (Segment) . For a domain attribute ak ∈ A 

and its associated header–value realization (hk, v r,k ) in row 

r, we define a segment as: 

sr,k = [ x(hk), :, x(vr,k )] .

Segment sr,k represents the symbolic realization of a do-main attribute ak within a table. 

Attribute and Realization Embeddings. To model seg-ments under schema and column contexts, we encode do-main attributes and their table-specific realizations in a shared embedding space using two separate encoders. A lightweight encoder fθ′ independently maps attributes to context-free embeddings, while a Transformer encoder Fθ

contextualizes header–value realizations within serialized rows. We next define the corresponding attribute and real-ization embeddings. Implementation details of fθ′ and Fθ

are provided in Appendix D.1. 3Segment-driven Structural Induction and Semantic Alignment for Heterogeneous Tabular Representation 

Definition 3.2 (Context-free Attribute Embedding) . For each domain attribute a ∈ A , we define its context-free embedding using a lightweight encoder fθ′ as: 

ea = Pool  fθ′ (x(a)) ,

where Pool( ·) denotes mean pooling and fθ′ is applied in-dependently of any table instance. 

Definition 3.3 (Contextualized Realization Embedding) .

Given a tokenized row x(r) with length L, a Transformer encoder Fθ produces contextualized token embeddings: 

[e0, . . . , e L−1] = Fθ (x(r)) . (1) Let S(h) 

> r,k

and S(v) 

> r,k

denote the token spans corresponding to header hk and value vk, respectively. We define the contextualized header and value representations as: 

e(h) 

> r,k

= Pool( {et | t ∈ S (h) 

> r,k

}),

e(v) 

> r,k

= Pool( {et | t ∈ S (v) 

> r,k

}).

3.2. Masked Segment Modeling Schema-preserving Serialization. Given a row r =

{(hk, v k)}Kk=1 , we construct its token sequence x(r) by concatenating segments into a linearized format: 

x(r) = [ [CLS] , sr, 1, [SEP] , . . . , sr,K , [SEP] ],

where each segment is delimited by a separator token (e.g., 

[SEP] ). By serializing rows as sequences of segments, the encoder can model schema context through interactions among co-occurring header–value realizations. The serial-ization process is exemplified as follows:          

> MOVIE NAME . . .
> harry potter . . .
> . . . . . .
> r1[CLS] MOVIE NAME :harry potter [SEP]...[SEP]
> S(h)
> r1,1
> S(v)
> r1,1

Schema-aware Contextualization. To promote schema-level stability and reduce sensitivity to column permuta-tions, we reinitialize positional embeddings within segment boundaries and augment token embeddings with the cor-responding attribute embedding. Let eword (·) denote the token embedding function and Pj denote learnable posi-tional embeddings. For a token xt belonging to segment 

sr,k associated with attribute ak, we define: 

epos (xt) = Pj , j = 0 , . . . , l k,et = eword (xt) + epos (xt) + eak ,

where lk is the number of tokens in segment sr,k . Here, 

xt denotes the t-th token in x(r), and ak ∈ A is the at-tribute corresponding to header hk, with eak its attribute embedding. The encoder Fθ processes these embeddings to produce token representations as in Eq. (1) . This formula-tion injects attribute priors into all tokens within a segment, enabling consistent schema-aware contextualization. 

Structure-aware Masking. Standard masked language modeling (MLM) has proven effective for natural lan-guage (Devlin et al., 2019), but its direct application to ta-bles is suboptimal because it treats schema and value tokens uniformly. Headers represent attribute realizations, while values instantiate these attributes with instance-specific in-formation. To explicitly model these dependencies, we in-troduce a masked segment modeling (MSM) that explicitly models schema–value dependencies by partitioning each row of segments into three masking regimes: • Header-masked segments: header tokens in selected segments are masked, forming the set Mh. The model must recover header names from associated values. • Value-masked segments: value tokens in selected seg-ments are masked, forming the set Mv . The model must infer values from headers and row context. • Vanilla MLM: a random subset of remaining tokens is masked, forming Mr . This regularizes the model to prevent overfitting header–value co-occurrences. 

Objective. For each masked token m ∈ M with contex-tualized token embedding et, the classifier with parameters 

{W, b } produces a logit vector zm = W e m +b ∈ R|V| . The masked segment modeling (MSM) loss is then given by the standard softmax cross-entropy: 

Lmsm = − 1

|M| 

X

> m∈M

log exp( zm[m]) 

P 

> v∈V

exp( zm[v]) ,

where zm[v] is the logit corresponding to item v of vo-cabulary V at the position of m, and M is the union of 

Mh, Mv , Mr . The MSM objective, coupled with struc-tured masking, compels the encoder to capture the func-tional roles of tokens and header-value dependencies within the tabular schema. 

3.3. Entropy-driven Segment Alignment 

Contrastive learning (Oord et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2020; Lee et al., 2022) is widely used to organize representations according to a target semantic objective. Building on sym-bolic segments, we construct segment embeddings that in-tegrate context-free attribute semantics with contextualized header and value realizations. By aligning these embed-dings in a distribution-aware manner, we enable attribute semantics to adapt to table-specific statistics while preserv-ing semantic consistency across heterogeneous tables. 4Segment-driven Structural Induction and Semantic Alignment for Heterogeneous Tabular Representation 

Definition 3.4 (Segment Embeddings) . For a row r ∈ t and a segment sr,k associated with domain attribute ak ∈ A , we define the corresponding segment embedding as: 

σr,k = g eak ∥ e(h) 

> r,k

∥ e(v)

> r,k

,

where eak is the context-free attribute embedding in Defi-nition 3.2, e(h) 

> r,k

and e(v) 

> r,k

are the contextualized header and value embeddings in Definition 3.3, ∥ denotes concatena-tion, and g(·) is a trainable two-layer feedforward network with GELU activation and layer normalization. 

Entropy-based Attribute Categorization. To capture the heterogeneous roles of attributes within a table, we catego-rize them based on the empirical distribution of their column values. For each table t ∈ T and attribute a ∈ A t observed in t, we compute the normalized entropy of its column: 

Ht(a) = − X

> v∈C t(a)

pt(v | a) log pt(v | a),

where pt(v | a) denotes the empirical frequency of value v

in its column Ct(a). Using fixed quantile thresholds θlow and 

θhigh , we partition At, the set of domain attributes observed in table t, into two disjoint subsets: 

At 

> low

= {a ∈ A t | Ht(a) ≤ θlow },

At 

> high

= {a ∈ A t | Ht(a) ≥ θhigh }.

Low-entropy attributes ( At

> low

) correspond to stable, domain-coherent properties (e.g., genre ), while high-entropy at-tributes ( At

> high

) capture instance-specific variations (e.g., 

title ). This categorization is computed independently for each table and remains fixed during training. 

Batch Construction. Training proceeds over stratified batches of rows sampled from multiple tables within the same domain. At each step, we sample a set of tables 

TB ⊂ T and construct a batch B by drawing approximately 

|B| /|T B| rows from each table. Each row r ∈ B is associated with its source table t( r),and we denote Bt = {r ∈ B | t( r) = t} as the subset of rows originating from table t. During training, segments from each row is aligned according to the attribute partition 

(At

> low

, At

> high

) of its source table. 

Learning Objective. Given a query q, a positive sample 

x+, a set of negative samples X −, and a temperature τ , the InfoNCE objective (Oord et al., 2018) is defined as: 

LNCE (q, x +, X −, τ )= − log esim (q,x +)/τ 

esim (q,x +)/τ + P  

> x−∈X −

esim (q,x −)/τ .

For attributes ak ∈ A t

> low

, we align segment embeddings with attribute embeddings, encouraging semantically con-sistent attribute representations across rows and tables: 

Lt 

> low

= Er∼B t, a k ∈A t

> low

h

LNCE 

 σr,k , eak , E−

> low

, τ low 

i

,

E− 

> low

= { ea′ | a′ ∈ A t

> low

, a ′̸ = ak }.

For attributes ak ∈ At

> high

, we align segment embed-dings with contextualized value representations, promoting instance-level discrimination within each table: 

Lt 

> high

= Er∼B t, a k ∈A t

> high

h

LNCE 

 σr,k , e(v) 

> r,k

, E−

> high

, τ high 

i

,

E− 

> high

= { e(v) 

> r′,k

| r′ ∈ B t, r ′̸ = r }.

Finally, given a batch B and a balancing hyperparameter 

λalign , the full training objective is: 

Ltotal = Lmsm + λalign · L align ,

where Lalign = 1  

> |T B|

· P

> t∈T B

 Lt 

> low

+ Lt

> high

. Appendix A provides a theoretical analysis of the contrastive alignment. 

# 4. Experiments 

In this section, we evaluate whether NAVI effectively cap-tures attribute semantics from both schema-level structural evidence and column-level distributional evidence across heterogeneous tables. We first assess schema-context mod-eling through generative reconstruction tasks, measuring the model’s ability to capture functional dependencies between headers and values within rows. Next, we evaluate semantic consistency under lexical and structural variation, examining whether representations remain stable across heterogeneous header realizations while preserving domain-specialized at-tribute semantics. Finally, we evaluate downstream utility through row-level separability across diverse classifiers and the framework’s integration as a robust semantic encoder within traditional feature-engineering pipelines. 

4.1. Experimental Setup Datasets. We evaluate on two domains, Movie and Prod-uct, using subsets of WDC WebTables (Peeters et al., 2024), selecting the 100 largest tables per domain. To balance domains, we downsample Product tables to a fixed target of 480,817 total rows via proportional (per-table) sampling. All tables are processed through a standardized pipeline (see Appendix D.2) to ensure compatibility with models that use BERT-style tokenization, and we split rows into train/validation/test with an 8:1:1 ratio. We utilize held-out subsets (10% test split) per domain. We uniformly subsam-ple 1,000 rows per each evaluation run. 5Segment-driven Structural Induction and Semantic Alignment for Heterogeneous Tabular Representation                                   

> Table 1. Performance on header prediction and value imputation. Model Product Movie
> Header Value Header Value BERT 0.9400 0.7743 0.9233 0.6889 TAPAS 0.2996 0.2501 0.2619 0.2326 HAETAE 0.9260 0.7785 0.8982 0.6911
> NAVI 0.9995 0.7933 0.9998 0.7077
> w/o CAE 0.5996 0.5544 0.5485 0.4799 w/o MSM 0.9959 0.7769 0.9941 0.6792 w/o ESA 0.9993 0.7977 0.9994 0.7012

Baseline Methods. We evaluate NAVI against represen-tative table embedding models spanning major paradigms. BERT serves as the generic transformer backbone under-lying most language model-based table encoders; its per-formance highlights the limitations of applying vanilla lan-guage models to tabular data. TAPAS, the most widely adopted table encoder, exemplifies structure-aware ap-proaches, while CM2 and HAETAE represent feature-oriented and domain-aware encoders, respectively. This selection enables a systematic comparison of relevant work. 

Implementation. We configure NAVI to balance domain and structural objectives. For alignment, we set τlow , τ high =0 .1, 0.02 , θlow , θ high =5% , 95% , and 

λalign =0 .0125 by default. For masked segment modeling, we use the ratio of header-masked, value-masked, vanilla MLM segments is 4:4:2. All models are trained for 2 epochs (the point at which learning curves indicate empirical convergence) with a batch size of 32 using AdamW (Loshchilov & Hutter) with a learning rate of 3 × 10 −5, and a weight decay of 0.01. Additional implementation details appear in Appendix D. 

4.2. Generative Task Performance 

To evaluate schema-context modeling, we assess whether NAVI can recover masked structural and semantic informa-tion from header–value dependencies within rows. Specif-ically, we consider two generative reconstruction tasks: 

Header Prediction , which requires recovering masked head-ers from associated values and surrounding schema context, and Value Imputation , which infers masked values condi-tioned on headers and neighboring row context. As shown in Table 1, NAVI achieves near-perfect header prediction performance across both domains, substantially outperforming existing baselines. This result indicates that the proposed schema-aware contextualization successfully preserves stable attribute semantics even under heteroge-neous header realizations. Furthermore, NAVI consistently achieves the best value imputation accuracy, suggesting that masked segment modeling effectively captures structural dependencies between headers and values within rows.  

> Figure 3. Distribution of cosine similarities between masked field representations and corresponding target representations.

While the results in Table 1 evaluate exact token reconstruc-tion, feature-oriented methods such as CM2 operate under a fundamentally different objective by reconstructing continu-ous feature embeddings instead of discrete subword tokens. To provide a more comparable evaluation across model-ing paradigms, we further analyze semantic reconstruction quality in latent representation space. For NAVI, we construct semantic field representations by mean-pooling contextualized hidden states over all subword tokens belonging to a header and its value. We then compute the cosine similarity between representations obtained from a masked forward pass and those from the corresponding unmasked gold forward pass. This measures whether the model preserves the semantic identity of masked fields be-yond exact token recovery. Figure 3 visualizes the resulting similarity distributions for NAVI and CM2. The distributions exhibit a clear separation between the two approaches across both domains. Notably, the lower quar-tile of NAVI already exceeds the upper quartile of CM2 (Product: Q1NAVI = 0 .7400 vs. Q3CM2 = 0 .1903 ; Movie: 

0.7870 vs. 0.2578 ), indicating that even weaker reconstruc-tions produced by NAVI remain more semantically aligned with the target representations than the strongest reconstruc-tions of CM2. These findings suggest that the proposed segment-centric schema modeling preserves substantially richer semantic information during masked reconstruction. 

4.3. Consistency of Header Representations 

To evaluate semantic consistency under heterogeneous schemas, we probe whether NAVI can consolidate disparate surface forms into a coherent domain context—a prerequi-site for robust reasoning across unaligned tables. Specifi-cally, we assess the model’s ability to transcend superficial lexical cues and recognize semantically equivalent attributes despite the lexical and statistical divergence prevalent in real-world tables. Evaluation encompasses two distinct di-mensions: first, the semantic consolidation of heterogeneous headers into stable tables, and second, the representational resilience of these schema anchors when reconstructing at-tributes from perturbed inputs and localized row context. 6Segment-driven Structural Induction and Semantic Alignment for Heterogeneous Tabular Representation 

Table 2. Robustness of header prediction under schema perturbations. We evaluate the model’s ability to reconstruct masked headers using perturbed schemas and their remaining context as reference. Accuracy is reported for the default test set and three perturbation settings: column permutation, synonym replacement, and typographical errors. For each perturbation, the highest accuracy is shown in bold, while the smallest relative performance drop from the default setting is highlighted in bold within parentheses. 

Product Movie 

Default Col. Perm. Synonym Typo Default Col. Perm. Synonym Typo BERT .9400 .8730 (-7.12%) .9189 (-2.24%) .8855 (-5.80%) .9233 .8590 (-6.96%) .9044 (-2.05%) .8762 (-5.10%) 

TAPAS .2996 .2681 (-10.51%) .2457 (-17.99%) .2539 (-15.25%) .2619 .2331 (-11.00%) .2472 (-5.61%) .2328 (-11.11%) 

HAETAE .9260 .8619 (-6.92%) .9146 (-1.23%) .8800 (-4.97%) .8982 .8189 (-8.83%) .8889 (-1.04%) .8504 (-5.32%) 

NAVI .9995 .9997 (+0.02%) .9760 (-2.35%) .9375 (-6.20%) .9998 .9997 (-0.01%) .9870 (-1.28%) .9522 (-4.76%) 

Table 3. Performance on header clustering. NMI and B³-F1 scores for clustering (using Agglomerative). Model Product Movie 

NMI B³-F1 NMI B³-F1 BERT 0.8749 0.7317 0.8798 0.6969 TAPAS 0.8750 0.7239 0.8726 0.6759 HAETAE 0.8742 0.7268 0.8864 0.7276 

NAVI 0.9005 0.7920 0.9144 0.7996 

Header Clustering. To evaluate semantic consistency un-der lexical diversity, we cluster semantically equivalent headers across tables using agglomerative clustering, mea-sured by B 3-F1 and NMI. A model with consistent schema representations should group lexical variants of the same concept into compact, well-separated clusters. As shown in Table 3, NAVI substantially outperforms all baselines across both Product and Movie domains, indicating more re-liable alignment of semantically equivalent headers despite variations in surface form. To further analyze the geometry of the learned representa-tion space, we measure pairwise distances between lexical variants (e.g., actor vs. actor names ) and evaluate cluster separability using the silhouette score. Compared to BERT, NAVI produces smaller inter-variant distances un-der both cosine similarity (0.30 vs. 0.36) and L2 distance (0.72 vs. 0.77), indicating stronger semantic consolidation of lexical aliases. At the same time, NAVI preserves clearer separation between distinct semantic groups (e.g., actor 

vs. director ), achieving a substantially higher silhou-ette score (0.52 vs. 0.26). These results suggest that NAVI improves both intra-semantic alignment and inter-semantic separation without collapsing distinct attribute semantics. Figure 4 provides a qualitative illustration of this effect us-ing the actor header group. Under NAVI, lexical variants collapse into a coherent semantic cluster despite differences in surface realization. In contrast, BERT produces frag-mented clusters that remain separated according to lexical form. This contrast indicates that BERT primarily encodes 

Figure 4. UMAP projection of contextualized header embeddings. 

surface-level similarity, whereas NAVI consolidates lexical aliases into stable schema-level semantic representations. Together, these findings demonstrate that entropy-driven segment alignment effectively enforces inter-table semantic consistency under heterogeneous schemas. 

Robustness to Schema Perturbations. We further evalu-ate the consistency of header representations by testing the model’s resilience to controlled perturbations that reflect heterogeneity observed in real-world table corpora. We ap-ply these perturbations only at inference time, using models trained strictly on clean schemas. Specifically, we consider three perturbation types. First, column permutation involves randomly shuffling the column order within each row while maintaining header–value alignment. Second, we apply lex-ical perturbations to 50% of low-entropy headers by either performing synonym replacement with unseen alternatives or introducing header typos through 1–2 character edits. Table 2 reveals that while both NAVI and HAETAE provide baseline stability against lexical noise, they diverge signif-icantly under structural drift. Against synonym and typo-graphical perturbations, the performance gap is marginal, as both models leverage schema-level anchors to resist lexical drift. However, NAVI proves far more robust to structural variation; while HAETAE’s accuracy drops up to 9% under column permutations, NAVI remains nearly invariant. This distinction confirms that strictly schema-aware approaches still rely on table-local structural cues, whereas NAVI’s entropy-driven value alignment successfully decouples se-mantic roles from fragile structural artifacts. 7Segment-driven Structural Induction and Semantic Alignment for Heterogeneous Tabular Representation 

Table 4. Performance on discriminative task. We evaluate row classification performance using Macro-F1 scores across the Product and Movie datasets, employing four diverse classifiers (XGBoost, Logistic Regression (LR), and TabPFN) operating on either [CLS] token embeddings or raw features. Methods are categorized into LM Encoders and FE Pipelines. For each classifier-category pair, the best result is indicated in bold, while the second-best is underlined. The overall best performance across all methods for a given classifier and dataset is marked with a dagger ( †). 

Product Movie Category Model XGBoost LR TabPFN XGBoost LR TabPFN LM Encoders BERT 0.912 (± 0.013) 0.931 (± 0.015) 0.937 (± 0.020) 0.595 (± 0.036) 0.638 (± 0.043) 0.659 (± 0.038) 

TAPAS 0.911 (± 0.013) 0.925 (± 0.015) 0.930 (± 0.013) 0.629 (± 0.035) † 0.669 (± 0.023) † 0.688 (± 0.017) †

CM2 0.814 (± 0.023) 0.846 (± 0.018) 0.842 (± 0.017) 0.379 (± 0.025) 0.375 (± 0.020) 0.402 (± 0.015) 

HAETAE 0.915 (± 0.015) 0.938 (± 0.011) 0.933 (± 0.013) 0.602 (± 0.050) 0.644 (± 0.041) 0.664 (± 0.016) 

NAVI 0.928 (± 0.010) 0.939 (± 0.012) 0.946 (± 0.013) † 0.615 (± 0.027) 0.667 (± 0.028) 0.679 (± 0.030) 

w/o CAE 0.725 (± 0.025) 0.854 (± 0.026) 0.801 (± 0.019) 0.265 (± 0.027) 0.381 (± 0.028) 0.303 (± 0.021) 

w/o MSM 0.845 (± 0.024) 0.903 (± 0.012) 0.894 (± 0.015) 0.467 (± 0.025) 0.560 (± 0.027) 0.522 (± 0.037) 

w/o ESA 0.909 (± 0.019) 0.930 (± 0.012) 0.934 (± 0.013) 0.623 (± 0.010) 0.667 (± 0.010) 0.674 (± 0.010) 

FE Pipelines Raw 0.887 (± 0.015) 0.829 (± 0.013) 0.910 (± 0.013) 0.457 (± 0.038) 0.420 (± 0.035) 0.478 (± 0.019) 

TableVec. 0.920 (± 0.017) 0.915 (± 0.014) 0.931 (± 0.019) 0.622 (± 0.014) 0.552 (± 0.029) N/A 

NAVI FE 0.944 (± 0.017) † 0.942 (± 0.012) † 0.942 (± 0.015) 0.629 (± 0.027) 0.661 (± 0.028) 0.665 (± 0.031) 

4.4. Downstream Discriminative task 

To evaluate downstream utility, we assess whether semanti-cally consistent representations learned from heterogeneous tables improve row-level discriminative performance. For LM-based encoders, each row is serialized and encoded once using the final [CLS] embedding as the fixed feature vector. We report macro-F1 on 10 balanced classes per domain (top product categories; top movie genres) using XGBoost, Logistic Regression, and TabPFN, averaged over eight subsampled runs (1,000 rows/run). As shown in Table 4, NAVI achieves the strongest or near-strongest performance across all classifiers in the Product domain, confirming that resolving semantic asymmetry via entropy-driven alignment improves entity-level separability. However, performance dynamics shift in the Movie domain, where the schema is characterized by high redundancy (e.g., 

actor.1 , actor.2 ). In this specific context, TAPAS leverages its strong intra-table structural priors to achieve the highest scores. Conversely, the Product domain features a seman-tically more diverse and cleaner schema, allowing NAVI’s ability to reconcile global anchors with instance context to yield more significant gains. Beyond LM-based encoders, we evaluate feature-engineering pipelines on the same task, including raw-feature baselines and TableVectorizer. While TableVec-torizer performs type-aware preprocessing, it produces very high-dimensional representations in text-heavy domains such as Movie ( >2,000 dimensions), making it incompat-ible with TabPFN and substantially larger than NAVI’s 768-dimensional embeddings, yet without outperforming NAVI. To illustrate the benefit of replacing generic text encoders, we construct a simple hybrid model, NAVI FE ,which concatenates raw numerical features with NAVI’s text-derived segments. This hybrid already outperforms both raw-feature and TableVectorizer baselines, indicating that NAVI can serve as an effective drop-in semantic encoder within feature-engineering pipelines. 

4.5. Ablation Study 

We conduct ablation studies to analyze the contributions of NAVI from three perspectives: (1) the effectiveness of its core modeling components, (2) the role of entropy-based categorization in entropy-driven segment alignment, and (3) the influence of numerical features within the dataset. 

Main Components. We ablate the core components of NAVI to evaluate their individual contributions to schema-context modeling and cross-table semantic consistency. One component is removed at a time while keeping all other settings fixed. We evaluate three variants: (1) w/o Context-free Attribute Embedding (CAE), removing the injection of transferable attribute priors into token and segment represen-tations; (2) w/o Masked Segment Modeling (MSM), replac-ing structured segment masking with vanilla MLM; and (3) w/o Entropy-driven Segment Alignment (ESA), removing entropy-driven contrastive alignment across segments. As shown in Table 1, removing CAE and MSM causes sub-stantial degradation on generative reconstruction tasks, indi-cating that transferable attribute priors and segment-aware masking are both essential for modeling header–value de-pendencies. In Table 4, removing ESA substantially reduces Product performance, while its effect is weaker in Movie. This suggests that ESA is most beneficial when schemas are semantically diverse and require cross-table alignment, whereas Movie contains more redundant schema patterns. 8Segment-driven Structural Induction and Semantic Alignment for Heterogeneous Tabular Representation              

> Table 5. Effect of entropy-based routing in ESA. Imp denotes value imputation accuracy, and Cls denotes classification performance using XGBoost. Classification results are reported over five runs.
> Product Movie
> Imp Cls Imp Cls NAVI 0.7933 0.928 ±0.010 0.7077 0.615 ±0.021
> RR 0.7903 0.902 ±0.022 0.7071 0.592 ±0.022

Entropy-based Categorization. To evaluate whether ESA benefits specifically from entropy-based categoriza-tion, we compare it with a random routing (RR) variant that assigns alignment objectives to randomly selected columns. As shown in Table 5, RR consistently reduces row clas-sification performance while producing smaller but con-sistent drops on value imputation. These results suggest that entropy-based routing provides an effective inductive bias by distinguishing stable domain attributes from highly instance-specific attributes during alignment. 

Influence of Numerical Features. Unlike feature-oriented table encoders that explicitly model numerical feature types, NAVI primarily focuses on refining domain-specialized semantics from textual evidence. To evaluate whether its performance nevertheless depends heavily on numerical regularities, we analyze three settings on row clas-sification with XGBoost: (1) All , using the full tables; (2) 

Text-only , removing numerical columns; and (3) Partial-text ,reducing textual coverage while preserving table structure. Across five runs, NAVI achieves 0.928 ± 0.010 under the full setting, 0.902 ± 0.014 under the text-only setting, and 

0.888 ± 0.015 under the partial-text setting. The relatively small degradation after removing numerical columns indi-cates that performance is not primarily driven by numerical regularities. In contrast, reducing textual semantic evidence causes noticeably larger degradation, suggesting that NAVI mainly derives its gains from modeling textual semantics rather than specialized numerical feature encoding. 

4.6. Geometry of Segment Embeddings 

To empirically validate the advantages of Entropy-driven Segment Alignment, we analyze the representational geome-try of segments from BERT and NAVI trained on the Movie domain. This visualization serves as a direct probe into how our alignment objective resolves the tension between schema stability and local instance discriminability. For BERT, segment embeddings are obtained by mean-pooling contextualized token embeddings over each header–value span, and all embeddings are projected with t-SNE. As shown in Figure 5, the segment geometry of BERT re-veals the absence of explicit header–value alignment. While high- and low-entropy segments are roughly separable, low-BERT NAVI  

> Figure 5. T-SNE visualization of segment embeddings from five heterogeneous Movie tables.

entropy segments (intended as stable anchors) are widely scattered, reflecting the entanglement of schema semantics with row-specific noise. High-entropy segments further fragment into table-specific micro-clusters, indicating that similarity is driven by superficial artifacts rather than con-sistent entity semantics. This geometry reflects the lack of role-aware organization in contextual embeddings learned by conventional LM-based encoders. In contrast, NAVI exhibits a structured geometry induced by entropy-driven segment alignment. Low-entropy segments collapse into compact, well-localized clusters that act as domain anchors, reflecting cross-header alignment around global semantic centroids. This contraction shows that NAVI consistently extracts schema-level semantics while suppressing table-specific variation. High-entropy segments form broader, dispersed clusters that preserve row separabil-ity within the domain. This selective geometry, contracting anchors while maintaining instance variability, confirms that NAVI successfully decouples stable domain logic from entity-specific content. 

# 5. Conclusion 

In this paper, we address the longstanding tension between domain-level semantic consistency and local instance speci-ficity by introducing the header–value segment as the atomic unit for tabular representation learning. Through Masked Segment Modeling and Entropy-driven Segment Alignment, NAVI jointly models schema-level structural context and column-level distributional context, yielding near-perfect generative schema reconstruction and strong resilience to structural and lexical drift. Qualitatively, the resulting em-bedding space exhibits a structured geometry where low-entropy anchors provide global stability while high-entropy segments maintain instance-level discriminability. Further-more, the superior performance of NAVI FE positions our framework as a potent drop-in semantic encoder for tradi-tional feature-engineering pipelines. By bridging the gap between symbolic tabular structures and contextualized neu-ral representations, this work establishes a robust foundation for future work in cross-domain transfer and the integration of unaligned, heterogeneous table corpora. 9Segment-driven Structural Induction and Semantic Alignment for Heterogeneous Tabular Representation 

# Acknowledgments 

This work was partly supported by the Institute of Informa-tion & Communications Technology Planning & Evalua-tion (IITP)-ICT Creative Consilience Program (IITP-2026-RS-2020-II201819), Artificial Intelligence Star Fellowship Support Program (IITP-2026-RS-2025-02304828), and the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) (RS-2024-00406320 and RS-2026-25494369) funded by the Korea government(MSIT). 

# Impact Statement 

This paper presents a framework for learning semantically consistent representations from heterogeneous in-domain tables. We believe this work can improve structured-data understanding and enable future applications involving large language model and table interactions, including table ques-tion answering, retrieval-augmented generation, and enter-prise knowledge retrieval over heterogeneous tables. While our work is primarily methodological, its broader impact depends on how such representation systems are deployed and integrated into downstream applications. 

# References 

Ba, J. L., Kiros, J. R., and Hinton, G. E. Layer normalization. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:1607.06450 , 2016. Badaro, G., Saeed, M., and Papotti, P. Transformers for tab-ular data representation: A survey of models and applica-tions. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 2023. Chen, T. and Guestrin, C. Xgboost: A scalable tree boosting system. In Proceedings of the 22nd acm sigkdd inter-national conference on knowledge discovery and data mining , pp. 785–794, 2016. Chen, T., Kornblith, S., Norouzi, M., and Hinton, G. Asimple framework for contrastive learning of visual rep-resentations. In International conference on machine learning , pp. 1597–1607. PmLR, 2020. Clark, K., Khandelwal, U., Levy, O., and Manning, C. D. What does BERT look at? an analysis of BERT’s atten-tion. In Proceedings of the 2019 ACL Workshop Black-boxNLP: Analyzing and Interpreting Neural Networks for NLP , pp. 276–286, 2019. Deng, X., Sun, H., Lees, A., Wu, Y., and Yu, C. Turl: Table understanding through representation learning. ACM SIGMOD Record , 51(1):33–40, 2022. Devlin, J., Chang, M.-W., Lee, K., and Toutanova, K. BERT: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for lan-guage understanding. In Proceedings of the 2019 Confer-ence of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-nologies , 2019. Fang, X., Xu, W., Tan, F. A., Zhang, J., Hu, Z., Qi, Y., Nick-leach, S., Socolinsky, D., Sengamedu, S., and Faloutsos, C. Large language models on tabular data: Prediction, generation, and understanding–a survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.17944 , 2024. Gorishniy, Y., Rubachev, I., Khrulkov, V., and Babenko, A. Revisiting deep learning models for tabular data. 

Advances in neural information processing systems , 34: 18932–18943, 2021. Herzig, J., Nowak, P. K., Müller, T., Piccinno, F., and Eisen-schlos, J. TaPas: Weakly supervised table parsing via pre-training. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 2020. Hollmann, N., Müller, S., Eggensperger, K., and Hutter, F. Tabpfn: A transformer that solves small tabular classifi-cation problems in a second. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2023. Huang, X., Khetan, A., Cvitkovic, M., and Karnin, Z. Tab-transformer: Tabular data modeling using contextual em-beddings. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.06678 , 2020. Iida, H., Thai, D., Manjunatha, V., and Iyyer, M. Tabbie: Pretrained representations of tabular data. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies , pp. 3446–3456, 2021. Jung, W. and Yoon, S. HAETAE: In-domain table pretrain-ing with header anchoring. In Proceedings of the 48th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval , pp. 3065–3069, 2025. Ke, G., Meng, Q., Finley, T., Wang, T., Chen, W., Ma, W., Ye, Q., and Liu, T.-Y. Lightgbm: A highly efficient gradient boosting decision tree. Advances in neural infor-mation processing systems , 30, 2017. Kim, J., Lee, C., and Park, N. Stasy: Score-based tabular data synthesis. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations .Kotelnikov, A., Baranchuk, D., Rubachev, I., and Babenko, A. Tabddpm: Modelling tabular data with diffusion mod-els. In International conference on machine learning , pp. 17564–17579. PMLR, 2023. Lee, J., Kim, J., Shon, H., Kim, B., Kim, S. H., Lee, H., and Kim, J. Uniclip: Unified framework for contrastive language-image pre-training. Advances in Neural Infor-mation Processing Systems , 35:1008–1019, 2022. 10 Segment-driven Structural Induction and Semantic Alignment for Heterogeneous Tabular Representation 

Li, P., He, Y., Yashar, D., Cui, W., Ge, S., Zhang, H., Rifin-ski Fainman, D., Zhang, D., and Chaudhuri, S. Table-gpt: Table fine-tuned gpt for diverse table tasks. Proceedings of the ACM on Management of Data , 2(3):1–28, 2024. Lim, Y. and Yoon, S. Multi-level diagnosis and evaluation for robust tabular feature engineering with large language models. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2025 , pp. 4630–4655, 2025. Liu, Q., Chen, B., Guo, J., Ziyadi, M., Lin, Z., Chen, W., and Lou, J.-G. Tapex: Table pre-training via learning a neural sql executor. In International Conference on Learning Representations .Loshchilov, I. and Hutter, F. Decoupled weight decay reg-ularization. In International Conference on Learning Representations .Mueller, M., Gruber, K., and Fok, D. Continuous diffusion for mixed-type tabular data. In The Thirteenth Interna-tional Conference on Learning Representations .Oord, A. v. d., Li, Y., and Vinyals, O. Representation learn-ing with contrastive predictive coding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.03748 , 2018. Peeters, R., Brinkmann, A., and Bizer, C. The web data commons schema.org table corpora. In Companion Pro-ceedings of the ACM Web Conference 2024 , 2024. Prokhorenkova, L., Gusev, G., Vorobev, A., Dorogush, A. V., and Gulin, A. Catboost: unbiased boosting with categori-cal features. Advances in neural information processing systems , 31, 2018. Somepalli, G., Schwarzschild, A., Goldblum, M., Bruss, C. B., and Goldstein, T. Saint: Improved neural networks for tabular data via row attention and contrastive pre-training. In NeurIPS 2022 First Table Representation Workshop .Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones, L., Gomez, A. N., Kaiser, Ł., and Polosukhin, I. At-tention is all you need. Advances in neural information processing systems , 30, 2017. Wang, T. and Isola, P. Understanding contrastive represen-tation learning through alignment and uniformity on the hypersphere. In International conference on machine learning , pp. 9929–9939. PMLR, 2020. Wang, Z., Dong, H., Jia, R., Li, J., Fu, Z., Han, S., and Zhang, D. Tuta: Tree-based transformers for generally structured table pre-training. In Proceedings of the 27th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining , pp. 1780–1790, 2021. Yan, J., Zheng, B., Xu, H., Zhu, Y., Chen, D. Z., Sun, J., Wu, J., and Chen, J. Making pre-trained language models great on tabular prediction. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. Ye, C., Lu, G., Wang, H., Li, L., Wu, S., Chen, G., and Zhao, J. Towards cross-table masked pretraining for web data mining. In Proceedings of the ACM Web Conference 2024 , pp. 4449–4459, 2024. Yin, P., Neubig, G., Yih, W.-t., and Riedel, S. TaBERT: Pretraining for joint understanding of textual and tabular data. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 2020. Zhang, H., Zhang, J., Shen, Z., Srinivasan, B., Qin, X., Faloutsos, C., Rangwala, H., and Karypis, G. Mixed-type tabular data synthesis with score-based diffusion in latent space. In International Conference on Learning Representations , volume 2024, pp. 52829–52857, 2024a. Zhang, T., Yue, X., Li, Y., and Sun, H. TableLlama: Towards open large generalist models for tables. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pp. 6024–6044, 2024b. Zhao, Y., Chen, L., Cohan, A., and Zhao, C. Tapera: enhanc-ing faithfulness and interpretability in long-form table qa by content planning and execution-based reasoning. In 

Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Associ-ation for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pp. 12824–12840, 2024. Zheng, S. and Charoenphakdee, N. Diffusion models for missing value imputation in tabular data. In Table Repre-sentation Learning Workshop at NeurIPS , 2022. 11 Segment-driven Structural Induction and Semantic Alignment for Heterogeneous Tabular Representation 

# A. Theoretical Analysis of Entropy-driven Segment Alignment 

We provide a geometric analysis of Entropy-driven Segment Alignment (ESA), the contrastive objective introduced in Section 3.3. Our goal is to analyze and characterize the local geometric forces induced by ESA on normalized segment em-beddings, rather than to establish a generalization guarantee. Following the alignment–uniformity perspective of contrastive representation learning (Wang & Isola, 2020), we interpret contrastive objectives as simultaneously pulling positive pairs together and pushing negative pairs apart. ESA specializes this principle to heterogeneous tables by conditioning the choice of positives and negatives on the empirical entropy of attributes. Unlike conventional contrastive learning, which applies a uniform positive-pair construction to all representations, ESA routes segment embeddings according to the semantic role of their associated attributes. For low-entropy attributes, segments are aligned with context-free attribute embeddings, encouraging stable schema-level anchors shared across rows and tables. For high-entropy attributes, segments are aligned with row-specific value representations while contrasted against other rows from the same table, preserving instance-level separability. This routing induces two complementary geometric effects: low-entropy segments undergo anchor contraction, whereas high-entropy segments maintain controlled dispersion. 

A.1. Setup and Notation 

We analyze ESA in the segment embedding space. Let σr,k denote the segment embedding for the k-th header–value realization in row r, as defined in Section 3.3. Let eak be the context-free embedding of the associated domain attribute 

ak, and let e(v) 

> r,k

be the contextualized value representation of value vr,k . Throughout this analysis, we assume that all embeddings are ℓ2-normalized and lie on the unit hypersphere Sd−1 = {u ∈ Rd : ∥u∥2 = 1 }:

σr,k , eak , e(v) 

> r,k

∈ Sd−1. (2) Accordingly, similarity is measured by the inner product, sim( u, v ) = u⊤v, which corresponds to cosine similarity on the unit hypersphere. We also use the standard identity 

∥u − v∥22 = 2(1 − u⊤v), u, v ∈ Sd−1, (3) which connects the dot-product form of InfoNCE to Euclidean geometry on normalized embeddings. For a table t, ESA partitions its observed attributes into low-entropy and high-entropy subsets, denoted by At 

> low

and At

> high

,respectively. The entropy partition is computed from empirical column-value distributions before training and is treated as fixed during optimization. For a low-entropy attribute ak ∈ A t

> low

, ESA uses the context-free attribute embedding eak as the positive target for the segment embedding σr,k . The negatives are the context-free embeddings of other low-entropy attributes in the same table. Thus, the low-entropy loss for a segment is: 

ℓlow (σr,k ) = − log exp( σ⊤

> r,k

eak /τ low )exp( σ⊤

> r,k

eak /τ low ) + P   

> a′∈A t
> low , a ′̸=ak

exp( σ⊤

> r,k

ea′ /τ low ) . (4) This objective defines positive pairs between segment embeddings and shared attribute-level anchors. For a high-entropy attribute ak ∈ A t

> high

, ESA instead uses the row-specific contextualized value representation e(v) 

> r,k

as the positive target. The negatives are contextualized value representations of the same attribute from other rows in the same table. Let Bt denote the subset of batch rows sampled from table t. The high-entropy loss for a segment is: 

ℓhigh (σr,k ) = − log exp( σ⊤

> r,k

e(v) 

> r,k

/τ high )exp( σ⊤

> r,k

e(v) 

> r,k

/τ high ) + P  

> r′∈B t, r ′̸=r

exp( σ⊤

> r,k

e(v)

> r′,k

/τ high ) . (5) This objective defines positive pairs between segment embeddings and row-specific value evidence, while using other rows as negatives. 12 Segment-driven Structural Induction and Semantic Alignment for Heterogeneous Tabular Representation 

This formulation highlights the key distinction of ESA: the same segment embedding σr,k is regularized differently depending on the empirical entropy of its associated attribute. Low-entropy routing encourages segment embeddings to contract toward shared schema-level anchors, whereas high-entropy routing encourages them to remain distinguishable across rows. The following subsections formalize these two geometric effects. 

Lemma A.1 (Gradient of local InfoNCE) . Let σ ∈ Sd−1 be a query representation, x+ be its positive target, and 

X − = {x− 

> j

}Mj=1 be a set of negative targets. Consider the local InfoNCE loss 

ℓ(σ) = − log exp( σ⊤x+/τ )exp( σ⊤x+/τ ) + PMj=1 exp( σ⊤x− 

> j

/τ ) . (6) 

Let X = {x+} ∪ X −, and define the softmax probability of any x ∈ X as 

p(x) = exp( σ⊤x/τ )

P 

> ˜x∈X

exp( σ⊤ ˜x/τ ) . (7) 

Then the negative gradient of ℓ with respect to σ is 

−∇ σ ℓ = 1

τ

(1 − p(x+)) x+ −

> M

X

> j=1

p(x− 

> j

)x−

> j

 . (8) 

Thus, the descent direction contains an attractive component toward the positive target and repulsive components away from the negative targets. Proof. Differentiating Eq. (6) with respect to σ gives 

∇σ ℓ = 1

τ

X

> x∈X

p(x)x − x+

!

. (9) Taking the negative gradient yields 

−∇ σ ℓ = 1

τ x+ − X

> x∈X

p(x)x

!

. (10) Separating the positive and negative terms gives Eq. (8). 

A.2. Low-entropy Alignment as Anchor Contraction 

We first analyze the low-entropy branch of ESA. Low-entropy attributes typically correspond to stable, domain-coherent properties whose values exhibit limited variation within a table. For such attributes, ESA aligns each segment embedding 

σr,k with its corresponding context-free attribute embedding eak . Since the same attribute embedding is shared across rows and tables, this objective encourages segment realizations of the same attribute to contract toward a common schema-level anchor. 

Theorem A.2 (Low-entropy ESA induces anchor-directed attraction) . Consider a low-entropy attribute ak ∈ A t 

> low

and its segment embedding σr,k . Let ℓlow (σr,k ) be the low-entropy InfoNCE loss defined in Eq. (4) . Then 

−∇ σr,k ℓlow = 1

τlow 

(1 − pak )eak − X  

> a′∈A t
> low , a ′̸=ak

pa′ ea′

 , (11) 

where pak is the softmax probability assigned to the positive anchor eak , and pa′ is the probability assigned to a negative anchor ea′ . Therefore, minimizing the low-entropy ESA objective moves σr,k toward its attribute anchor while pushing it away from competing low-entropy attribute anchors. 

13 Segment-driven Structural Induction and Semantic Alignment for Heterogeneous Tabular Representation 

Proof. Apply Lemma A.1 with 

σ = σr,k , x+ = eak , X − = {ea′ | a′ ∈ A t

> low

, a ′̸ = ak}, τ = τlow .

This gives Eq. (11) . The interpretation follows from the attractive positive term and repulsive negative terms in the resulting descent direction. Theorem A.2 shows that the low-entropy branch of ESA imposes an anchor-based geometry on segment embeddings. Since all segments associated with the same low-entropy attribute share the positive target eak , their optimization directions contain a common attractive component toward the same schema-level anchor. This reduces variation caused by row-specific values and table-specific surface forms, encouraging compact clusters around the corresponding attribute anchor. At the same time, the negative terms in Eq. (11) prevent trivial collapse across different low-entropy attributes. Each low-entropy attribute defines its own local anchor, while competing anchors repel one another through the contrastive denominator. Thus, ESA encourages low-entropy segments to become compact within the same attribute and separated across distinct attributes. This provides an objective-level explanation for the low-entropy geometry observed in Figure 5: stable attributes form compact semantic clusters that are less sensitive to row-specific noise. In the alignment–uniformity view (Wang & Isola, 2020), this corresponds to an entropy-conditioned form of alignment between stable header–value realizations and domain-level attribute anchors. 

A.3. High-entropy Alignment as Instance Separation 

We next analyze the high-entropy branch of ESA. High-entropy attributes typically correspond to instance-specific informa-tion whose values vary substantially across rows. For such attributes, collapsing all segment embeddings toward a shared attribute anchor would remove useful entity-level distinctions. ESA therefore uses the row-specific contextualized value representation e(v) 

> r,k

as the positive target and contrasts it against value representations from other rows in the same table. This objective encourages segment embeddings to preserve local instance separability. 

Theorem A.3 (High-entropy ESA induces value-mediated instance separation) . Consider a high-entropy attribute ak ∈At 

> high

and its segment embedding σr,k . Let ℓhigh (σr,k ) be the high-entropy InfoNCE loss defined in Eq. (5) . Then 

−∇ σr,k ℓhigh = 1

τhigh 

(1 − pr )e(v) 

> r,k

− X 

> r′∈B t, r ′̸=r

pr′ e(v)

> r′,k

 , (12) 

where pr is the softmax probability assigned to the positive value representation e(v) 

> r,k

, and pr′ is the probability assigned to a negative value representation e(v)

> r′,k

. Therefore, minimizing the high-entropy ESA objective moves σr,k toward its own row-specific value representation while pushing it away from value representations of other rows. Proof. Apply Lemma A.1 with 

σ = σr,k , x+ = e(v) 

> r,k

, X − = {e(v) 

> r′,k

| r′ ∈ B t, r ′̸ = r}, τ = τhigh .

This gives Eq. (12) . The interpretation follows from the attractive positive term and repulsive negative terms in the resulting descent direction. Theorem A.3 shows that the high-entropy branch of ESA imposes an instance-discriminative geometry on segment embeddings. Unlike the low-entropy case, where multiple rows share the same attribute-level positive target, each high-entropy segment is aligned with its own row-specific value representation. Thus, ESA avoids contracting all realizations of a high-entropy attribute toward a single centroid and instead preserves the information needed to distinguish rows that share the same schema position but differ in value content. 14 Segment-driven Structural Induction and Semantic Alignment for Heterogeneous Tabular Representation 

The negative terms in Eq. (12) further induce controlled dispersion among row-specific realizations. Since negatives are sampled from other rows associated with the same high-entropy attribute, segment embeddings are separated relative to the empirical value distribution within the table rather than pushed toward arbitrary points on the hypersphere. This is particularly important for titles, names, identifiers, and other entity-specific fields, where schema-level anchoring would erase discriminative information. In the alignment–uniformity perspective, this corresponds to a entropy-conditioned analogue of uniformity: high-entropy segments remain dispersed while being constrained by contextualized value evidence. This explains the geometry observed in Figure 5, where NAVI preserves row-level discriminability. 

A.4. Combined Geometry of ESA 

The preceding analysis shows that ESA induces a role-aware geometry in the segment embedding space. Rather than applying a single contrastive structure to all attributes, ESA changes the alignment target according to the empirical entropy of the associated column. Low-entropy attributes are aligned with shared context-free attribute anchors, yielding anchor-directed attraction and schema-level contraction. High-entropy attributes are aligned with row-specific value representations, yielding value-mediated separation and preserving instance-level discriminability. Thus, ESA jointly encourages semantic consistency for stable attributes and discriminability for entity-specific attributes. This can be viewed as an entropy-conditioned adaptation of the alignment–uniformity perspective of contrastive learn-ing (Wang & Isola, 2020). Low-entropy routing emphasizes alignment to global attribute anchors, while high-entropy routing introduces a localized uniformity-like effect by contrasting row-specific value realizations within the same table. Importantly, this does not imply global uniformity over the entire hypersphere; rather, it induces controlled dispersion within high-entropy segments. This role-aware geometry explains why NAVI can contract stable schema anchors without collapsing entity-specific information, supporting our central motivation that column-level distributional evidence should be incorporated selectively according to the heterogeneous semantic roles of attributes. 15 Segment-driven Structural Induction and Semantic Alignment for Heterogeneous Tabular Representation 

# B. Further Analysis on the Geometry of Segment Embeddings 

To further examine how NAVI organizes segment embeddings, we visualize segment embeddings from five Movie tables using t-SNE, grouping segment embeddings by their entropy category (low vs. high) and overlaying table-wise convex hulls (Figure 6). The resulting geometry provides qualitative evidence that NAVI realizes cross-table generalization. For BERT, segment embeddings are constructed by mean-pooling the contextualized token embeddings of each header–value span, ensuring a comparable segment representation across models.           

> Figure 6. t-SNE projections of header–value segment embeddings from five Movie tables, grouped by entropy category. Gray convex hulls correspond to individual tables. For low entropy segment embeddings, points are additionally labeled as Best Rating or Worst Rating. NAVI (t -SNE) BERT (t -SNE)
> (a) Low entropy segment embeddings. NAVI (t -SNE) BERT (t -SNE) (b) High entropy segment distribution.

Low-entropy segment embeddings correspond to stable domain concepts (e.g., ratings, director). To assess whether models recover these semantics, we color segment embeddings using two coherent groups—Best Rating and Worst Rating. Under NAVI, the two groups form clean, well-separated clusters that persist across tables, with overlapping convex hulls indicating that the geometry is driven by shared cross-table value distributions rather than table identity. This reflects strong semantic discrimination and domain-level invariance. Overall, NAVI collapses surface-form variation while preserving core domain distinctions, yielding representations that generalize consistently across heterogeneous tables. High-entropy segment embeddings represent entity-specific content (e.g., names, descriptions). NAVI distributes these segment embeddings broadly, avoiding collapse even when within-table contexts are similar. The table hulls heavily overlap, showing that representations do not cling to table identity. BERT, however, forms several dense, table-specific clumps, indicating that its contextual embedding remains sensitive to table-local patterns and fails to maintain row-level separability across tables. NAVI’s geometry thus reflects that entity-specific values remain distinguishable without being entangled with schema or table-specific quirks. 16 Segment-driven Structural Induction and Semantic Alignment for Heterogeneous Tabular Representation 

# C. Additional Related Work: Predictive Tabular Learning 

While the main paper focuses on table understanding and representation learning for heterogeneous tables, tabular data has also been studied extensively from the perspective of predictive modeling, generative modeling, and language-model-based table reasoning. We briefly discuss these broader directions and clarify how they differ from our goal of learning semantically consistent representations across heterogeneous in-domain tables. Across these directions, prior work is largely organized around task-specific prediction objectives, such as predicting labels, missing values, textual answers, or executable programs. In contrast, our goal is not to optimize a single downstream task, but to learn reusable representations that resolve semantic inconsistency across heterogeneous in-domain tables, where latent attributes, their header realizations, and their value distributions may not be consistently aligned. 

C.1. Supervised Prediction on Tabular Features 

A long line of work studies tabular learning as a supervised prediction problem, where the goal is to estimate target labels or continuous values from fixed input features. Classical machine learning methods, especially gradient-boosted decision trees (Chen & Guestrin, 2016; Ke et al., 2017; Prokhorenkova et al., 2018) remain strong baselines for classification and regression on structured tables. These methods are effective at modeling feature interactions, handling heterogeneous feature types, and achieving strong predictive performance under task-specific supervision. More recent neural approaches (Huang et al., 2020; Somepalli et al.; Gorishniy et al., 2021; Hollmann et al., 2023) further explore attention-based architectures, self-supervised objectives, and in-context prediction for tabular data. These approaches typically assume fixed and well-defined feature spaces within a table or benchmark dataset. Our setting instead considers heterogeneous in-domain tables, where semantically related attributes may appear under different headers and identical headers may express different meanings depending on schema and column context. 

C.2. Generative Prediction for Imputation 

Another line of work applies generative modeling to tabular data, with applications including data synthesis, missing value imputation, and distributional modeling. Recent methods adapt diffusion models, score-based models, and related generative objectives to structured tables (Kotelnikov et al., 2023; Kim et al.; Zhang et al., 2024a; Mueller et al.). These approaches model tabular feature distributions and can be used to generate realistic synthetic rows or recover missing entries (Zheng & Charoenphakdee, 2022). Related methods also explore conditional generation, mixed-type feature modeling, and robustness under incomplete observations. These methods are related to our reconstruction-style objective, but they primarily model or complete tabular observations. In contrast, our masked segment modeling uses reconstruction to learn schema-aware header–value dependencies for representation learning. 

C.3. Language-mediated Prediction over Tables 

With the emergence of large language models, recent work has also studied tables as inputs to language-centric reasoning systems. Earlier table pretraining methods formulate table reasoning as question answering, semantic parsing, or sequence-to-sequence generation over structured inputs (Herzig et al., 2020; Yin et al., 2020; Liu et al.). More recent systems adapt or instruction-tune large language models to interact with tables through natural language commands, table question answering, data analysis, or text-to-SQL-style reasoning (Zhao et al., 2024; Li et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024b). These methods are especially effective when tables are used as contexts for question answering, program generation, or symbolic reasoning. These methods often treat tables as serialized prompts or external contexts for generating textual or symbolic outputs. Our work instead focuses on compact, reusable representations of heterogeneous tables themselves, which can complement LLM-table systems through retrieval, grounding, or preprocessing. 17 Segment-driven Structural Induction and Semantic Alignment for Heterogeneous Tabular Representation 

# D. Implementation Details 

D.1. Architectural Details 

The context-free attribute encoder fθ′ introduced in Definition 3.2 is implemented as a lightweight BERT-based module that maps canonical attribute identifiers to context-independent attribute embeddings. The encoder uses the BERT tokenizer and embedding layer, followed by two Transformer layers selected from the pretrained BERT model, to leverage lexical and compositional priors for short attribute strings. The use of a shallow encoder balances expressivity and efficiency. Since domain attributes are typically represented by short textual identifiers rather than full natural-language sentences, a lightweight encoder is sufficient to capture their lexical and compositional structure while avoiding unnecessary sentence-level contextualization. Using more layers may overfit to discourse-level semantics that are less relevant for attribute names, whereas using fewer layers limits the encoder’s ability to model compositional attribute phrases. We use layers 8 and 9 of the pretrained BERT encoder. This choice is motivated by prior analyses of BERT (Clark et al., 2019), which suggest that mid-to-deep layers capture syntactic and relational dependencies, while earlier layers focus more on local lexical information and final layers are more strongly shaped by sentence-level aggregation and task-specific adaptation. These properties make layers 8 and 9 suitable for modeling attribute identifiers, which are often short noun phrases requiring lexical and syntactic interpretation but not full discourse-level reasoning. Given an attribute string a, the encoder first tokenizes it using the BERT tokenizer and obtains initial token embeddings through the BERT embedding layer: 

u(0) = BertEmbeddings( x(a)) .

The resulting sequence is then passed through two selected Transformer layers: 

u(1) = EncoderLayer 8(u(0) ),

u(2) = EncoderLayer 9(u(1) ).

The context-free attribute embedding ea is obtained by mean pooling over non-padding tokens: 

ea =

Pni=1 u(2)  

> i

· mask i

Pni=1 mask i

.

This corresponds to the implementation of fθ′ and Pool( ·) in Definition 3.2. The encoder supports single attribute strings, lists of attributes, and batched attribute lists, automatically adjusting the output dimensionality and applying attention masks for padded inputs. 

Projection Layer for Segment Embeddings. The projection network g(·) used in the segment embedding definition in Section 3.3 combines three sources of evidence: the context-free attribute embedding eak , the contextualized header representation e(h) 

> r,k

, and the contextualized value representation e(v) 

> r,k

. These components correspond respectively to the domain-level attribute prior, the table-specific header realization, and the row-specific value realization of a segment. Given a batch of segment components Ea ∈ RB×K×D, E(h) ∈ RB×K×D, and E(v) ∈ RB×K×D, where B is the batch size, K is the number of segments per row, and D is the hidden dimension, the projection first concatenates the three representations along the feature dimension: 

zr,k = eak ∥ e(h) 

> r,k

∥ e(v) 

> r,k

∈ R3D .

The concatenated representation is then passed through a two-layer feedforward network with GELU activation, dropout, and layer normalization: 18 Segment-driven Structural Induction and Semantic Alignment for Heterogeneous Tabular Representation 

hr,k = LayerNorm (GELU (Linear 3D→2D(zr,k ))) ,σr,k = LayerNorm (Linear 2D→D (Dropout( hr,k ))) .

The resulting vector σr,k is the segment embedding used in Entropy-driven Segment Alignment. This expansion–compression design follows the feedforward structure commonly used in Transformer architectures (Vaswani et al., 2017). The intermediate expansion allows nonlinear interactions among attribute-level, header-level, and value-level signals before projecting them back to the model dimension. Layer normalization (Ba et al., 2016) improves optimization stability, while the intermediate 2D representation provides sufficient capacity to capture dependencies among the components of each header–value segment. 

D.2. Dataset Preprocessing 

Our dataset preprocessing pipeline is designed to optimize the quality and compatibility of tabular data for BERT-based language model training. The preprocessing consists of three main stages: data cleaning, BERT vocabulary validation, and tokenization optimization. 

Data Cleaning and Normalization The raw tabular data undergoes several cleaning steps to ensure consistency and quality. First, we flatten nested JSON structures. 

"actors": [{"name": "allan"}, {"name": "daniel"}] →

"actors.0.name": "allan", "actors.1.name": "daniel" 

This creates a uniform representation where each row is represented as a flat dictionary of key-value pairs. This flattening process preserves the hierarchical structure through dot-separated keys. Next, we handle indexed fields that represent repeated attributes. To prevent information overload and maintain computational efficiency, we sample a maximum of 3 indexed fields per field type, prioritizing the first occurrences to maintain data consistency. 

BERT Vocabulary Validation A critical challenge in training BERT on multilingual tabular data is the model’s limited vocabulary coverage for non-English languages. To address this, we implement a BERT vocabulary validation step that filters out tables containing content that cannot be effectively tokenized by the BERT tokenizer. For each table, we extract meaningful text fields (excluding URLs, pure numbers, and very short strings) and tokenize them using the BERT tokenizer. We calculate the ratio of unknown tokens ([UNK]) to total tokens for each field. Tables where more than 30% of the text fields contain excessive unknown tokens (threshold: 30% UNK ratio) are excluded from training. This filtering ensures that the model trains on data it can meaningfully process, significantly reducing the proportion of uninformative [UNK] tokens during training. 

Tokenization Optimization Finally, to maximize the utility of the remaining data while respecting BERT’s token limit constraints, we implement field-level truncation: Individual fields that exceed 20 tokens are truncated to fit within this limit, preserving the most important information while maintaining field names and separators. 

Preprocessing Statistics Our preprocessing pipeline processes data from 100 different e-commerce websites across multiple languages and domains. The BERT vocabulary validation step typically filters out 60-70% of rows containing significant non-English content, resulting in a dataset focused on English-language e-commerce data that can be effectively processed by BERT. The final preprocessed dataset maintains the structural information of the original tables while ensuring compatibility with BERT’s tokenization scheme, enabling effective representation learning for tabular data through masked language modeling objectives. This approach addresses the fundamental challenge of applying English-centric language models to multilingual structured data, ensuring that the training process focuses on content that the model can meaningfully learn from while preserving the rich structural information inherent in tabular data. 19 Segment-driven Structural Induction and Semantic Alignment for Heterogeneous Tabular Representation 

Algorithm 1 NAVI Training Procedure 

Require: Domain tables T , model parameters θ, alignment weight λalign , masking configuration MaskCfg 

Ensure: Trained parameters θ∗

1: Initialize model parameters θ, optimizer, and gradient scaler 

2: for epoch = 1 , . . . , T do 

3: Construct table groups G = {G1, . . . , G M } from T

4: Shuffle group order 

5: for each table group G ∈ G do 

6: for each table t ∈ G do 

7: Compute the column entropy Ht(a) for each attribute a ∈ A t

8: Construct attribute partitions At 

> low

and At 

> high

using θlow and θhigh 

9: end for 

10: Initialize a stratified sampler over rows from tables in G

11: for each batch B sampled from G do 

12: Serialize each row r ∈ B into segment sequence x(r)

13: Compute context-free attribute embeddings eak using fθ′

14: /* Masked Segment Modeling (Section 3.2) */ 

15: Apply structure-aware masking using MaskCfg to obtain masked inputs and labels 

16: Forward masked inputs through Fθ to compute MSM logits 

17: Compute Lmsm over masked token sets Mh, Mv , and Mr

18: /* Entropy-driven Segment Alignment (Section 3.3) */ 

19: Forward unmasked inputs through Fθ to obtain contextualized token embeddings 

20: Extract e(h) 

> r,k

and e(v) 

> r,k

for each segment sr,k 

21: Construct segment embeddings σr,k = g(eak ∥ e(h) 

> r,k

∥ e(v) 

> r,k

)

22: Compute Lt 

> low

and Lt 

> high

according to the source table t of each row 

23: Compute Lalign = 1 

> |T B|

P 

> t∈T B

(Lt 

> low

+ Lt

> high

)

24: Compute Ltotal = Lmsm + λalign Lalign 

25: Update θ using Ltotal 

26: end for 

27: end for 

28: end for 

29: return Mθ∗

D.3. Training Procedure 

For each batch constructed as described in Section 3.3, the model performs two forward passes. The masked serialized rows are first passed through the table encoder Fθ to compute MSM logits and the masked segment modeling loss Lmsm over 

Mh, Mv , and Mr defined in Section 3.2. The unmasked rows are then passed through Fθ to obtain contextualized token embeddings for entropy-driven segment alignment. We extract e(h) 

> r,k

and e(v) 

> r,k

following Definition 3.3, combine them with the context-free attribute embedding eak from Definition 3.2, and compute the segment embedding σr,k = g(eak ∥ e(h) 

> r,k

∥ e(v) 

> r,k

).These segment embeddings are used to compute Lt 

> low

and Lt 

> high

under the entropy-based attribute partitions in Section 3.3. The total loss follows the main objective: Ltotal = Lmsm + λalign Lalign .20