Title: Limitations of post accelerating ion beams using the snowplow field in a near-critical density target

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.14521v1

Published Time: Mon, 17 Aug 2026 01:05:13 GMT

Number of Pages: 8

Markdown Content:
# Limitations of post accelerating ion beams using the snowplow field in a near-critical density target 

Davide Terzani, 1, a) Stepan S. Bulanov, 1 Lieselotte Obst-Huebl, 1 Carlo Benedetti, 1 Franklin Dollar, 2 Eric Esarey, 1

Axel Huebl, 1 Aodhan McIlvenny, 1 John Palastro, 3 Jessica Shaw, 3 Carl B. Schroeder, 1, 4 Douglass Schumacher, 5

Mingsheng Wei, 3 and Louise Willingale 6

> 1)

Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA 

> 2)

University of California, Irvine, CA 

> 3)

University of Rochester, Laboratory for Laser Energetics, Rochester, NY 

> 4)

Department of Nuclear Engineering, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA 

> 5)

Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 

> 6)

The Gérard Mourou Center for Ultrafast Optical Science, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109 

(Dated: 17 August 2026) 

Laser-matter interaction at relativistic intensities is central to almost every scientific case for multi-PW laser facilities. In particular, the progress in laser-driven ion acceleration brings this interaction closer to multiple applications, ranging from material science to biomedical research. One of the most important questions regarding ion acceleration is how to obtain high charge ion beams with relativistic energies. Increasing laser energy and intensity usually leads to a number of limitations on maximum achievable ion energies rooted in the fundamental properties of charged particle interaction with strong electromagnetic fields. Following advances in staged laser-plasma electron acceleration, staged ion acceleration could offer a path to relativistic energies. Here, such scheme is explored and the possibility of scaling the acceleration of ion beams to relativistic energies is discussed. 

I. INTRODUCTION 

Laser-matter interaction at relativistic intensities has attracted considerable attention from the scientific com-munity for more than half a century. It started as a search for a basic understanding of the fundamen-tal physics of plasma waves and then progressed to the study of different plasma instabilities, particle accelera-tion, magnetic reconnection, and high-frequency radia-tion generation 1–5 . A number of applications of laser-matter interaction with significant societal impact in-clude extreme-ultraviolet lithography for producing inte-grated circuits for the semiconductor industry, compact Laser-Plasma Accelerators (LPAs) for generating elec-tron and ion beams and serving as light sources, and the demonstration of fusion gain at the National Ignition Fa-cility. As the available laser intensity increases, new phe-nomena can be studied, as well as novel, groundbreaking applications, including laser-plasma-based sources of rel-ativistic ions. In what follows, we study a scheme for laser-ion acceleration that depends on laser-matter inter-action at relativistic intensities. Recently, there has been a lot of interest in studying high-intensity, high-power laser interactions with near-critical-density (NCD) targets, defined as targets whose density is comparable to, or slightly greater than, the critical plasma density (see, e.g., Refs. 6–14). The crit-ical plasma density is defined as the threshold between the plasma being opaque and being transparent to laser 

> a) dterzani@lbl.gov

light, and can be expressed as ncr = meω20 /4πe 2 ≃

1.12 ×10 21 cm −3/λ 20 [μm], where me is the electron mass, e

is the electron charge, ω0 = 2 πc/λ 0 is the laser frequency, and λ0 is the laser wavelength, respectively. As the laser pulse intensity increases, the transparency threshold in-creases as well due to the relativistic effects 3,4 , so that opaque targets become transparent for the laser radia-tion. During the interaction with an NCD target, the laser pulse can be almost completely depleted, with a significant amount of laser energy absorbed by plasma electrons and ions. The collective motion of electrons and ions leads to the generation of extreme electromag-netic fields in plasma, whose strength might approach mega-Tesla and peta-eV/m according to different analyt-ical and computer simulation estimates 7,12,15–17 . Plasma density modulations excited during the interaction move with different velocities and in different directions, fu-eling a number of instabilities (see, e.g., Refs. 18 and 19). Laser pulse propagation in a NCD target has been studied for electron and ion acceleration and for the gen-eration of high-energy photons 7,20–26 .The intense laser pulse volumetric interaction with the NCD plasma in the regime of relativistic transparency requires PW or multi-PW class laser facilities, such as ELI-NP 27,28 , ELI Beamlines 29,30 , CoReLS 31 , Apollon 32 ,SULF 33 , ZEUS 34 , and the future NSF OPAL 35 . Almost all these facilities either deliver or plan to deliver two or more synchronized PW and multi-PW laser pulses to the target chamber, e.g., ELI-NP with two 10 PW pulses, or the future NSF OPAL facility with two 25 PW pulses. Such multi-beam configurations enable exciting possibil-ities to study laser-matter interactions at relativistic in-tensities with NCD targets. Among all of these, two arXiv:2608.14521v1 [physics.plasm-ph] 14 Aug 2026 2pulses can be used to demonstrate a two-stage ion ac-celeration. In this scheme, the ions generated by the first laser pulse are injected into the second stage, there inter-acting with a second NCD target. Their energy is then boosted by the strong electromagnetic fields generated in front of the laser pulse at the laser-plasma interface, known as the "snowplow" regime of laser-ion accelera-tion 36–38 (for similar approaches to multi-stage laser ion acceleration see Ref. 11 and references cited therein). In this paper, we study the operation of a second stage of a two-stage laser ion accelerator, where both stages are powered by multi-PW laser pulses. To assess the under-lying physics of ion acceleration by the electromagnetic fields generated in a multi-PW laser interaction with an NCD target, we adopt a simplified probing model. An externally injected test proton beam with a variable time delay relative to the second pulse is used. The beam has a 100% energy spread and a maximum energy of 2 GeV, which provides an upper bound estimate for the mag-netic vortex acceleration regime 15 . This choice enables us to examine its initial phase space in full. The beam propagates collinearly with the laser and is assumed to have zero angular divergence. This initial condition is chosen to simplify the modeling and enable a compari-son with 1D analytical theory. We compute the resulting energy boost as a function of the initial proton phase-space coordinates to infer the accelerating fields inside the NCD target and identify conditions that may opti-mize the two-stage acceleration. This also allows us to examine the maximum energy gain, which is governed by the laser-plasma interface (snowplow) velocity 36–38 . The simplified model is validated using Particle-In-Cell (PIC) simulations. This paper is organized as follows: in Section II we estimate externally injected proton beam energy gain due to the snowplow field. These estimates are benchmarked against the results of PIC simulations in Section III. We discuss the obtained insights into the post-acceleration of proton beams using snowplow field in an NCD target in Section IV.  

> II. LASER PULSE PROPAGATION IN NEAR CRITICAL DENSITY PLASMA

In this Section, we use an analytical model to esti-mate the energy gain of pre-accelerated protons in the snowplow field of the laser pulse propagating in an NCD plasma. The accelerating electric field is generated at the laser-plasma interface and moves with it. Thus, in order to estimate the energy gain we need to analyze the laser propagation in the NCD plasma and how the laser-plasma interface velocity is connected to the laser and plasma properties. This propagation can be described in the framework of the waveguide model 15,39 , where it is assumed that an intense laser pulse impinging on a NCD target produces a density channel, by first displacing the electrons, followed by the ions. The channel walls have density high enough to contain the laser propagation and reduce its diffraction. The laser propagates inside this self-generated channel, so that its electromagnetic field can be described by a wave equation in a waveguide. It is possible to use the solution of the wave equation in a waveguide 17 to determine the the radius of the channel, 

Rch , as well as the laser field strength, ach = eA ch /m ec2,where Ach is the amplitude of the vector potential of the electromagnetic field in the channel and the group veloc-ity, βg =

q

1 − 1/γ 2 

> g

as: 

Rch = λ0

π ˜n−1/3 

> e

˜P 1/6, (1) 

ach = ˜ n1/3 

> e

˜P 1/6, (2) 

γg =

√21.84 ˜P 1/6 ˜n−1/3 

> e

. (3) In Equations (1)-(3), we introduced the normalized laser power, ˜P = (2 /K )( P/P c), and normalized plasma den-sity, ˜ne = ne/n cr . Here Pc = 2m2

> e

c5/e 2 = 17 GW is the characteristic power for relativistic self-focusing, 

K = ( π/ 32) 1/2[J1(κR ch )2 − J0(κR ch )J2(κR ch )] ≃ 1/13 .5

is a geometrical factor coming from the integration over the laser pulse profile in the channel 20 , Jn(κR ch ) is the Bessel function of the first kind, and κ ≃ 1.84 /R ch is the solution of the equation J′

> 1

(κR ch ) = 0 , which is a bound-ary condition for the wave equation in the waveguide. As the laser pulse propagates in the NCD plasma, it loses energy due to the generation of the channel in both electron and ion plasma components, which is accompanied by significant energy gain by plasma particles. This energy depletion is characterized by a depletion length, Lch , which can be determined as follows. As the energy of the laser in the channel, 

WL = πR 2

> ch

TFWHM a2

> ch

mec3ncr K, where TFWHM is the full width at half maximum laser duration, is spent mostly on electron acceleration, then by assuming that the average energy gain by electrons initially placed in this channel of radius Rch and length Lch is ach mec2 and equating the laser energy to the energy gained by these electrons, We = πR 2

> ch

Lch neach mec2, we obtain the de-pletion length, which is also the channel length: 

Lch 

Lp

= Aγ 2 

> g

, (4) where A ≃ 1.84 2K/ 2 ≃ 0.125 and Lp =

cT FWHM /2plog(2) is the laser pulse length. If we as-sume that the laser pulse depletes homogeneously, i.e., the rate of energy transfer from the laser to the plasma electrons is constant, the velocity of the laser-plasma in-terface is 

βI = Lch 

Lch + Lp

βg . (5) The Lorentz factor associated with the motion of the 3laser-plasma interface is 

γI = 1 + Aγ 2

> g

q

1 + γ2 

> g

(A2 + 2 A)

. (6) Thus, the Lorentz factor of the laser-plasma interface is determined by the group velocity of the laser. According to Eq. (6), it varies from unity, when γg = 1 , to ∼ γg /4,when γg ≫ 1. For values of plasma density and laser power that satisfy the validity requirements of the waveg-uide model 20 , this variation is even smaller (see Fig. 1). Moreover, the weak dependence of γg on ˜P and ˜ne shown in Eq. (3), leads to a Lorentz factor of the laser-plasma interface varying by a factor of two over the order of mag-nitude variation of either laser power (Fig. 1, left panel) or plasma density (Fig. 1, right panel). Thus, the weak dependence of the γg on laser power and plasma density as well as a significant reduction of the Lorentz factor of the laser-plasma interface compared to γg , which is due to strong depletion of laser pulses in the NCD plasma, are the main limiting factors for the energy gain in the two stage ion acceleration scheme based on the snowplow regime. In what follows we show that a several GeV en-ergy gain is potentially possible in the framework of this acceleration scheme, however scaling the scheme up 10 GeV and beyond is prohibitively challenging and would require a different approach to boosting the energy of relativistic ions. 0 10 Power, P [PW] 0510 Lorentz gamma 5 10 density, n/n cr 

γg , w 0 = Rch 

γg , w 0 > R ch 

γI , w 0 = Rch 

γI , w 0 > R ch                

> FIG. 1. The dependence of the laser γg(black curves) and
> γI(blue curves) as a function of: (left panel) laser power, with fixed plasma density, ne/n cr = 4 , (right panel) plasma density, with fixed laser power, P= 17 PW. The case with the effect of w0> R ch is shown by dashed curves. Here,
> w0= 4 λ0.

The results above were obtained under the assump-tion of an ideal coupling, i.e., laser pulse width at focus being equal to the radius of the self-generated channel, 

w0 = Rch 15,17 . However, in any realistic experimental scenario the laser pulse focal radius will be fixed, whereas the density of the target and laser pulse power can be varied, resulting in w0̸ = Rch in general. For the case 

w0 > R ch , when only a fraction of the laser power is ef-fectively coupled into the self-generated channel, different expressions for Rch , γg , and Lch should be used 17 :

Rch = λ0

π

 λ0

πw 0

1/2 

˜n−2 

> e

˜P

1/4

, (7) 

Lch /L p = K λ0

πw 0



˜n−2 

> e

˜P

1/2

, (8) 

γg =

√21.84 

 λ0

πw 0

1/2 

˜n−2 

> e

˜P

1/4

, (9) which result in a different behavior for γI , when the plasma density is varied (see Fig. 1). The part of the laser that is outside the πR 2 

> ch

area of the channel is scat-tered in plasma and does not participate in creating the channel and in driving the snowplow field. Here it is as-sumed that the laser power is homogeneously distributed across the focal spot and only Pch = ( Rch /w 0)2P part of initial laser power is coupled to the channel. As a result, the non-ideal case demonstrates stronger dependence on plasma density leading to smaller values of laser-plasma interface velocity. In what follows, we use the results above to esti-mate the energy gain of the proton beams accelerated by the longitudinal electric field associated with the laser-plasma interface. Figure 2 shows the longitudinal charge-               

> FIG. 2. On-axis lineout of the snowplow electric field and density at t= 220 fs generated by a laser with energy E=500 J in a density density n0= 2 ncr .The other laser and plasma parameters are listed in table I. For this density, the cold wavebreaking limit is E0≃5.7TV/m .

separation field (black line) and background electron den-sity (blue line) for a E = 500 J laser pulse propagating in a ˜ne = 2 target after a 220 fs propagation. The laser front (omitted for clarity) sits at z ≳ 40 μm, where it pushes the plasma density. Particles ahead of the mov-ing field interface are accelerated by the interface itself until their momentum becomes large enough to outrun it. For brevity, we do not derive here the full analysis of 4particle motion in the interface field, which can be found in several works, for instance in Refs. 36, 38, 40, and 41. The equations of motion for these particles can be written in the following form: 

du dt = me

mp

EI (x − βI t), (10) 

1

cdz dt = u

(1 + u2)1/2 . (11) Here, z is the longitudinal coordinate, u is the relativis-tic momentum normalized to mpc, with mp the pro-ton mass, and EI (x − βI t) is the longitudinal charge-separation field, moving with the interface and normal-ized to E0 = mecω p/e , where ωp = p4πe 2ne/m e is plasma frequency. In the reference frame co-moving with the interface, the particle acceleration in the interface field can be interpreted as a reflection from a relativistic mirror 42 . Particles that move faster than the interface do not interact with the moving structure. Conversely, particles that move slower than the interface are swept up by the field. Because the field has a finite longitudi-nal extent (as shown in Figure 2), they experience net acceleration over that extent. If the initial particle mo-mentum is high enough, the energy acquired during the interaction is sufficient to trap the particles in the struc-ture rather than allowing them to slip back. In this case, the relativistic mirror reflects them forward in its refer-ence frame. The closer the initial speed is to the lower trapping threshold, the longer the particles interact with the field, and the higher their final velocity. The Hamiltonian analysis in Ref. 38 provides an ana-lytical solution of the equations under a 1D approxima-tion. For higher target densities, the interface velocity is smaller, which lowers the initial trapping threshold. However, the maximum energy gain is limited by the shorter interaction time associated with a smaller field extent and the smaller velocity of the interface field. For lower target densities, the trapping threshold increases because the interface moves faster and particles can slip through the field more easily. Nevertheless, the faster-moving interface covers a larger physical extent, which can imprint higher energy gains on the particles that re-main trapped and thus reach higher final energies.  

> III. SIMULATIONS

We investigated the action of the snowplow field on pre-accelerated test protons using a set of PIC simula-tions performed with WarpX 43,44 . The laser-plasma in-teraction was modeled in quasi-cylindrical symmetry, in which the electromagnetic fields are decomposed into az-imuthal modes. Compared with fully 3D simulations, this approach substantially reduces the computational cost while preserving the correct scaling of the electro-magnetic fields in the target, which is not generally cap-tured in a 2D Cartesian geometry. The simulations used a fixed window that included the target in its entirety. The longitudinal and transverse resolutions were 64 and 51 cells per micron, respectively. The background electron-proton plasma was represented by 70 macroparticles per cell for each species. The input files used for the simulation scan can be found in Ref. 45.                             

> Parameter Value
> Laser-plasma
> Energy, E[J]200, 500 Strength, a076, 120 Duration, TFWHM [fs ]30 Waist at Focus, w0,[μm]4Wavelength, λ0,[μm]0.8 Initial position, z0[μm]-28 Target Density, ne/n c1 - 10
> Test protons
> Energy, Ei[MeV ]0.75 - 2030 Transverse Position, r[μm]-0.5 - 0.5 Longitudinal Position, z[μm]-30 - 30 TABLE I. Simulation Parameters

The simulations model a pre-ionized, near-critical, pure hydrogen target. To isolate the snowplow acceler-ation mechanism, we introduce pre-accelerated protons as test particles, thereby representing a proton popula-tion produced by an unspecified preceding acceleration stage. The details of this pre-acceleration stage, as well as the mechanism by which protons couple to the snow-plow field, are beyond the scope of this study. The test particles are initialized over a broad region of longitudinal phase space, allowing us to determine the final proton energy as a function of their initial position and energy. Their initial energy range from 

Ei = 0 .75 MeV to Ei = 2030 MeV, while their longitudinal positions span z = −30 μm to z = 30 μm. All protons are initially injected with zero transverse momentum and are distributed transversely over r = −0.5 μm to r = 0 .5 μmaround the laser axis. Restricting the initial transverse extent to this nar-row region, which is substantially smaller than both the laser waist and the plasma channel formed in the tar-get, simplifies the analysis while retaining the essen-tial features of the acceleration process. In particu-lar, the initially collinear distribution reduces transverse– longitudinal coupling and transverse phase-space mixing, enabling a more direct comparison with the 1D analytical model. We considered a circularly polarized laser pulse with either 200 J or 500 J of energy. The pulse is characterized by a Gaussian longitudinal and transverse profile. The other laser parameters are described in Table I. The nor-malized laser strengths for the two pulses are a0 = 76 and 

a0 = 120 respectively. Our simulations explore a range of target densities, normalized to the critical density nc,5from 1 to 10 in integer steps. By varying the target den-sity and laser energy, we investigate the effects of these parameters on the snowplow acceleration process. The collection of parameters for each simulation are summa-rized in Table I.               

> FIG. 3. The bottom panel shows the electron (top, blue scale) and hydrogen (bottom, red scale) density maps after
> t= 320 fs propagation. The top panel shows the correspond-ing normalized longitudinal electric field on axis. The dynam-ics show the interface at about 70 μm, where the laser front is pushing the electrons. The ions react with some delay due to their larger mass. The incoming laser energy is E= 500 Jand the unperturbed density is ˜ne= 2 . The other laser and plasma parameters are listed in table I. For this density, the cold wavebreaking limit is E0≃5.7TV/m .

As mentioned above, the propagation of the intense laser pulse in the NCD plasma leads to the formation of laser generated channels in electron and ion plasma com-ponents as shown in Figure 3, where we show a density map of the electrons (top half) and ions (bottom half) at t = 320 fs for a simulation with a 500 J laser pulse and a target density ˜ne = 2 . The laser pulse propagates from left to right. The formation of the channel is clearly seen, as well as the fact that the channel in ion density is formed with a slight delay after the the channel in elec-tron density. The evolution of the laser-plasma interface velocity, βI ,for a E = 500 J laser pulse propagating in the ˜ne = 4 

plasma is shown in Figure 4. At about t ≃ 80 fs, when a substantial fraction of the laser pulse enters into the target, βI reaches approximately 0.8. The subsequent decrease around t ≃ 400 fs indicates almost total laser pulse depletion. During its propagation, the laser pulse travels about 80 μm into the target. The analytical es-timate for the interface velocity given by Eq. (5) agrees reasonably well with the maximum value of the velocity. The laser plasma interface velocity depends on the laser power and on plasma density. With the increase of the latter, the laser plasma interface velocity decreases,              

> FIG. 4. The evolution of the laser-plasma interface velocity,
> βI, for a E= 500 J laser pulse propagating in a ˜ne= 4 density plasma. The dashed line shows the value predicted by Eq. (5) for these laser and plasma parameters.
> FIG. 5. The dependence of the average value of laser-plasma interface velocity on plasma density for two values of laser energy, E= 200 J (black curve and dots) and 500 J (blue curve and dots). The curves are the analytical results from Eq. (5). Dots are the results of PIC simulations.

since the laser depletes faster in more dense plasma, which can be seen in Figure 5, where the dependence of 

βI averaged over the laser depletion length is shown as a function of plasma density for two values the laser energy. The solid lines represent the scaling expected according to the simplified model presented in Eqs. (5) - (9). The results of PIC simulations are in reasonable agreement with the analytical estimates. The test protons are being accelerated by the snowplow field that is generated at the laser-plasma interface, i.e., in front of the laser pulse. However, the total energy gain of these protons depends on the initial conditions, i.e., on their initial position and momentum. In order to char-acterize this acceleration we present a color map of the energy gain ∆E of individual test protons as a function 6                

> FIG. 6. The dependence of the proton energy gain, ∆Eon the initial longitudinal position z0and initial kinetic energy
> Eifor a 500 J laser pulse and a target density of 4 nc.The other laser and plasma parameters are listed in table I. The left panel (a) shows the results obtained via PIC simulations, the right panel (b) shows the numerical solutions of equa-tions (10)-(11). The maximum energy gain is achieved for particles starting ahead of the laser-plasma interface with en-ergies 200 MeV ≲EI≲500 MeV and swept by the snowplow field. The horizontal dashed line corresponds to the energy of a proton initially moving with the velocity equal to the av-erage interface velocity. The plots mask phase space regions corresponding to particles losing energy in the interaction.

of their initial longitudinal position z0 and initial kinetic energy Ei for a simulation with a 500 J laser pulse and a target density of 4 nc (see the left panel of Figure 6). The horizontal dashed line corresponds to the energy of a proton initially moving with the velocity equal to the average interface velocity, βI , determined from Figure 4. We recognize two distinct acceleration mechanisms be-low and above the βI threshold, respectively. Below the threshold, particles ahead of the interface field are accel-erated via a prolonged snowplow push. Since they ini-tially move slower than the interface, they are trapped in the snowplow field at the front of the interface and accel-erated to their maximum velocity via a relativistic mirror reflection. This entails that lower initial velocities result in higher final velocities. Above the threshold, particles outrun the moving accelerating structure. However, par-ticles starting behind the structure catch up with it and receive an accelerating kick when passing it. This results in a roughly uniform energy gain for all those initial par-ticles, regardless of their initial energy. The right panel of Figure 6 shows the same plot obtained via the nu-merical solution of equations (10)-(11). We notice that substantial energy gain is only achieved in a narrow pa-rameter space and is characterized by maximizing the acceleration distance, which is achieved by the particles that are injected in the field as the laser-plasma inter-face is formed with an initial energy high enough not to slip all the way through the accelerating field (roughly 

200 MeV ≲ EI ≲ 500 MeV). These particle achieve nearly 2.2 GeV energy gain, reaching final energies around 2.5 GeV. A 1D description of the snowplow acceleration from both our toy-model and Ref. 38 shows that the highest energy gain is observed for protons with low initial ener-gies. These slow protons are effectively reflected, in the reference frame of the moving interface, by the acceler-ating field, resulting in a significant energy gain. Since we identified the basic features of the proton post acceleration in the snowplow field, i.e., the dependence on initial position and energy, we characterize the accel-eration process in terms plasma density. We show the dependence of the maximum proton energy gain on the plasma density in Fig. 7. As it could have been expected from the waveguide model of high power laser pulse prop-agation in NCD plasma, the increase in density leads to the decrease of the maximum proton energy gain, which is connected with the decrease in the interface velocity and, thus, in acceleration length. We note that a laser pulse with higher power accelerate protons to higher en-ergies, which is again due to the interface velocity in-creasing with laser power.     

> FIG. 7. The dependence of the maximum proton energy gain on the density of plasma target for laser energies 200 J and
> 500 J, obtained via PIC simulations.
> IV. CONCLUSIONS

In this paper, we explored the possibility of post ac-celerating a proton beam, which is generated during the interaction of a multi-PW laser pulses with a NCD tar-get. Since such an interaction would potentially produce a proton beam with a maximum energy on the order of 

1 GeV, but with almost 100% energy spread, we tested injecting such proton distribution into the second stage, 7where a second multi-PW laser beam interacts with a NCD target boosts the energy of these protons. Our an-alytical results, based on the waveguide model of high power laser pulse propagation in NCD plasma and a 1D model of snowplow acceleration, indicate a possibility of a multi-GeV proton energy gain. The specific energy gain depends on the parameters of laser NCD plasma interac-tion, in particular on laser power and plasma density. We studied the action of the snowplow field on pre-acceleration test protons via a set of PIC simulations using the code WarpX. The results of PIC simulations show a multi-GeV energy gain and agree with the ana-lytical estimates. It was determined that the effective-ness of snowplow post-acceleration depends strongly on the initial position of test protons and their initial en-ergy. In other words, the injection scheme should be a crucial component of any future experiment design on a two-stage proton acceleration. We found that the max-imum energy gain is experienced by those protons that arrive at the second target before the laser pulse and have the velocity smaller than the laser-plasma interface velocity. Thus, they are effectively reflected off the mov-ing laser-plasma interface and gain a significant energy boost. However, when the plasma density increases the effectiveness of the snowplow acceleration decreases lead-ing to the lower maximum energy gain. This can be par-tially mitigated by increasing the laser power, but due to the weak dependence of laser-plasma interface veloc-ity the overall maximum proton energy gain can not be boosted towards 10’s of GeV. If one envisions a laser-plasma based ion accelerator able to deliver 10’s or 100’s GeV beams, then this two stage interaction setup might potentially serve as an injector and booster stages for it. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

This work supported by the U.S. DOE Office of Sci-ence Office of HEP under Contract No. DE-AC02-05CH11231, and used the facilities at the National En-ergy Research Scientific Computing Center (NERSC) un-der award HEP-ERCAP0035612. Lousie Willingale ac-knowledges support from the National Science Founda-tion through Award 2408410. The work of John Palastro and Jessica Shaw is supported by the Office of Fusion Energy Sciences under Award Numbers DE-SC0021057, the Department of Energy National Nuclear Security Ad-ministration under Award Number DE-NA0004144, the University of Rochester, and the New York State En-ergy Research and Development Authority. The authors would like to acknowledge Marco Garten for useful dis-cussions. 

> 1

G. A. Mourou, T. Tajima, and S. V. Bulanov, Reviews of Modern Physics 78 , 309 (2006). 

> 2

E. Esarey, C. B. Schroeder, and W. P. Leemans, Reviews of Modern Physics 81 , 1229 (2009). 

> 3

H. Daido, M. Nishiuchi, and A. S. Pirozhkov, Reports on Progress in Physics 75 , 056401 (2012). 

> 4

A. Macchi, M. Borghesi, and M. Passoni, Reviews of Modern Physics 85 , 751 (2013). 

> 5

A. D. Piazza, L. Willingale, and J. D. Zuegel, “Multi-Petawatt Physics Prioritization (MP3) Workshop Report,” (2022), arXiv:2211.13187 [hep-ph]. 

> 6

X.-L. Zhu, T.-P. Yu, Z.-M. Sheng, Y. Yin, I. C. E. Turcu, and A. Pukhov, Nature Communications 7, 13686 (2016). 

> 7

D. Stark, T. Toncian, and A. Arefiev, Physical Review Letters 

116 , 185003 (2016). 

> 8

A. Sharma, Scientific Reports 8, 2191 (2018). 

> 9

J. Psikal, Plasma Physics and Controlled Fusion 63 , 064002 (2021). 

> 10

Y. He, T. G. Blackburn, T. Toncian, and A. Arefiev, Physics of Plasmas 29 , 053105 (2022). 

> 11

M. Garten, S. S. Bulanov, S. Hakimi, L. Obst-Huebl, C. E. Mitchell, C. B. Schroeder, E. Esarey, C. G. R. Geddes, J.-L. Vay, and A. Huebl, Physical Review Research 6, 033148 (2024). 

> 12

S. Hakimi, L. Obst-Huebl, A. Huebl, K. Nakamura, S. S. Bu-lanov, S. Steinke, W. P. Leemans, Z. Kober, T. M. Ostermayr, T. Schenkel, A. J. Gonsalves, J.-L. Vay, J. Van Tilborg, C. Toth, C. B. Schroeder, E. Esarey, and C. G. R. Geddes, Physics of Plasmas 29 , 083102 (2022). 

> 13

M. Rehwald, S. Assenbaum, C. Bernert, F.-E. Brack, M. Buss-mann, T. E. Cowan, C. B. Curry, F. Fiuza, M. Garten, L. Gaus, M. Gauthier, S. Göde, I. Göthel, S. H. Glenzer, L. Huang, A. Huebl, J. B. Kim, T. Kluge, S. Kraft, F. Kroll, J. Metzkes-Ng, T. Miethlinger, M. Loeser, L. Obst-Huebl, M. Reimold, H.-P. Schlenvoigt, C. Schoenwaelder, U. Schramm, M. Siebold, F. Tre-ffert, L. Yang, T. Ziegler, and K. Zeil, Nature Communications 

14 , 4009 (2023). 

> 14

O. Seemann, Y. Wan, S. Tata, E. Kroupp, and V. Malka, Phys-ical Review Letters 133 , 025001 (2024). 

> 15

J. Park, S. S. Bulanov, J. Bin, Q. Ji, S. Steinke, J.-L. Vay, C. G. R. Geddes, C. B. Schroeder, W. P. Leemans, T. Schenkel, and E. Esarey, Physics of Plasmas 26 , 103108 (2019). 

> 16

H. G. Rinderknecht, T. Wang, A. L. Garcia, G. Bruhaug, M. S. Wei, H. J. Quevedo, T. Ditmire, J. Williams, A. Haid, D. Doria, K. M. Spohr, T. Toncian, and A. Arefiev, New Journal of Physics 

23 , 095009 (2021). 

> 17

S. Hakimi, S. S. Bulanov, A. Huebl, L. Obst-Huebl, K. Naka-mura, A. Gonsalves, T. Schenkel, J. van Tilborg, J.-L. Vay, C. B. Schroeder, E. Esarey, and C. R. Geddes, Physics of Plasmas 31 ,123108 (2024). 

> 18

S. V. Bulanov, T. Z. Esirkepov, M. Kando, F. Pegoraro, S. S. Bulanov, C. G. R. Geddes, C. B. Schroeder, E. Esarey, and W. P. Leemans, Physics of Plasmas 19 , 103105 (2012). 

> 19

D. Haberberger, S. Tochitsky, F. Fiuza, C. Gong, R. A. Fonseca, L. O. Silva, W. B. Mori, and C. Joshi, Nature Physics 8, 95 (2012). 

> 20

S. S. Bulanov, V. Y. Bychenkov, V. Chvykov, G. Kalinchenko, D. W. Litzenberg, T. Matsuoka, A. G. R. Thomas, L. Willingale, V. Yanovsky, K. Krushelnick, and A. Maksimchuk, Physics of Plasmas 17 , 043105 (2010). 

> 21

L. Willingale, S. P. D. Mangles, P. M. Nilson, R. J. Clarke, A. E. Dangor, M. C. Kaluza, S. Karsch, K. L. Lancaster, W. B. Mori, Z. Najmudin, J. Schreiber, A. G. R. Thomas, M. S. Wei, and K. Krushelnick, Physical Review Letters 96 , 245002 (2006). 

> 22

L. Willingale, P. M. Nilson, A. G. R. Thomas, S. S. Bulanov, A. Maksimchuk, W. Nazarov, T. C. Sangster, C. Stoeckl, and K. Krushelnick, Physics of Plasmas 18 , 056706 (2011). 

> 23

Z. Gong, S. S. Bulanov, T. Toncian, and A. Arefiev, Physical Review Research 4, L042031 (2022). 

> 24

M. Vranic, R. A. Fonseca, and L. O. Silva, Plasma Physics and Controlled Fusion 60 , 034002 (2018). 

> 25

R. Babjak, B. Martinez, M. Krus, and M. Vranic, New Journal of Physics 26 , 093002 (2024). 

> 26

Z. Gong, S. Cao, J. P. Palastro, and M. R. Edwards, Physical Review Letters 133 , 265002 (2024). 

> 27

C. Radier, O. Chalus, M. Charbonneau, S. Thambirajah, G. De-schamps, S. David, J. Barbe, E. Etter, G. Matras, S. Ricaud, 8

V. Leroux, C. Richard, F. Lureau, A. Baleanu, R. Banici, A. Gradinariu, C. Caldararu, C. Capiteanu, A. Naziru, B. Di-aconescu, V. Iancu, R. Dabu, D. Ursescu, I. Dancus, C. A. Ur, K. A. Tanaka, and N. V. Zamfir, High Power Laser Science and Engineering 10 , e21 (2022). 

> 28

K. A. Tanaka, K. M. Spohr, D. L. Balabanski, S. Balascuta, L. Capponi, M. O. Cernaianu, M. Cuciuc, A. Cucoanes, I. Dan-cus, A. Dhal, B. Diaconescu, D. Doria, P. Ghenuche, D. G. Ghita, S. Kisyov, V. Nastasa, J. F. Ong, F. Rotaru, D. Sangwan, P.-A. Söderström, D. Stutman, G. Suliman, O. Tesileanu, L. Tudor, N. Tsoneva, C. A. Ur, D. Ursescu, and N. V. Zamfir, Matter and Radiation at Extremes 5, 024402 (2020). 

> 29

T. Spinka, E. Sistrunk, A. Bayramian, J. P. Armstrong, S. Bax-amusa, S. Betts, D. R. Bopp, S. Buck, K. Charron, J. Cupal, R. Demaret, R. Deri, J.-M. D. Nicola, A. Erlandson, E. S. Fulker-son, C. Gates, J. Horner, J. Horacek, J. Jarboe, K. Kasl, D. Kim, E. Koh, L. Koubikova, R. Lanning, J. Lusk, W. Maranville, C. Marshall, D. Mason, J. Menapace, P. Miller, P. Mazurek, A. J. Naylon, J. Nissen, J. Novak, D. Peceli, P. Rosso, K. Schaf-fers, T. Silva, D. Smith, J. Stanley, R. Steele, C. Stolz, T. Surat-wala, S. Telford, J. Thoma, D. VanBlarcom, J. Weiss, P. Wegner, B. Rus, and C. Haefner, in 2017 European Conference on Lasers and Electro-Optics and European Quantum Electronics Confer-ence (2017) (Optica Publishing Group, 2017). 

> 30

S. Weber, S. Bechet, S. Borneis, L. Brabec, M. Bučka, E. Chacon-Golcher, M. Ciappina, M. DeMarco, A. Fajstavr, K. Falk, E.-R. Garcia, J. Grosz, Y.-J. Gu, J.-C. Hernandez, M. Holec, P. Janečka, M. Jantač, M. Jirka, H. Kadlecova, D. Khikhlukha, O. Klimo, G. Korn, D. Kramer, D. Kumar, T. Lastovička, P. Lutoslawski, L. Morejon, V. Olšovcová, M. Rajdl, O. Ren-ner, B. Rus, S. Singh, M. Šmid, M. Sokol, R. Versaci, R. Vrána, M. Vranic, J. Vyskočil, A. Wolf, and Q. Yu, Matter and Radia-tion at Extremes 2, 149 (2017). 

> 31

J. H. Sung, H. W. Lee, J. Y. Yoo, J. W. Yoon, C. W. Lee, J. M. Yang, Y. J. Son, Y. H. Jang, S. K. Lee, and C. H. Nam, Optics Letters 42 , 2058 (2017). 

> 32

W. Yao, R. Lelièvre, I. Cohen, T. Waltenspiel, A. Allaoua, P. An-tici, Y. Ayoul, A. Beck, A. Beluze, C. Blancard, D. Cavanna, M. Chabanis, S. N. Chen, E. Cohen, P. Cossé, Q. Ducasse, M. Dumergue, F. E. Hai, C. Evrard, E. Filippov, A. Fre-neaux, D. C. Gautier, F. Gobert, F. Goupille, M. Grech, L. Gremillet, Y. Heller, E. d’Humières, H. Lahmar, L. Lancia, N. Lebas, L. Lecherbourg, S. Marchand, D. Mataja, G. Meyniel, D. Michaeli, D. Papadopoulos, F. Perez, S. Pikuz, I. Pomerantz, P. Renaudin, L. Romagnani, F. Trompier, E. Veuillot, T. Vin-chon, F. Mathieu, and J. Fuchs, Physics of Plasmas 32 , 043106 (2025). 

> 33

W. Li, Z. Gan, L. Yu, C. Wang, Y. Liu, Z. Guo, L. Xu, M. Xu, Y. Hang, Y. Xu, J. Wang, P. Huang, H. Cao, B. Yao, X. Zhang, L. Chen, Y. Tang, S. Li, X. Liu, S. Li, M. He, D. Yin, X. Liang, Y. Leng, R. Li, and Z. Xu, Optics Letters 43 , 5681 (2018). 

> 34

A. Maksimchuk, J. Nees, B. Hou, R. Anthony, J. Bae, F. Bayer, M. Burger, P. T. Campbell, J. Cardarelli, V. Contreras, N. Ernst, F. Falcoz, R. Fitzgarrald, I. Jovanovic, G. Kalinchenko, C. Ku-ranz, J. Latham, Y. Ma, A. McKelvey, T. Nutting, Q. Qian, B. K. Russell, G. Sucha, A. G. R. Thomas, R. Van Camp, E. Viges, L. Willingale, G. Young, Q. Zhang, and K. Krushelnick, Physics of Plasmas 32 , 103107 (2025). 

> 35

J. Bromage, S.-W. Bahk, I. A. Begishev, C. Dorrer, M. J. Guardalben, B. N. Hoffman, J. B. Oliver, R. G. Roides, E. M. Schiesser, M. J. S. Iii, M. Spilatro, B. Webb, D. Weiner, and J. D. Zuegel, High Power Laser Science and Engineering 7, e4 (2019). 

> 36

O. Shorokhov and A. Pukhov, Laser and Particle Beams 22 , 175 (2004). 

> 37

B. Liu, J. Meyer-ter Vehn, H. Ruhl, and M. Zepf, Plasma Physics and Controlled Fusion 62 , 085014 (2020). 

> 38

B. Liu, M. Shi, M. Zepf, B. Lei, and D. Seipt, Physical Review Letters 129 , 274801 (2022). 

> 39

S. Bulanov, E. Esarey, C. Schroeder, W. Leemans, S. Bulanov, D. Margarone, G. Korn, and T. Haberer, Physical Review Spe-cial Topics - Accelerators and Beams 18 , 061302 (2015). 

> 40

A. Brantov, E. Govras, V. Kovalev, and V. Y. Bychenkov, Phys-ical Review Letters 116 , 085004 (2016). 

> 41

I. Göthel, C. Bernert, M. Bussmann, M. Garten, T. Miethlinger, M. Rehwald, K. Zeil, T. Ziegler, T. E. Cowan, U. Schramm, and T. Kluge, Plasma Physics and Controlled Fusion 64 , 044010 (2022). 

> 42

S. V. Bulanov, T. Z. Esirkepov, M. Kando, A. S. Pirozhkov, and N. N. Rozanov, Physics-Uspekhi 56 , 429 (2013). 

> 43

L. Fedeli, A. Huebl, F. Boillod-Cerneux, T. Clark, K. Gott, C. Hillairet, S. Jaure, A. Leblanc, R. Lehe, A. Myers, C. Piechurski, M. Sato, N. Zaim, W. Zhang, J.-L. Vay, and H. Vincenti, in SC22: International Conference for High Per-formance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis (2022) pp. 1–12. 

> 44

J. L. Vay, A. Almgren, J. Bell, L. Ge, D. P. Grote, M. Hogan, O. Kononenko, R. Lehe, A. Myers, C. Ng, J. Park, R. Ryne, O. Shapoval, M. Thévenet, and W. Zhang, Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research Section A: Accelerators, Spec-trometers, Detectors and Associated Equipment 3rd European Advanced Accelerator Concepts workshop (EAAC2017), 909 ,476 (2018). 

> 45

D. Terzani, S. Bulanov, C. Benedetti, and C. Schroeder, (2026), 10.5281/zenodo.21924875.