Title: 2608.07846v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.07846v1

Published Time: Tue, 11 Aug 2026 00:20:49 GMT

Number of Pages: 44

Markdown Content:
1

# China RealDID: Verifiable Credentials Anchored in 

# Legal Identity 

Yifan He 

Founder and Chief Executive Officer, Red Date Technology (Hong Kong) Ltd. 

yifan.he@reddatetech.com 

ORCID: 0009 -0005 -1048 -180X 

Working Paper  — Comments and circulation welcome. This is a working 

paper circulated for discussion and feedback. A condensed version is 

planned for journal submission. Operational metrics, including DID 

issuance volume, consortium composition, and end -to -end credential 

issuance and verification latency, will be added in a future revision once 

proper authorization is received. 

Author’s note.  The author is CEO of Red Date Technology (Hong Kong) 

Ltd., co -developer of the RealDID system described in this paper. 

Architectural descriptions reflect insider knowledge; normative claims 

should be read with this affiliation in mind. A formal Competing Interests 

declaration appears before the References. 

# Abstract 

Verifiable credentials (VCs) and decentralized identifiers (DIDs) enable selective 

disclosure without centralized identity providers, but suffer a structural weakness: 

without a trusted identity root, verifiers cannot distinguish a genuine credential 

holder from a fabricated identity. National legal identity systems provide biometric -

grounded verification but impose three costs: every verifier must collect the 

subject’s full personally identifiable information, verification infrastructure 

concentrates on a single state -operated API, and the state observes every 

verification transaction. We present China’s RealDID as a case study bridging these 

paradigms through a three -layer architecture —CTID (centralized legal identity), 

RealDID (decentralized identifier anchor on an open permissioned blockchain), and 

VCs with selective disclosure —evaluated against an adversary model of five 

adversary classes and six security goals. The central mechanism is a content -blind 

government relay: the state authenticates VC partici pants and counter -signs every 

credential but cannot read the payload, which the issuer encrypts directly to the 

holder’s public key. We describe the VC lifecycle, triple -signature chain, template 

registry with open issuer participation, selective -disclosure mechanism, and the 

architecture’s metadata -level privacy limits —including the credential graph 2

accumulated at the relay and the presentation -linkability gap from single -DID reuse. 

The design yields an asymmetric, state -bounded trust model: the state cannot 

impersonate users or read credential contents, while the user cannot fabricate 

legal identity or evade state -side metadata observation. We analyze regulatory 

alignment with China’s Personal Information Protection Law and the EU’s GDPR, 

including the tension between immutable on -chain registries and erasure rights, 

and discuss generalizability through cross -border deployments with Singapore and 

Hong Kong. 

Keywords:  RealDID • verifiable credentials • decentralized identity • CTID • 

selective disclosure • digital identity • privacy • authentication • China 

# 1. Introduction 

Verifiable credentials (VCs) and decentralized identifiers (DIDs), standardized by 

the W3C [1, 2], enable cryptographic selective disclosure: a holder can present a 

subset of claims from an issuer -signed credential to a verifier, who validates the 

issuer’s and holder’s signatures without querying a central authority. This model 

addresses several long -standing privacy weaknesses of centralized identity 

verification  — verifier -side PII over -collection, single -API cost concentration, and 

state visibility into all verification transactions. However, the decentralized identity 

ecosystem carries a complementary security gap: it lacks  legal anchoring . A self -

issued DID provides no guarantee that the entity behind it corresponds to a real, 

legally -recognized person. In the absence of a trusted identity root, a verifier cannot 

distinguish between a genuine credential holder and a fabricated identity backed by 

a self -generated key pair. Cryptographic verification of a credential’s signatures 

confirms  who issued it  and  who presents it , but says nothing about whether the 

underlying identity is real  — a property that only a state -operated, biometric -

grounded legal identity system can provide. 

This tension  — between the privacy and decentralization benefits of VCs and the 

legal -anchoring requirement that only a centralized state root can satisfy  — is the 

problem this paper addresses. We present China’s RealDID system as a case study 

that bridges centralized legal identity with decentralized verifiable credentials, and 

we evaluate the result against an explicit security model. 

RealDID is a decentralized identity layer built on top of CTID (Cyber Trusted Identity), 

China’s centralized identity verification infrastructure operated by the responsible 

national authority. After a user invokes CTID’s per -session biometric verification  —

matching a live facial image against their pre -existing CTID record, which is 

populated automatically when a citizen obtains their national ID card  — the 

responsible state authority issues a  did:sic:  identifier (State Information Center) 

on an open permissioned blockchain governed by a multi -stakeholder consortium 

of public and private sector entities. The user generates their own cryptographic key 

pair locally; the government records the mapping between the RealDID and the 3

CTID identity in an internal, off -chain linkage table but never publishes it on -chain. 

The government has no access to the user’s private key and therefore cannot sign 

as the user, present credentials, or impersonate the DID subject. Verifiable 

credentials are issued against RealDIDs through a government -mediated but 

content -blind relay : the government verifies that both the issuer and the holder are 

authentic, but cannot view the credential contents, which the issuer encrypts 

directly to the holder’s public key before the credential reaches the relay. The 

government never holds a key capable of decrypting the payload. Every VC 

presentation carries a  triple -signature chain : the issuer signature attests to the 

credential’s authority, the government counter -signature attests to the authenticity 

of both parties, and the holder signature on each presentation proves current 

control of the DID private key and prevents replay. 

This architecture yields what we call an  asymmetric, state -bounded trust model :

the state retains legal anchoring, deanonymization, revocation, and per -credential 

metadata logging, yet is cryptographically prevented from impersonating users or 

reading credential contents; the user controls selective disclosure but cannot 

fabricate a legal identity or evade state -side metadata observation. The user is 

bounded by cryptography; the state is bounded by cryptography plus legal -process 

constraints on capabilities it both holds and operates. We frame this as 

decentralized verification with centralized legal anchoring  rather than fully 

decentralized identity  — a more honest baseline than stronger “mutual constraint” 

rhetoric, developed in detail in §4.4 and §6.2. 

We evaluate the architecture against an explicit adversary model (§3.0) comprising 

five adversary classes: malicious verifier (A1), semi -honest issuer (A2), semi -honest 

government relay (A3), network observer (A4), and consortium -majority adversary 

(A5). We define six security goals  — issuer authentication (G1), holder 

authentication (G2), selective disclosure of contents (G3), content blindness at the 

relay (G4), verifier privacy (G5), and accountability under legal process (G6)  — and 

map each to the architectural mechanism that realizes it, the adversary classes it 

addresses, and the assumptions and limitations that bound the claim. 

This paper makes three contributions: 

1.  Security architecture : We describe the RealDID three -layer architecture 

(CTID → RealDID → VCs) in protocol -level detail, including the DID issuance 

flow, key custody model, VC template registry with open issuer participation, 

full VC lifecycle, triple -signature chain, content -blind relay design, and the 

selective -disclosure mechanism. We provide a structured security -claim 

table mapping each of the six security goals to its architectural mechanism, 

adversary coverage, and bounding assumptions. We name the 

architecture’s securit y and privacy limits explicitly: the credential -graph 

metadata that the relay accumulates, the presentation -linkability gap from 4

single -DID reuse, and the reliance on consortium consensus rather than 

cryptographic enforcement against a majority adversary. 

2.  Policy and regulatory analysis : We analyze the architecture’s alignment 

with China’s Personal Information Protection Law (PIPL) and compare it with 

the EU’s General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) and eIDAS 2.0, 

including the tension between immutable on -chain registries and data -

subject erasure rights. We characterize the dual -root trust model and its 

asymmetry, and identify verifier privacy as an under -appreciated dimension 

of identity infrastructure  — protected by decentralized verification but 

structurally exposed by centralized API models. 

3.  Generalizability : We argue that the three -layer model is chain -agnostic and 

applies to any jurisdiction with a centralized legal identity system. We 

discuss this through in -progress cross -border deployments with Singapore 

and Hong Kong; empirical evaluation is reserved for future work. 

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides background 

on CTID, RealDID, W3C Verifiable Credentials, and related work. Section 3 presents 

the adversary model and security goals, followed by a gap analysis through five 

problem scenarios. Section 4 details the RealDID identity -anchor architecture. 

Section 5 describes the VC ecosystem built on RealDID. Section 6 provides policy 

and governance analysis. Section 7 discusses generalizability to other jurisdictions. 

Section 8 concludes. 

# 2. Background 

# 2.1 CTID: China’s Centralized Identity Infrastructure 

The Cyber Trusted Identity (CTID) system is China’s national online identity 

authentication platform, operated by the responsible national authority. CTID 

anchors legal identity to biometric and documentary evidence collected through 

the national ID -card issuance process: when a Chinese citizen applies for a national 

ID card, the issuing authority records the citizen’s biometric (facial image) and 

documentary data, and CTID is populated automatically from that record. No 

separate user -initiated CTID registration step is required. Once verified, CTID binds 

the user’s legal identity  — name, identification number, photograph, and 

associated demographic data  — to an authenticated session or token. 

CTID exposes a single permission -based verification API gateway. Authorized 

service providers  — primarily financial institutions, telecommunications carriers, 

and government platforms  — submit an authentication request containing the 

subject’s claimed name, identification number, and facial image, and CTID returns 

only a yes/no confirmation of whether the submitted data matches its records. The 

API is not publicly accessible; access requires formal authorization and is limited to 

a relatively small set of e ntities. This architecture concentrates three burdens on 5

the state: (1) full infrastructure cost for national -scale verification traffic, (2) sole 

responsibility for access control decisions, and (3) complete visibility into every 

verification transaction  — who verifies whom, when, and in what context. 

This API -gateway form is the original CTID deployment model. CTID is currently 

being upgraded toward a complementary app -based mode of operation  —

structurally analogous to the national identity applications deployed in Singapore 

and Hong Kong  — in which the user authenticates through a state -issued mobile 

application rather than (or in addition to) the verifier -submitted query model 

described above. The architectural analysis in the remainder of this paper applies to 

both modes, since the RealDID layer is decoupled from how CTID itself is exposed 

to verifiers. 

# 2.2 RealDID: The Decentralized Identity Layer 

RealDID is a decentralized identity system built as an extension to CTID. Its core 

premise is to decouple identity  verification  from identity  authentication : CTID 

remains the root of legal identity verification (biometric + documentary), but 

RealDID shifts ongoing authentication and credential exchange to a decentralized 

infrastructure. 

RealDID operates on an  open permissioned blockchain  — specifically  Guoxin 

Chain  (formerly Yan’an Chain [31]), built on the FISCO BCOS open -source 

blockchain framework [33] and operated by China’s Blockchain -based Service 

Network (BSN), launched 9 June 2023  — governed by a multi -stakeholder 

consortium of government agencies and private sector entities. The chain is 

permissioned at the validator level  — only consortium members may operate nodes 

and write blocks  — but publicly readable: any party with network access can query 

DIDs, resolve DID documents, and verify cryptographic signatures without 

authorization. This design is driven by three constraints. First, public permissionless 

blockchains require cryptocurrency gas fees, which are legally restricted in China. 

Second, a private single -entity chain would defeat the purpose of decentralized 

verification by placing one party in unilateral control. Third, the consortium model 

distributes governance across multiple stakeholders, ensuring that no single entity 

— including the state  — can unilaterally alter the DID registry, template registry, or 

revocation registry. 

The RealDID issuance protocol proceeds as follows: 

1.  CTID verification : The user authenticates through CTID’s biometric 

verification (facial recognition and ID document matching). 

2.  Key generation : The user generates a cryptographic key pair locally. The 

public key is submitted to the government; the private key never leaves the 

user’s device. 

3.  DID issuance : The government issues a  did:sic:<address>  to the 

permissioned chain, associating the DID with the user’s public key. 6

4.  Linkage recording : The government internally records the mapping between 

the CTID identity and the  did:sic:  — this linkage table is held exclusively by 

the government and is never published on -chain. 

5.  Key custody : The user retains exclusive control of the private key. The 

government cannot sign transactions, present credentials, or otherwise act 

as the DID subject. 

# 2.3 W3C Verifiable Credentials 

The W3C Verifiable Credentials Data Model [2] defines a standard for 

cryptographically verifiable digital credentials. A VC is a set of claims about a 

subject, issued by an authoritative issuer, and held by the subject in a digital wallet. 

The holder can present the VC  — or a subset of its claims  — to a verifier, who 

cryptographically validates the issuer’s signature and the holder’s control of the 

credential. 

The W3C Decentralized Identifiers specification [1] defines DIDs as globally unique, 

resolvable identifiers that do not require a centralized registration authority. A DID 

resolves to a DID document containing the subject’s public keys and service 

endpoints. DIDs are typically anchored to a distributed ledger or similar verifiable 

data registry, enabling anyone to resolve them without querying a central authority. 

Three properties of the VC model are central to the RealDID architecture.  Selective 

disclosure  allows a holder to reveal only a subset of claims from a VC  — for 

example, proving age over 18 without revealing date of birth.  Issuer authentication 

ensures that every VC carries a cryptographic signature from its issuer, which 

verifiers can validate against the issuer’s DID document.  Presentation 

authentication  ensures that the party presenting a VC is its legitimate holder, via a 

holder signature bound to the DID’s private key. 

# 2.4 Related Work 

Several lines of work are relevant: (i) self -sovereign and decentralized identity 

frameworks, (ii) state -led mobile and verifiable credential deployments, (iii) bridges 

between national identity infrastructure and decentralized credentials, and (iv) the 

underlying cryptographic primitives for selective disclosure. 

Self -sovereign and decentralized identity frameworks.  Allen’s “Path to Self -

Sovereign Identity”  [19] articulates the ten principles (existence, control, access, 

transparency, persistence, portability, interoperability, consent, minimization, 

protection) that the SSI ecosystem has built on. Civic identity on blockchain has 

been explored by Sovrin [5] (a purpose -built identity ledger built on Hyperledger Indy, 

which also originated the AnonCreds anonymous -credential scheme [22]) and 

uPort [32] (Ethereum -based self -sovereign identity). These systems emphasize user 

sovereignty but assume self -asserted or  socially -attested identity roots, limiting 

their legal standing for applications requiring government -recognized identity. The 7

Trust over IP Foundation has developed a four -layer governance model [23] that 

complements the technical W3C stack with governance and assurance layers; 

RealDID’s consortium -governed registries occupy that layer in a way that the W3C 

documents leave deliberately unspecified. 

State -led mobile and verifiable credential deployments.  The European Union’s 

eIDAS 2.0 regulation [3] mandates the European Digital Identity Wallet (EUDI Wallet), 

which enables citizens to store and present digital credentials with selective 

disclosure. The accompanying EUDI ARF [15] specifies SD -JWT [12] and ISO/IEC 

18013 -5 mobile driver’s licenses (mDL) [16] as the interoperable credential formats; 

together with Hyperledger Indy/AnonCreds [22], these are the principal production -

grade reference designs against which RealDID can be compared. The mDL 

standard in particular has reached real -world deployment in multiple jurisdictions 

[25]. NIST SP 800 -63 [26] provides the U.S. assurance -level baseline for digital 

identity, including remote identity proofing at the highest assurance level (IAL3), 

which like CTID requires biometric verification. The trust model in eIDAS 2.0 is 

federated: member states authenticate identity through their national systems and 

issue credentials into the wallet. The EUDI Wallet achieves user -controlled 

selective disclosure through a federation of national trust roots rather than a single 

state root. 

Bridges between national identity and decentralized credentials.  India’s 

Aadhaar system has moved from being a candidate identity root for verifiable 

credentials to an actual one: the Aadhaar (Authentication and Offline Verification) 

Amendment Regulations, 2024 [4] formalize the  Aadhaar Verifiable Credential  (AVC) 

as a recognized offline verification mode, allowing holders to share a UIDAI -signed 

credential containing selected demographic fields (and the last four digits of the 

Aadhaar number) rather than the full Aadhaar identity. Architecturally, AVC is closer 

to RealDID’s selective -disclosure ethos than the original Aadhaar API model is  —

but AVC remains  issuer -rooted  in UIDAI without an intermediate decentralized 

identifier layer, and Aadhaar’s biometric -centralized architecture has been the 

subject of a substantial critical literature documenting exclusion harms and 

centralized -biometric -storage risks [20, 21]. The presence of AVC in production 

makes India the most directly relevant comparator for the RealDID model: same 

problem class (state legal identity bridging to user -held credentials), distinct 

architectural choice (no on -chain DID layer; UIDAI as sole anchor). Estonia’s e -

Residency and X -Road infrastructure [27] is yet another model  — a federated set of 

state -operated services around a national PKI  — and is a useful reference for how 

mature state digital identity can interoperate with credential issuance without a 

ledger. 

Cryptographic primitives for selective disclosure.  Cryptographic selective 

disclosure schemes  — BBS+ signatures [10], Camenisch -Lysyanskaya signatures 

[11], and the IETF SD -JWT specification [12]  — allow a holder to prove possession of 

an issuer -signed credential while revealing only a subset of its claims, without the 8

holder having to re -sign a redacted version. Anonymous -credential schemes 

(IDEMIX [24], AnonCreds [22]) additionally provide presentation unlinkability, so 

that two presentations from the same holder cannot be linked to a common identity 

by colluding verifiers. RealDID uses SD -JWT [12] for cryptographic selective 

disclosure (§5.3), providing the same hash -commitment mechanism as the EUDI 

credential format; the unlinkability gap from single -DID reuse is discussed in §6.4. 

RealDID’s distinguishing features.  Relative to this prior work, the features that 

distinguish RealDID are: (1)  content -blind government relay  — the state 

authenticates VC participants without viewing credential payloads; (2)  user -held 

private keys with state -exclusive linkage  — the state can deanonymize a DID 

under legal process but cannot impersonate; (3)  verifier privacy at the application 

layer  — on -chain queries do not require authentication to a central authority, in 

contrast to permissioned verification APIs; and (4)  chain -agnostic governance  —

the architecture prescribes chain  properties  (public readability, multi -stakeholder 

governance of registries) rather than a specific chain type. None of these is 

individually novel as a cryptographic technique; the contribution is in their 

integration with a centralized legal identity root, in a regulatory environment that 

constrains the chain layer, and in the explicit naming of the asymmetries that follow. 

# 3. Privacy and Verification Gap Analysis 

Before presenting the RealDID architecture in detail, we establish the problems it 

addresses. This section first specifies the adversary model and security goals 

against which both centralized CTID -style verification and the proposed RealDID 

architecture are evaluated (§3.0), then analyzes five structural gaps in centralized 

identity verification, each illustrated with a concrete scenario (§3.1 –§3.5). 

# 3.0 Adversary Model and Security Goals 

We consider five adversary classes. The model is informal  — a fully game -based 

treatment is out of scope for a case -study paper  — but it pins down which 

capabilities each adversary holds and which security goals each scenario evaluates. 

Adversary classes.  - A1  — Malicious verifier.  A verifier that follows the protocol to 

receive presentations but seeks to (i) extract more PII than disclosed, (ii) replay or 

re -present credentials it has received, or (iii) collude with other verifiers to link a 

holder’s interactions across services.  - A2  — Semi -honest issuer.  An issuer that 

issues credentials honestly but seeks to track holder usage of those credentials 

post -issuance, to issue equivalent credentials to unintended subjects, or to register 

credential types outside its domain of authority.  - A3  — Semi -honest government 

relay.  The government acts as the relay (§5.2 Phase 2) and follows the protocol, but 

seeks to maximize metadata observation while remaining content -blind to 

credential payloads.  - A4  — Network observer.  An attacker observing on -chain 

queries (chain -read traffic, RPC endpoints) who seeks to identify which verifier 

queries which DID. We assume the attacker does not control consortium validators. 9

Verifiers that operate their own read -only Guoxin Chain full node (see §4.2) sit 

outside this attack surface entirely, since their queries never leave their 

infrastructure.  - A5  — Consortium -majority adversary.  A coalition of more than 

the consensus threshold of consortium validators that seeks to write malicious 

entries to the DID Registry, Template Registry, or Revocation Registry. We treat this 

as a worst -case bound rather than a routine threat. 

Security goals.  We aim for:  - G1  — Issuer authentication.  Verifiers can 

cryptographically confirm that a credential was issued by a named, on -chain -

resolvable issuer (against A1, A2).  - G2  — Holder authentication.  Verifiers can 

confirm that the presenter currently controls the DID -bound private key (against A1). 

- G3  — Selective disclosure of contents.  Holders disclose only the claim fields 

they choose; verifiers learn nothing about omitted fields beyond what is structurally 

implied (against A1).  - G4  — Content blindness at the relay.  The relay cannot read 

credential payloads (against A3, at the payload level).  - G5  — Verifier privacy.  No 

central authority observes which verifier queries which DID at the application layer 

(against A3, A4 modulo network -level metadata).  - G6  — Accountability under 

legal process.  The state retains a defined, gated capability to deanonymize a DID 

through the linkage table. 

The architecture targets G1 –G6. It does  not  target presentation -unlinkability 

(defeated by single -DID reuse, see §6.4), credential -graph privacy against the relay 

(defeated by per -issuance metadata logging, see §5.5), or network -layer verifier 

anonymity (verifier IPs are visible to whoever hosts the chain RPC). These omissions 

are named explicitly so that the architecture’s claims are evaluated on what it 

actually delivers. 

Security claims: mechanism -to -goal mapping.  Table 1 summarises how each 

security goal is realized by a specific architectural mechanism, which adversary 

classes the mechanism addresses, and what assumptions or limitations bound the 

claim. 

Security Goal 

Architectural 

Mechanism  Adversary Classes 

Assumptions & 

Limitations 

G1  — Issuer 

authentication 

Issuer signature on 

VC (Phase 2 step 

2); verifier resolves 

issuer DID 

document on -

chain and 

validates signature 

(Phase 3 step 7) 

A1 (malicious 

verifier), A2 (semi -

honest issuer 

seeking to issue 

equivalent 

credentials to 

unintended 

subjects) 

Issuer private key 

remains 

uncompromised; 

DID document 

integrity is 

guaranteed by 

consortium 

consensus; verifier 

correctly resolves 

the issuer DID 

G2  — Holder  Holder signature  A1 (malicious  Holder private key 10 

Security Goal 

Architectural 

Mechanism  Adversary Classes 

Assumptions & 

Limitations 

authentication  on presentation 

(Phase 3 step 6); 

verifier validates 

against DID 

document public 

key (Phase 3 step 

7); verifier -

provided nonce + 

timestamp in 

presentation 

prevent replay 

verifier attempting 

replay) 

remains 

uncompromised; 

verifier includes 

fresh nonce in 

request; no key -

loss recovery 

mechanism 

specified (§7.4) 

G3  — Selective 

disclosure of 

contents 

SD -JWT with hash -

committed 

disclosures: issuer 

includes  _sd  hash 

commitments for 

selectively -

disclosable fields 

in the signed VC; 

holder reveals only 

chosen fields plus 

salts at 

presentation 

(Phase 3 step 6); 

verifier validates 

disclosed values 

against issuer -

signed 

commitments 

(Phase 3 step 7); 

per -field  

> selective_disclo
> sable

flag in 

template schema 

determines which 

fields are 

commitment -

protected (§5.4) 

A1 (malicious 

verifier seeking 

excess PII) 

Underlying hash 

function is 

preimage -

resistant; SD -JWT 

does not by itself 

provide 

presentation 

unlinkability  —

single -DID reuse 

across 

presentations still 

enables verifier 

collusion to link 

interactions (§6.4) 

G4  — Content 

blindness at relay 

Issuer encrypts VC 

payload to holder’s 

public key before 

A3 (semi -honest 

relay) 

Issuer performs 

encryption to the 

correct holder 11 

Security Goal 

Architectural 

Mechanism  Adversary Classes 

Assumptions & 

Limitations 

transmission 

(Phase 2 step 2); 

relay sees 

ciphertext only, 

holds no 

decryption key 

(Phase 2 step 3); 

separate key -

agreement key 

mitigates cross -

protocol key -use 

risk (§5.3) 

public key; 

underlying 

encryption scheme 

(HPKE/SM2) is 

IND -CCA2 secure; 

issuer and holder 

key -agreement 

keys are correctly 

published in DID 

documents 

G5  — Verifier 

privacy 

Public -readable 

chain with 

anonymous 

queries (§4.1 –4.2); 

no authentication, 

API key, or 

permission 

required for DID 

resolution or 

signature 

validation; verifier -

operated read -only 

full node option 

eliminates third -

party RPC 

observation (§4.2) 

A3 (semi -honest 

relay), A4 (network 

observer) 

For verifiers using 

shared consortium 

RPC endpoints, the 

RPC operator sees 

query metadata 

(verifier IP, queried 

DID); network -

layer traffic 

analysis (by ISP or 

state -level 

observer) is 

outside the 

architecture’s 

threat model; 

chain -level read 

patterns remain 

publicly visible 

G6  —

Accountability 

under legal 

process 

Off -chain linkage 

table ( CTID  

> identity ↔
> did:sic:

) held 

exclusively by the 

state (§4.3 step 4); 

access gated by 

judicial warrant or 

equivalent legal 

process; storage 

protected by 

access controls, 

— (affirmative 

capability, not a 

defense against a 

specific adversary) 

Linkage -table 

compromise (§6.4) 

is the single 

highest -value 

attack surface; 

legal -process 

integrity is a 

governance rather 

than cryptographic 

guarantee; 

deanonymization 

capability is total 12 

Security Goal 

Architectural 

Mechanism  Adversary Classes 

Assumptions & 

Limitations 

encryption, and 

audit logging (§4.5) 

for any targeted 

DID 

Table 1: Security claims mapped to architectural mechanisms, adversary classes, 

and assumptions. 

# 3.1 Verifier -Side PII Burden and Data Locality 

Scenario.  A user wishes to access a third -party corporate -benefits platform  — for 

example, a discount portal that partners with employers to offer perks to their staff. 

The platform must verify two facts about the user: (i) their legal identity (to prevent 

fraudulent signups) and (ii) that they are currently employed at one of the 

participating companies. 

What the centralized model requires.  Two friction layers compound.  First , to 

verify legal identity via CTID, the platform must already hold the user’s name, 

identification number, and facial data (per §2.1, CTID expects these as query inputs 

and returns only yes/no), then submit them to CTID. The platform becomes a 

custodian of full PII for every prospective member, regardless of which company 

they actually work for.  Second , employment status is not in CTID  — CTID anchors 

legal identity , not employment relationships. The platform therefore must 

additionally obtain employment confirmation from each participating employer’s 

HR system. With no public HR API, this means either bespoke per -employer 

integrations (which do not scale across thousands of partner companies) or 

informal email/paper attestations (which create new fraud and leakage surfaces). 

Threat model.  Two actors carry risk. The platform, having collected full PII from 

every user just to bootstrap CTID verification, becomes a high -value breach target. 

Each employer’s HR system, queried piecemeal by every third -party benefits 

provider it partners with, becomes an attack surface and a structural leak point  —

and there is no clean way for an HR system to confirm employment to an external 

verifier without disclosing more than necessary. In the model of §3.0, the platform 

embodies  A1  (malicious verifier), structurally compelled to collect PII far beyond 

what the transaction requires; the harm it creates is precisely what  G3  (selective 

disclosure of contents) is designed to prevent. 

RealDID resolution.  The employer (a non -government entity that has registered as 

an issuer on the open Template Registry and published an  EmploymentCredential 

template  — see §5.1) issues a VC to each employee at onboarding, encrypted to the 

employee’s public key and counter -signed by the government relay. To access the 

benefits platform, the employee presents only the fields the platform actually 

needs  — for example,  {employer: "ABC Corp", status: "active"}  — omitting 

their department, title, hire date, and identity. The platform validates the triple -13 

signature chain on the open chain, confirms the issuer DID resolves to the named 

employer, and confirms the holder’s signature against the holder DID, all without 

collecting any PII and without any direct query to the employer’s HR system. The 

platform never becomes a PII custodian; the employer’s HR data never leaves the 

employer’s perimeter. 

This scenario also illustrates an aspect of the architecture made explicit in §5.1: any 

qualifying entity  — government bureaus, universities, hospitals, employers, 

professional bodies, financial institutions  — can register as an issuer and define its 

own credential template, subject to the government’s approval that the issuer is 

authoritative for the credential type. The set of issuable credentials is not limited to 

government -held data. 

# 3.2 Cross -Border Credential Verification 

Scenario.  A Chinese university graduate applies to a foreign university for a 

master’s program. The foreign university requires verification that the applicant’s 

bachelor’s degree is authentic and was issued to a real person. The university has 

no access to CTID and no standing to query China’s national identity infrastructure. 

What CTID requires (and why it fails across borders).  Two prerequisites fail 

simultaneously.  First , the foreign university would need to already hold the 

graduate’s PII (per §2.1, CTID takes name + identification number + facial data as 

inputs, not outputs)  — possible in principle, but forcing the foreign verifier to 

become a custodian of Chinese citizens’ identity data.  Second , the foreign 

university would need network access to the CTID endpoint, which is not exposed 

across borders. The graduate therefore must rely on notarized paper documents, 

third -party credential evaluation services, or bilateral institutional agreements, all 

of which introduce delay, cost, and trust dependencies. 

Threat model.  The verifier (foreign university) cannot distinguish between a genuine 

graduate with authentic credentials and an applicant presenting forged documents. 

The credential evaluation service becomes a centralized trust bottleneck. The 

graduate’s personal data crosses borders through multiple intermediaries, each a 

potential leak vector. In the model of §3.0, the foreign university’s inability to 

distinguish genuine credentials from forgeries is a failure of both  G1  (issuer 

authentication) and  G2  (holder authentication). The PII exposure through 

intermediaries violates  G3  (selective disclosure), and the structural exclusion of 

foreign verifiers from the CTID API is an instance of the access inequality that  G5 

(verifier privacy) addresses at the architectural level. 

RealDID resolution.  The graduate’s university (an authorized issuer) has registered 

a DiplomaCredential template on the RealDID chain. The graduate holds a VC 

containing their degree, major, and graduation date, encrypted to their private key, 

with issuer and government counter -signatures. The foreign university queries the 

Chinese permissioned chain  — publicly readable by anyone anywhere  — resolves 14 

the issuer’s DID, validates the three signatures, and confirms the credential is 

authentic. The foreign university never accesses CTID, never learns the graduate’s 

national ID number, and never touches China’s identity infrastructure. The 

graduate’s PII never crosses the border. 

# 3.3 Anonymous Accountability 

Scenario.  A user wishes to participate in an online medical Q&A community as an 

answering practitioner  — answering health questions posed by anonymous askers. 

The community requires that every answering account be backed by a real, 

currently -licensed medical professional (to maintain answer quality and to meet 

platform -level liability commitments), but promises that practitioners can remain 

anonymous to askers and to the wider public. 

What the centralized model requires.  Two -step verification, each step over -

collecting.  First , the platform must verify the practitioner’s legal identity through 

CTID  — which means collecting name, identification number, and facial data (per 

§2.1) and submitting them to CTID for a yes/no confirmation. The platform now 

holds full PII for every practitioner.  Second , the platform must verify the 

practitioner’s current medical license. CTID does not hold license data, so the 

platform must additionally query the relevant licensing authority’s database  —

assuming a queryable API exists for that jurisdiction at all. The end state: the 

platform possesses each practitioner’s full legal identity bound together with their 

professional license record. The platform’s promise of practitioner anonymity is 

contradicted by the platform’s structural possession of identity. 

Threat model.  The platform is a semi -honest actor  — it intends to keep practitioner 

identities private from askers and from the public, but holds identity -plus -license 

data that can be compelled, breached, or misused by insiders. The threat is not the 

platform’s intent but its structural possession of the data. In the model of §3.0, the 

platform’s structural possession of identity -plus -license data is the threat that  G3 

(selective disclosure of contents) eliminates: the verifier receives only the claims it 

needs  — {license_valid: true, specialty: "general practice"}  — and never 

touches the practitioner’s identity. The government’s retained linkage capability 

implements  G6  (accountability under legal process) without requiring continuous 

identity exposure to every verifier. 

RealDID resolution.  The relevant licensing authority (a non -government issuer in 

the sense of §5.1  — a professional regulator that has registered as an issuer on the 

open Template Registry) publishes a MedicalLicenseCredential  template. A

licensed practitioner holds a VC stating, for example,  {license_valid: true, 

> specialty: "general practice", jurisdiction: "Beijing"}

, encrypted to their 

private key and counter -signed by the government relay. To participate as an 

answerer on the platform, the practitioner presents only  {license_valid: true,  

> specialty: "general practice"}

— sufficient for the platform to confirm the 15 

answerer is a real, currently -licensed practitioner in the appropriate specialty. The 

platform validates the triple -signature chain and accepts the presentation; it never 

collects the practitioner’s name, identification number, photograph, or license 

number. The practitioner is anonymous to the platform; the platform’s quality bar is 

preserved. The government retains the RealDID  ↔ CTID linkage, accessible only 

through defined legal process  — providing accountability without continuous 

identity exposure. 

This scenario demonstrates that the architecture supports  verified -but -anonymous 

participation not only at the level of identity uniqueness (“a real, unique person”) 

but also at the level of professional or institutional standing (“a real, currently -

licensed practitioner”). The credential layer carries the claim the verifier actually 

needs; the identity layer remains undisclosed. 

# 3.4 Centralized API Cost and Verifier Access Inequality 

Problem.  CTID’s single permission -based API gateway creates two compounding 

failures: (1)  infrastructure cost  — the government bears the full operational 

expense of handling national -scale verification traffic, a burden that grows with 

digital service adoption; (2)  verifier access inequality  — only a limited set of 

authorized entities may verify identities. Small businesses, educational institutions, 

non -profits, and foreign organizations are structurally excluded. The digital identity 

ecosystem is restricted to a small, privileged class of verifiers. In the model of §3.0, 

the centralized API creates the observation surface that  A3  (semi -honest 

government relay) exploits  — every verification request passes through a single 

point  — and eliminates  G5  (verifier privacy) as a dimension of the identity 

ecosystem. 

RealDID resolution.  Verification moves from the government’s API gateway to the 

open permissioned chain. Any party with network access can query DIDs, resolve 

DID documents, and validate cryptographic signatures  — no authorization required. 

The government eliminates the operational cost of the verification API. The verifier 

base expands from a handful of authorized entities to the entire internet -connected 

world. The chain’s consensus mechanism distributes the cost of maintaining the 

verification infrastructure across the consortium. 

# 3.5 Verifier Privacy 

Problem.  In the centralized model, every verification request passes through the 

government’s API gateway. The government observes: who is verifying whom, when, 

how often, and in what sequence. A bank verifying a customer, a hospital verifying a 

patient, a school verifying a parent  — the government records all of it. In an identity 

ecosystem,  the identities of verifiers  and  the relationships between verifiers and 

subjects  are themselves sensitive privacy data. A company’s customer list, a 

clinic’s patient roster, a law firm’s client base  — all are exposed to the government 

through the verification API. This is not a bug; it is an architectural inevitability of 16 

centralized verification. In the model of §3.0, the government’s complete visibility 

into verification transactions is  A3  (semi -honest government relay) operating 

exactly as the centralized architecture permits: every API call is an observation 

event. The harm is the total loss of  G5  (verifier privacy). 

RealDID resolution.  At the protocol level, on -chain verification creates no central 

observation point: a verifier resolves a DID document and validates a signature 

without authenticating to any authority, calling any API, or obtaining any permission. 

There is no structural equivalent of the CTID gateway that logs every verification 

request. The architecture therefore provides a  spectrum  of verifier privacy under the 

verifier’s own control. Verifiers with sufficient operational capacity can operate their 

own read -only Guoxin Chain full node and perform DID resolution and signature 

validation entirely on their own infrastructure, with no query ever leaving the 

verifier’s network. In that mode, even the consortium nodes  — the operators of the 

chain itself  — cannot observe which DIDs the verifier is checking, when, or in what 

sequence. This realizes  G5  (verifier privacy) against both  A3  (semi -honest 

government relay) and  A4  (network observer): at the application layer, verification 

leaves no trace at any central authority. Verifiers without that capacity may query a 

shared consortium RPC endpoint  — a choice that trades some privacy (the RPC 

operator sees the verifier’s IP and the queried DID) for operational simplicity, but 

which the architecture does not require. The key architectural property is that the 

protocol itself  creates no observation point: the decision is the verifier’s, not the 

system’s. Verifier privacy emerges as a structural property of the architecture  — not 

a policy promise  — but its strength depends on the verifier’s operational choice. 

This protects an under -appreciated dimension of the identity ecosystem: the right 

of verifiers to verify without being tracked. 

# 4. RealDID Architecture 

The scenarios in §3.1 –§3.5 illustrate five structural problems that centralized 

identity verification creates: verifier -side PII burden, cross -border exclusion, the 

tension between verification and anonymity, infrastructure cost concentration, and 

loss of verifier privacy. The RealDID architecture addresses each through a

combination of an open permissioned chain (§4.1 –4.2), a DID issuance protocol 

that anchors legal identity without exposing it on -chain (§4.3 –4.5), a content -blind 

government relay, and a V C ecosystem with cryptographic selective disclosure (§5). 

This section presents the identity anchor layer. Figure 1 shows the three -layer 

architecture stack at a glance. 17 18 

Figure 1: Three -layer architecture stack. CTID provides the centralized legal -identity 

root; RealDID anchors decentralized identifiers on the open permissioned chain; the 

VC layer carries application -level credentials with selective disclosure. 

# 4.1 Why Open Permissioned Chain 

RealDID’s chain architecture is shaped by three structural constraints that apply in 

China’s legal and regulatory environment. 

Cryptocurrency prohibition.  Public permissionless blockchains (Ethereum, 

Solana, etc.) require cryptocurrency for gas fees to execute transactions and store 

state. Cryptocurrency transactions are legally restricted in China, making public 

permissionless chains unavailable as national infrastructure. A private single -entity 

chain avoids this issue but defeats the purpose of decentralized verification: if one 

party controls the ledger, verifiers must trust that party to not tamper with DIDs, 

templates, or revocation entries. 

API cost elimination.  CTID’s centralized verification gateway concentrates 

infrastructure cost on the government. Moving verification to a distributed chain 

shifts operational costs to the consortium of validator nodes, eliminating the single -

bottleneck API as a cost center. Verifiers with sufficient infrastructure can take this 

further by operating their own read -only Guoxin Chain full node and bearing their 

own verification -side compute and storage costs  — neither the government nor the 

consortium pays for those queries. Small verifiers without that capacity simply 

query a public consortium RPC endpoint at no cost. 

Verifier access equality.  A permissioned API restricts verification to authorized 

entities. A publicly readable chain enables any party to verify DIDs and signatures 

without permission, expanding the verifier base from a privileged few to anyone with 

network access. 

The  open permissioned chain  satisfies all three constraints: permissioned 

validators (consortium members) avoid cryptocurrency dependence; public 

readability enables permissionless verification; and multi -stakeholder governance 

prevents unilateral control  — the architectural defense against  A5  (consortium -

majority adversary). No single entity, including the state, can unilaterally alter the 

registries. This is the closest architecture to a public permissionless chain that is 

legally permissible in China. 

# 4.2 Chain Topology 

The RealDID chain is a consortium blockchain with the following properties: 

• Validator set.  Permissioned nodes operated by consortium members  —

government agencies (such as national identity and cybersecurity authorities) 

and private sector entities (technology platforms, telecommunications 

carriers, financial institutions). 19 

• Public read access.  Any party with network access can query the chain: 

resolve DID documents, read the template registry, check the revocation 

registry, and validate signatures. No authorization, API key, or permission is 

required. Verifiers may either query a consortium -hosted RPC endpoint or 

operate their own read -only full node (sync against the public chain state); 

the chain’s read interface is open at the protocol level, not gated by the 

consortium. 

• Smart contract governance.  Three smart contracts govern the identity 

infrastructure: the DID Registry (issuance, update, deactivation of DIDs), the 

Template Registry (registration, approval, deprecation of VC templates), and 

the Revocation Registry (credential revocation, DID deactivation). All three 

are governed by consortium consensus  — no single entity, including the 

government, can unilaterally modify them. This is the enforcement 

mechanism for the defense against  A5  (consortium -majority adversary): 

malicious registry entries require collusion above the consensus threshold 

(§6.4). 

• Consensus.  The PBFT (Practical Byzantine Fault Tolerant) consensus 

protocol, as implemented in the FISCO BCOS open -source blockchain 

framework [33], suitable for a permissioned validator set with known 

identities. 

# 4.3 DID Issuance Protocol 

The protocol for issuing a RealDID proceeds in five steps: 

Step 1: CTID Verification.  The user invokes CTID’s per -session face+ID match 

against their pre -existing CTID record (which was populated automatically when 

they obtained their national ID card  — see §2.1). CTID confirms that the submitted 

live face image and identification number match the on -file biometric and 

documentary data, returning a yes/no authentication result. No separate CTID 

registration is required at this point  — only a per -session verification against an 

already -populated record. This step establishes the user as a verified legal person 

at the moment of DID issuance. 

Step 2: Key Generation.  The user’s device generates a cryptographic key pair 

locally. The public key is transmitted to the government; the private key remains 

exclusively on the user’s device and is never transmitted to any party. 

Step 3: DID Registration.  The government submits a transaction to the DID Registry 

smart contract, registering  did:sic:<address>  with the user’s public key. The 

consortium validates and commits the transaction. The DID document is now 

publicly resolvable on -chain. 

Step 4: Linkage Recording.  Internally, the government records the mapping  CTID    

> identity ↔did:sic:<address>

in a secure, off -chain linkage table. This mapping 

is never published on -chain. It is accessible only to the government, and only for 20 

purposes defined by law (e.g., criminal investigation with judicial warrant). This step 

implements  G6  (accountability under legal process): the state retains a defined, 

gated deanonymization capability while keeping the linkage off -chain, invisible to 

A4  (network observer). 

Step 5: Key Custody.  The user retains exclusive control of the private key. The 

government has no copy, no escrow, and no mechanism to sign as the user. The 

DID is now operational: the user can sign VC applications, receive encrypted VCs, 

and present credentials to verifiers. 

# 4.4 Key Custody and the Asymmetric Trust Model 

The key custody design establishes an asymmetric, state -bounded relationship 

between the state and the user, summarized in Table 2. The rows of the table 

correspond to the security goals of §3.0: the government’s inability to prove control 

of a DID, view VC contents, or impersonate a subject realizes  G4  (content blindness 

at the relay) against  A3 ; its retained deanonymization and revocation capabilities 

implement  G6  (accountability under legal process). 

Capability  Government  User 

Prove control of DID  No (no private key)  Yes (holds 

private key) 

Deanonymize a DID  Yes (linkage table)  No 

Fabricate legal identity  No (requires CTID verification)  No (requires 

CTID 

verification) 

View VC contents  No (encrypted to holder’s 

public key) 

Yes (decrypts 

with private key) 

Impersonate a DID subject  No (no private key)  N/A (is the 

subject) 

Revoke a DID  Yes (DID Registry)  No 

Table 2: Asymmetric, state -bounded capabilities. The state retains broader 

structural powers (linkage, revocation, metadata observation) than the user, but is 

cryptographically excluded from impersonation and from reading credential 

contents. Neither party can act unilaterally across all dimensions, but the 

constraints are not symmetric. 

Asymmetric -constraint property.  The state cannot impersonate, cannot read 

credential contents, and cannot unilaterally alter the registries. The user cannot 

fabricate a legal identity and cannot prevent lawful deanonymization, revocation, or 

metadata observation by the relay. These constraints are real but not symmetric: 

the user is bounded by  cryptography , while the state is bounded by  cryptography 

plus legal -process commitments around capabilities it both holds and operates .21 

The system is not “trustless”  in the blockchain sense, nor a clean two -way balance 

of power  — it is  trust -distributed with a structurally privileged state root . Throughout 

this paper we use the term  decentralized verification with centralized legal 

anchoring  to describe this arrangement. The policy implications of the asymmetry 

are examined in §6.2. 

# 4.5 Linkage Secrecy 

The RealDID  ↔ CTID linkage table is the most sensitive component of the 

architecture. It is held exclusively by the government, stored off -chain, and 

protected by access controls, encryption, and audit logging. On -chain DIDs reveal 

no information about the underlying legal identity: a DID document contains only a 

public key and service endpoints. An observer monitoring the chain cannot 

associate a DID with a real -world person. 

Deanonymization requires a judicial warrant or equivalent legal process. The 

linkage table is not a general -purpose lookup service; it is accessible only through 

defined legal procedures. This design provides accountability to law without 

enabling casual surveillance. It is the architectural implementation of  G6 :

deanonymization is possible but gated, and an  A4  (network observer) monitoring 

the chain learns nothing  — DIDs are opaque strings with no on -chain link to real -

world identity. 

Deployment status.  The architectural description in this section reflects the 

RealDID system as designed and deployed. Operational metrics will be included in 

a future revision; see the Working Paper notice above. 

# 5. VC Ecosystem on RealDID 

With RealDID providing the decentralized identity anchor, verifiable credentials 

form the rich, use -case -driven layer on top. This section describes the VC template 

registry, the full credential lifecycle, the triple -signature chain, credential schemas, 

and the content -blindness properties that protect holder privacy. 

# 5.1 VC Template Registry 

Before any credential can be issued, issuers must register VC templates on -chain. 

A template defines a credential type, its claim schema, the business scenario it 

serves, and usage constraints. This registry serves as a catalog: holders browse 

available templates to discover which credentials they may apply for, and verifiers 

consult templates to understand the structure and semantics of credentials they 

receive. 

Open issuer model.  The issuer set is not restricted to government agencies. Any 

qualifying entity  — government bureaus, universities, hospitals, employers, 

professional bodies, financial institutions, and other social and industrial 

organizations  — can register as an issuer by submitting templates for the credential 22 

types it is authoritative for. A hospital can issue  VaccinationCredential  or 

> PatientCredential

, an employer can issue  EmploymentCredential , a trade 

association can issue  ProfessionalMembershipCredential , a bank can issue 

> AccountStatusCredential

, and so on. The government’s role at template 

registration is not to be the issuer itself but to gate participation: it verifies, through 

the KYC and manual approval process described below, that each submitting issuer 

is authoritative for the credential type it proposes. 

The template registration process (Phase 0) proceeds as follows: 

1.  An issuer creates a template specifying: credential type (e.g., 

> DiplomaCredential

), claim schema (field names, types, whether each field 

is required, and which fields support selective disclosure), business 

scenario description, and constraints (e.g., maximum validity period). 

2.  The template is submitted to the government for approval. Issuers undergo a 

KYC process to establish their legal identity and organizational authority; 

each VC template is then reviewed and approved manually by human 

operators, who verify that the submitting issuer is authoritative for the 

credential type it proposes  — a university for  DiplomaCredential , a medical 

board for  ProfessionalMedicalLicense .

3.  Upon approval, the template is published to the on -chain Template Registry 

with the government’s approval signature and a timestamp. Holders can 

now discover the template and apply for VCs against it. 

# 5.2 VC Lifecycle 

The full VC lifecycle spans eight steps across four phases, with a preceding one -

time  Phase 0  for issuer -driven template registration. Figure 2 illustrates the flow; 

the Government’s role is confined to Phase 2 (authenticate participants, log 

metadata, counter -sign  — without reading credential contents) and to revocation in 

Phase 4. Detailed exposition of each step follows below. 23 

Figure 2: VC lifecycle on RealDID. Phase 0 (purple) registers credential templates 

on -chain  — a one -time issuer -driven step. Phases 1 –4 (blue / pink -dashed / green / 

amber) describe the per -credential flow from application through revocation. The 

dashed border on Phase 2 highlights the Government’s content -blind relay role: it 

authenticates issuer and holder and logs metadata, but cannot read the encrypted 

payload. 

Phase 1  – Application and Issuance. 24 

Step 1: Apply.  The holder selects a template from the registry and submits a VC 

application to the issuer. The application is signed with the holder’s private key, 

proving control of the DID and authenticating the request. 

Step 2: Issue.  The issuer validates the application against the template, populates 

the template with the appropriate claims, encrypts the resulting VC to the holder’s 

public key, signs it with the issuer’s DID private key, and submits it to the 

government relay. Encryption at the issuer  — before the credential reaches the 

relay  — is the mechanism that realizes  G4  (content blindness at the relay) against 

A3 : the relay will see only ciphertext. 

Phase 2  – Government Gate. 

Step 3: Verify.  Before the VC reaches the holder, it passes through the government 

relay. The government verifies two facts: (a) the issuer is authorized to issue this 

credential type, and (b) the holder DID corresponds to a valid, active RealDID. 

Critically, the government cannot view the VC contents  — the payload was 

encrypted  by the issuer  in Step 2 above to the holder’s public key, and the 

government holds no decryption key. Encryption is performed at the issuer, not at 

the relay; the relay sees only ciphertext. The government logs metadata  – {issuer  

> DID, holder DID, template ID, VC hash, timestamp}

– for audit purposes. 

Step 4: Deliver.  The government adds a counter -signature attesting that both parties 

are authentic, and relays the encrypted VC to the holder. 

Phase 3  – Storage, Presentation, and Verification. 

Step 5: Store.  The holder receives the encrypted VC, decrypts it with their private 

key, and stores it in their digital wallet. The VC is now ready for use. 

Step 6: Present.  When a verifier requests proof of certain claims, the holder 

constructs a presentation containing the issuer -signed SD -JWT together with 

disclosure objects  — claim name, value, and salt  — for only the claims the verifier 

requires. The verifier can hash each disclosed value -plus -salt and validate it against 

the  _sd  commitments in the issuer -signed credential, cryptographically confirming 

that the disclosed claims originated from the issuer. Claims marked as selective -

disclosable in the template are commitment -protected; required claims need not 

carry  _sd  entries. The holder signs the presentation with their private key. 

Step 7: Verify.  The verifier receives the presentation and performs five checks: (a) 

resolves the holder’s DID document on -chain and validates the holder’s signature 

against the public key; (b) resolves the issuer’s DID document and validates the 

issuer’s signature on the original SD -JWT; (c) validates the government’s counter -

signature; (d) for each disclosed claim, hashes the value -plus -salt and validates the 

result against the  _sd  commitments in the issuer -signed SD -JWT  — confirming the 

claim originated from the issuer without revealing undisclosed fields; (e) checks the 

on -chain Revocation Registry to confirm neither the VC nor the holder’s DID has 25 

been revoked. Checks (a) and (b) realize  G2  (holder authentication) and  G1  (issuer 

authentication) respectively  — against  A1  (malicious verifier attempting replay or 

accepting forged credentials) and  A2  (semi -honest issuer issuing to unintended 

subjects). Check (d) realizes  G3  (selective disclosure of contents) cryptographically: 

the verifier confirms that disclosed claims are issuer -authenticated without 

learning the undisclosed claims. If all five checks pass, the verifier accepts the 

presentation. 

Phase 4  – Revocation. 

Step 8: Revoke.  A VC may be revoked by its issuer (e.g., a license expires or is 

withdrawn) or the government may revoke all VCs associated with a DID (e.g., if the 

underlying RealDID is deactivated due to identity fraud or legal process). 

Revocation entries are published to the on -chain Revocation Registry. Verifiers are 

expected to check this registry as part of Step 7. 

# 5.3 Triple -Signature Chain 

Every VC presentation carries three cryptographic signatures, each serving a 

distinct trust function. 

Issuer Signature.  The issuer signs the VC at creation. This signature proves to the 

verifier that the credential was issued by an authoritative source  – for example, that 

a diploma VC was genuinely issued by the university, not fabricated by the holder. 

The verifier validates this signature against the issuer’s public key in the issuer’s on -

chain DID document. This is the mechanism that realizes  G1  (issuer authentication) 

against  A1  (malicious verifier) and  A2  (semi -honest issuer). 

Government Counter -Signature.  The government signs the VC during the relay 

(Phase 2, Step 4). This signature proves two facts simultaneously: the issuer is 

authorized to issue this credential type, and the holder is a verified RealDID subject. 

The government does not attest to the truth of the claims  – only to the authenticity 

of the participants. The verifier validates this signature against the government’s 

public key, which is published on -chain. This signature bridges the gap between 

G1 /G2  and the state’s legal -anchoring function: it cryptographically binds the 

government’s attestation of participant authenticity to the credential without 

requiring the government to see credential contents ( G4 ). 

Holder Signature.  The holder signs each presentation at the moment of disclosure. 

This signature proves that the presenter currently controls the private key 

associated with the DID  – that the VC is being presented by its legitimate owner, not 

replayed by a third party. With a verifier -provided nonce and timestamp included in 

the presentation, this is the mechanism that realizes  G2  (holder authentication) 

against  A1  (malicious verifier attempting replay). 

All three signatures must validate for a presentation to be accepted. A missing or 

invalid issuer signature means the credential is not authoritative. A missing or 26 

invalid government signature means the participants’ authenticity is unverified. A 

missing or invalid holder signature means the presenter is not the credential’s 

owner or the presentation has been tampered with. 

Cryptographic primitives.  The architecture is parameterized over the underlying 

primitives rather than tied to a specific suite, and the choice of suite is constrained 

by the deploying jurisdiction’s cryptographic regulations. In China specifically, 

financial and identity -grade systems are typically required to use the SM -series 

national standards (SM2 for elliptic -curve signatures and key agreement, SM3 for 

hashing, SM4 for symmetric encryption); a RealDID deployment in China is 

expected to use these. In illustrative terms  — and abstracting over the specific suite 

— the architecture requires: (i) an EUF -CMA -secure signature scheme such as SM2 

or Ed25519 [13] applied over a canonicalized representation of each signed object 

(issuer signature over the VC instance; government counter -signature over  H(VC            

> instance) || issuer DID || holder DID || template ID || timestamp

;

holder signature over the presentation including a verifier -provided nonce and 

timestamp to prevent replay), and (ii) a hybrid public -key encryption scheme  — in 

the SM -suite case based on SM2/SM3/SM4, or in other jurisdictions a construction 

such as HPKE [14] over X25519 with AES -256 -GCM  — for content encryption from 

issuer to holder. Following W3C DID core privacy guidance [1], DID documents 

should publish  separate  verification methods for signing and for key agreement so 

that the holder’s signing key (DID -bound, used for authentication) and the holder’s 

key -agreement public key (used by issuers for content encryption) are not the same 

key in the same role. 

The current deployment uses SD -JWT [12] for selective disclosure. The issuer 

includes hash commitments ( _sd ) for each selectively -disclosable claim in the 

signed VC; at presentation, the holder reveals only the chosen claims together with 

their per -claim salts. The verifier hashes each disclosed value -plus -salt and 

validates the result against the commitments in the issuer -signed credential. This 

provides cryptographic assurance that the undisclosed claims are issuer -

authenticated  — the holder cannot alter them  — without revealing them to the 

verifier. Content blindness at the relay ( G4 ) is unaffected: the relay counter -signs 

the encrypted SD -JWT as a single opaque object (§5.2 Phase 2) and does not 

interact with the selective -disclosure mechanism, which operates entirely at the 

holder –verifier presentation step. Substituting a scheme such as BBS+ [10] for the 

issuer signature, which would additionally provide presentation unlinkability at the 

cryptographic layer, remains compatible with the architecture and is a candidate 

for future iterations. We treat the specific primitive selection as a deployment 

parameter rather than a load -bearing architectural commitment. 

# 5.4 Credential Schemas 

The RealDID VC ecosystem uses three W3C -aligned schema structures: the 

template, the VC instance, and the presentation. 27 

Template Schema  (registered on -chain, Phase 0): 

template_id: "did:sic:tsinghua#DiplomaCredential -v1" 

issuer_did: "did:sic:tsinghua" 

credential_type: "DiplomaCredential" 

business_scenario: "Higher education degree verification" 

claim_schema: 

degree: { type: string, required: true, selective_disclosable: 

false } 

major: { type: string, required: true, selective_disclosable: 

false } 

graduation: { type: date, required: true, selective_disclosable: 

false } 

gpa: { type: float, required: false, selective_disclosable: 

true }

honors: { type: string[], required: false, selective_disclosabl 

e: true }

constraints: 

max_validity_days: null 

gov_approval_signature: <government signature> 

registered_at: <timestamp> 

VC Instance  (issued to holder, encrypted with holder’s public key): 

vc_id: "urn:vc:0x7f3a9b..." 

template_id: "did:sic:tsinghua#DiplomaCredential -v1" 

holder_did: "did:sic:0x9b2c..." 

claims: 

degree: "Bachelor of Engineering" 

major: "Computer Science" 

graduation: "2025 -06 -30" 

gpa: 3.82 

issuer_signature: <issuer signature> 

gov_counter_signature: <government signature> 

issued_at: <timestamp> 

expires_at: null 

Presentation  (holder to verifier, SD -JWT with selective disclosure): 

vc_id: "urn:vc:0x7f3a9b..." 

issuer_signed_sd_jwt: "<SD -JWT with _sd hash commitments, issuer signat 

ure>" 

disclosures: 

degree: { value: "Bachelor of Engineering", salt: "0xa3f2..." } 

major: { value: "Computer Science", salt: "0xb4e1..." } 

graduation: { value: "2025 -06 -30", salt: "0xc5d0..." } 

gov_counter_signature: <government signature> 

holder_signature: <holder signature> 

timestamp: <now> 

nonce: <verifier -provided nonce> 28 

In this example, the holder has chosen to disclose their degree, major, and 

graduation date  — sufficient for an employer to verify qualification  — while GPA and 

honors information remains cryptographically bound by the issuer’s  _sd  hash 

commitments. The verifier can confirm that the undisclosed fields exist in the 

issuer -signed credential and are authentic, without learning their values. 

# 5.5 Content Blindness and Role Visibility 

The RealDID VC architecture enforces content blindness through encryption: VCs 

are encrypted to the holder’s public key by the issuer, and the government relays 

the encrypted payload without decryption capability. This means the government 

authenticates participants in a transaction it cannot read. The resulting visibility 

matrix for all four roles is shown in Table 3. 

Data  Government  Issuer  Holder  Verifier 

RealDID -

CTID 

linkage 

Full access  No access  No access  No access 

VC 

existence 

(metadat 

a) 

Yes  For own VCs  All own VCs  Only when 

presented 

VC 

contents 

No (encrypted)  For own VCs  Full access  Disclosed claims 

only 

Other 

issuers’ 

VCs 

No  No  Yes (if holder)  No 

Verificati 

on 

queries 

No (anonymous)  No  No  Own queries only 

Table 3: Role visibility matrix. The government authenticates participants without 

viewing credential contents. 

The content -blindness property is a critical architectural guarantee: it means the 

government can vouch for the authenticity of participants in the VC ecosystem 

without becoming a surveillance point for the  content  of credential exchanges. The 

government knows that a VC was issued, by whom, to whom, and when  — but not 

what it contains. 

Honest limit: the credential graph.  Content blindness is true for credential 

payloads but not for credential -graph metadata. Because the government relay logs          

> {issuer DID, holder DID, template ID, VC hash, timestamp}

for every 

issuance (§5.2 step 3), the state observes  — across all users and all issuers  — a29 

complete bipartite graph of who holds which  types  of credentials, from whom, and 

when. This is the observation surface that  A3  (semi -honest government relay) 

exploits: the relay follows the protocol as specified, yet still accumulates, as a 

structural byproduct, a dataset whose re -identification potential the metadata -

privacy literature has repeatedly demonstrated for analogous communication and 

transaction graphs [7, 8]. The architecture therefore protects  content  against the 

state but does not protect the  credential graph . Mitigations such as template -ID 

obfuscation, blinded issuance, or oblivious -relay constructions are possible in 

principle [9] but are not part of the current RealDID design; we revisit this in §6.4 and 

§8. 

# 5.6 Wallet Layer 

The RealDID architecture does not mandate any specific wallet implementation. 

Instead, it specifies a wallet -provider policy that admits a plurality of wallets, with 

three properties. 

Multiple wallet providers.  Any application  — mobile apps, mini -programs 

embedded in super -apps, browser extensions, or hardware devices  — can apply to 

be a RealDID wallet provider. Approval requires demonstrating compliance with two 

architectural requirements: (i) the holder’s private key never leaves the holder’s 

device or is otherwise transmitted to the wallet provider’s backend, and (ii) the 

wallet provider obtains explicit user consent before accessing the private key for 

any operation. Once approved, the wallet may discover templates from the on -

chain Template Registry and hold encrypted and decrypted VCs on behalf of its 

users. 

Issuer -hosted wallets.  A consequence of the open -wallet policy is that an issuer 

can operate its own wallet for VCs it issues. In this configuration, the issuance and 

use flow is fully bilateral between issuer and holder: the issuer encrypts the VC to 

the holder’s public key, the holder receives and decrypts it within the issuer -

provided wallet, and no third -party wallet operator sits in the middle observing the 

interaction. This is particularly relevant for credential types where the issuer has a 

strong interest in being the sole observer of usage  — for example, medical 

credentials issued by a hospital and consumed within the hospital’s own patient 

portal. 

Privacy implication.  In single -wallet ecosystems  — where one designated wallet 

app is the only legitimate holder of a given credential type  — the wallet operator 

becomes a structural observation point: it sees which credentials the user holds, 

which verifiers they present to, when, and how often. RealDID’s open -wallet policy 

distributes this observation surface across many independent wallet providers 

(none of whom hold private keys), and in the issuer -hosted case eliminates the 

third -party wallet operator entirely. We return to the contrast with single -wallet 

designs in §6.1. 30 

# 6. Policy and Governance Analysis 

This section analyzes the regulatory and governance implications of the RealDID 

architecture, examining alignment with Chinese data protection law, the dual -root 

trust model, accountability without mass surveillance, and the risks that must be 

honestly acknowledged. 

# 6.1 Regulatory Alignment 

PIPL Data Minimization.  China’s Personal Information Protection Law (PIPL) [6] 

establishes data minimization as a core principle: personal information collected 

must be limited to the minimum scope necessary to achieve the processing 

purpose, and excessive collection is prohibited. The centralized CTID model is in 

structural tension with this principle: every verifier is forced to collect and retain the 

subject’s full PII in order to submit a verification query at all (§2.1), regardless of 

which single claim it actually needs to confirm. The RealDID architecture aligns with 

PIPL through two mechanisms. First, selective disclosure ensures that verifiers 

receive only the claims they require  – an age threshold, a qualification, a

professional license  – not the holder’s complete legal identity. Second, content 

blindness ensures that even the government, which mediates every VC issuance, 

sees only metadata (participant identity, timestamp, VC hash) and never the 

credential contents. 

Cross -Border Data Sovereignty.  PIPL imposes strict requirements on cross -border 

transfer of personal information, including security assessments, standard 

contracts, or certification. Under the centralized CTID model, cross -border 

verification is doubly blocked: a foreign verifier would need to (i) already possess 

the subject’s PII to submit it as a CTID query input (forcing the foreign verifier to 

become a custodian of Chinese citizens’ identity data)  and  (ii) have cross -border 

network access to the CTID endpoint, which is not exposed outside China. The first 

prerequisite displaces the PII -custody burden to a foreign jurisdiction; the second 

forecloses verification altogether. Under RealDID, foreign verifiers query the open 

permissioned chain directly. They resolve DIDs and validate signatures without 

accessing CTID, without receiving PII, and without routing requests through any 

Chinese government server. The verifier sees only the disclosed claims of a VC  –

which, in the DiplomaCredential example, is a degree title and graduation date, not 

a national ID number. Cross -border verification is achieved without cross -border PII 

transfer. 

6.1.1 Comparison with eIDAS 2.0 and EUDI Wallet 

The European Union’s eIDAS 2.0 regulation [3] and the accompanying European 

Digital Identity Architecture and Reference Framework (EUDI ARF) [15] provide the 

closest production -grade comparison point. Both RealDID and EUDI Wallet enable 

selective disclosure of credentials from a user -controlled wallet with cryptographic 31 

verifiability, and both use SD -JWT [12] at the credential -format layer (§5.3 –5.4). The 

two architectures differ in two respects: trust -model anchoring and wallet design. 

Trust model.  eIDAS 2.0 distributes trust across a federation of member -state 

identity providers, while RealDID concentrates legal identity verification in a single 

state root (CTID) and distributes trust through the multi -stakeholder governance of 

the permissioned chain and smart contracts. Both models achieve user -controlled 

selective disclosure; they differ in how they anchor the legal identity that gives 

credentials their authority. 

Wallet architecture.  EUDI ARF prescribes a designated Personal Identification 

Data Wallet through which credentials are stored and presented within each 

member -state ecosystem. This concentrates a structural observation point at the 

wallet operator: the wallet application sees which credentials the user holds, which 

verifiers they interact with, and at what cadence  — even when the underlying 

credentials are issued by independent third parties. RealDID’s open -wallet policy 

(§5.6) admits a plurality of approved wallets and additionally allows issuers to host 

their own wallet for credentials they issue, removing third -party wallet operators 

from the issuance and use loop entirely in that configuration. The privacy -relevant 

question therefore shifts from  “is the wallet user -controlled?” (both architectures 

answer yes) to “how many wallet operators sit between holder and verifier, and 

what do they observe?”  — and on this dimension RealDID’s open -wallet policy 

yields a smaller and more configurable observation surface than the single -wallet 

EUDI model. 

6.1.2 GDPR, PIPL, and Erasure Against an Immutable Ledger 

A serious comparative -law gap that the centralized -versus -decentralized framing 

tends to glide past is the tension between  immutable  on -chain registries and 

erasure  rights under modern data -protection regimes. We analyze this for the two 

regimes most relevant to RealDID’s cross -border scope: China’s PIPL [6] and the 

European Union’s GDPR [17]. 

PIPL Art. 47 grants data subjects a right to deletion under specified conditions; 

GDPR Art. 17 grants a broader right to erasure (“right to be forgotten” ) with explicit 

exceptions. Recent comparative analyses note that PIPL is structurally closer to 

GDPR than to U.S. sectoral regimes on data -subject rights, making the GDPR 

contrast a tight rather than distant comparison for our purposes [28, 29]. Both rights 

presuppose that a controller can, in principle, delete personal data on request. A 

public, permissioned, append -only ledger that records DIDs, template registrations, 

and revocation entries cannot satisfy this presupposition mechanically: even a 

“deactivated” DID remains a permanent on -chain record, and historical entries 

cannot be redacted without breaking the ledger’s integrity. 

RealDID’s design mitigates but does not resolve this tension along three axes.  First ,

the on -chain record contains only the DID and a public key; it does not contain 32 

directly identifying personal data  — the linkage to CTID is held off -chain by the state. 

To the extent that a DID alone qualifies as personal data (it is plausibly 

pseudonymous data under GDPR Recital 26 and likely “personal information” under 

PIPL), the on -chain residue after revocation is bounded but non -zero.  Second ,

revocation entries published on chain mark a DID as inactive but cannot remove it. 

This is closer to GDPR’s notion of  restriction of processing  (Art. 18) than to outright 

erasure, and it requires policy alignment that PIPL and GDPR jurisprudence have 

not yet fully developed for ledger -based identity infrastructure.  Third , redactable -

blockchain constructions [18] offer a theoretical path to ledger -level erasure but are 

not part of the current RealDID design and carry their own governance 

complications (who holds the redaction key?). 

We do not claim that RealDID satisfies GDPR Art. 17 today. We claim, more 

modestly, that the architecture’s choice to keep all directly identifying data off -

chain narrows the surface of conflict between immutability and erasure rights to 

pseudonymous  identifiers and  registry  entries, and that the residual conflict is real 

and requires either policy reform, ledger -level redaction, or short -lived/rotating 

DIDs as part of future iterations. 

# 6.2 The Dual -Root Trust Model and Its Asymmetry 

The RealDID architecture establishes two roots of trust that constrain each other 

along distinct dimensions, but the constraints are not symmetric (Table 2, §4.4). 

State Root (CTID to RealDID).  The state guarantees that every  did:sic:  maps to a 

real, verified legal person. This is the  anchoring function : without it, DIDs are self -

asserted and VCs built on them carry no legal weight. The state root is hard -

bounded in three ways: the state cannot sign as any DID subject (no private key 

access), cannot view VC contents (encrypted to the holder’s public key), and 

cannot unilaterally modify the DID Registry, Template Registry, or Revocation 

Registry (multi -stakeholder consortium governance). It nevertheless retains three 

structural powers  — it can deanonymize a DID via the linkage table (under defined 

legal process), it can revoke a DID and thereby cascade -invalidate all associated 

VCs, and it observes per -credential metadata at the relay (issuer, holder, template, 

timestamp, ciphertext hash). 

User Root (Private Key).  The user guarantees that only they can present their 

credentials and apply for new VCs. This is the  sovereignty function : without it, the 

state could impersonate any citizen in digital transactions. The user root is hard -

bounded as well: the user cannot obtain a DID without CTID verification, cannot 

fabricate a legal identity, cannot prevent deanonymization under lawful process, 

and cannot prevent state -side observation of credential -graph metadata. 

Asymmetric, not mutual.  It would be tempting to call this a  mutual  constraint, and 

earlier drafts of this work did. We now resist that framing for the reasons 

established in §4.4: the user is bounded by cryptography; the state is bounded by 33 

cryptography plus legal -process commitments around capabilities it both holds 

and operates  — categorically different bounds. The architecture is therefore a 

departure from both pure self -sovereign identity, which assumes the user can 

bootstrap their own legal existence, and pure state -issued digital identity, which 

assumes the state can be trusted with unilateral control of all identity functions. 

The trade -off it offers is: stronger privacy and verifier -side decentralization, at the 

cost of accepting a structurally privileged state root. 

# 6.3 Accountability Without Mass Surveillance 

A persistent tension in digital identity architecture is the apparent trade -off between 

accountability and privacy. The RealDID architecture suggests this trade -off is not 

inevitable. 

Anonymous to Verifiers.  Verifiers see DIDs  – opaque strings  – and the specific 

claims the holder chooses to disclose. A verifier can confirm that a credential is 

authentic, legally anchored, and presented by its owner, without learning the 

holder’s name, national ID number, photograph, or any other PII. This is true for all 

verifiers, domestic and foreign. 

Accountable to Law.  The government holds the RealDID -CTID linkage table. If a 

DID is used for criminal activity, the government can identify the real person behind 

it through a defined legal process (judicial warrant). This is not a backdoor; it is a 

transparent architectural property. The linkage table is not a real -time surveillance 

feed  – it is an accountability mechanism gated by legal process. 

Audit Trail with Content Blindness.  The government logs metadata for every VC 

relay: issuer DID, holder DID, template ID, VC hash, and timestamp. This log 

supports audit and accountability without exposing credential contents. The 

government can answer “was a VC of this type issued to this holder at this time?” 

but cannot answer “what degree did this holder earn?” or “what medical condition 

does this VC attest to?” 

Verifier Privacy.  Unlike the centralized model, where every verification API call 

reveals the verifier’s identity to the government, on -chain verification requires no 

authentication. This is the realization of  G5  (verifier privacy): the verification 

protocol itself creates no observation point  — there is no structural equivalent of 

the CTID gateway that logs every query. The strength of the guarantee, however, 

depends on the verifier’s operational choice. For verifiers operating their own read -

only Guoxin Chain full node (see §4.2), the property is absolute at the application 

layer against both  A3  (semi -honest government relay) and  A4  (network observer): 

verification queries never traverse a third -party RPC endpoint and are not visible to 

any consortium operator, including government -agency consortium members. For 

verifiers using a shared consortium RPC endpoint, the query remains 

unauthenticated  — no API key or identity token is required  — but the RPC operator 

sees the verifier’s IP address and the queried DID. The RPC operator may be a 34 

government agency (§4.2 lists government agencies among consortium members), 

in which case the government  can  observe query metadata at that endpoint. This is 

not a protocol -level observation  — the verifier controls the trade -off: the 

architecture enables full -node privacy, an option the architecture does not 

foreclose, which distinguishes it from a centralized API model where verifier 

exposure is structurally unavoidable. A company verifying an employee’s 

credentials, a clinic verifying a patient’s insurance, a journalist verifying a source’s 

institutional affiliation  — all of these relationships are exposed to the government in 

a centralized verification model. RealDID protects them as a structural property of 

on -chain queries whose strength is under the verifier’s operational control. 

# 6.4 Risks and Honest Tensions 

A credible policy analysis must acknowledge the architecture’s risks and limitations. 

Linkage Table Compromise.  The RealDID -CTID linkage table is the single highest -

value target in the system. If compromised, all RealDID holders are simultaneously 

de -anonymized. This is the scenario in which  G6  (accountability under legal process) 

degrades to mass surveillance: the gated deanonymization capability becomes an 

uncontrolled disclosure. In terms of the adversary model, the threat is  A3  (semi -

honest government relay) exceeding its defined bounds  — or an external attacker 

exploiting the concentration of identity data that the state -root model structurally 

requires. Mitigations include off -chain storage with layered encryption, hardware 

security modules, strict access controls, and audit logging of all access attempts. 

However, no mitigation can reduce this risk to zero. The linkage table concentrates 

risk in a way that is inherent to the state -root model. 

Credential -Graph Metadata Accumulation.  As discussed in §5.5, the government 

relay logs per -issuance metadata  {issuer DID, holder DID, template ID, VC 

> hash, timestamp}

. Aggregated across the population, this constitutes a  credential 

graph  — for every citizen, the set of credential types they hold, the issuers they hold 

them from, and the issuance times. This is  A3 ’s (semi -honest government relay) 

structural observation surface: the protocol  requires  the relay to log this metadata 

for audit, and the relay therefore accumulates it lawfully, but the aggregation itself 

constitutes a surveillance dataset whose sensitivity is independent of credential 

contents. It reveals affiliations (which university, which hospital, which professional 

body) and life events (issuance of a marriage credential, a residence permit, a 

clearance). The metadata -privacy literature shows that comparable graphs (call 

records, transaction records) often re -identify individuals and disclose far more 

than nominally  “content -free” framing would suggest [7, 8]. The current 

architecture does not protect against this. Plausible mitigations include template -

ID obfuscation or commitment schemes, blinded -issuance constructions [9], or 

strict retention and access controls on the relay log. We treat these as priority items 

for future iterations of the design rather than features of the system as currently 

deployed. 35 

Presentation Linkability.  The RealDID design as described here uses a single  

> did:sic:

per holder across all presentations. Two consequences follow. First, 

multiple  A1  (malicious verifiers) can collude  — or one verifier across multiple 

sessions can self -correlate  — to link a holder’s interactions, since each 

presentation carries the same DID -bound holder signature against the same on -

chain DID document. Verifier collusion is one of the specific capabilities attributed 

to A1 in §3.0. Second, even non -colluding verifiers who simply log presentations can 

produce, in aggregate, a profile of the holder’s verification activity tied to a stable 

identifier. The architecture therefore provides  content  selective disclosure but not 

unlinkability  in the cryptographic sense achieved by anonymous -credential 

schemes such as BBS+ signatures [10], Camenisch -Lysyanskaya signatures [11], or 

IDEMIX -style constructions [24], and not the disclosure -time unlinkability targeted 

by the IETF SD -JWT draft [12]. Mitigations available within the current model include 

per -relationship or per -presentation pairwise DIDs (as in the W3C DID core 

specification’s privacy guidance [1]) and short -lived DIDs reissued by the state on 

demand; both carry usability and operational costs. We mark this as a structural 

limitation rather than a flaw  — the architecture’s primary goal was legal anchoring 

rather than full unlinkable presentation  — but the limit deserves to be named 

explicitly and is not adequately addressed by content blindness alone. 

Revocation Power.  The government can revoke a RealDID, which cascade -

invalidates all VCs linked to that DID. This is the flip side of  G6  (accountability under 

legal process): the same capability that enables lawful deanonymization also 

enables a single action to invalidate all of a person’s credentials. It is necessary for 

addressing identity fraud, criminal misuse, or national security concerns. However, 

the breadth of the power warrants scrutiny. What are the checks on revocation? Is 

there a process for appeal? Can revocation be scoped (e.g., revoke only newly -

issued VCs, preserving existing ones)? These are governance questions that the 

architecture itself does not answer. 

Template Approval Gatekeeping.  The government approves all VC templates 

before they are registered on -chain. This ensures that only authorized issuers can 

create credential types within their domain of authority  — the defense against  A2 

(semi -honest issuer) attempting to issue credentials outside its legitimate scope. 

However, it also creates a gatekeeping point: the government could theoretically 

block a template for reasons unrelated to issuer authorization  — for example, a 

credential type that enables disfavored forms of association or commerce. The 

multi -stakeholder governance of the Template Registry provides some check on this 

power (no single entity can unilaterally approve or reject), but the risk of 

gatekeeping creep is real. 

State Power and the Permissioned Chain.  The open permissioned chain is 

governed by a consortium that includes government agencies. This is the 

institutional context within which  A5  (consortium -majority adversary) must be 

evaluated: the defense against A5 relies on consortium consensus rather than 36 

cryptographic enforcement. While the consortium structure prevents unilateral 

action, a colluding majority of consortium members  — or a state that exercises 

effective control over enough consortium members  — could theoretically alter the 

chain’s state. On a public permissionless chain, collusion requires economic 

majority (51% attack); on a permissioned consortium chain, it requires institutional 

capture  — a different threat model with a different trust assumption. The paper 

does not claim equivalence; it claims that open permissioned chains achieve the 

minimum necessary properties for decentralized verification under China’s legal 

constraints. 

# 7. Generalizability 

A case study of a single system risks being dismissed as a point solution. This 

section demonstrates that the RealDID three -layer model generalizes to any 

country with a centralized legal identity system, and that the model is chain -

agnostic  – deployable on open permissioned chains where cryptocurrency is 

restricted, and on public permissionless chains where legally permissible. 

# 7.1 The Three -Layer Framework 

The RealDID architecture abstracts to a three -layer model that is independent of 

any specific national implementation: 

1.  Layer 1  – National Legal Identity.  A centralized system that verifies legal 

identity through biometric and documentary evidence. Examples: China’s 

CTID, India’s Aadhaar, Estonia’s eID, and the national identity systems of 

Singapore and Hong Kong. 

2.  Layer 2  – Decentralized Identifier (DID).  A DID issued by the state onto a 

verifiable data registry (blockchain), with user -generated key pairs, state -

held linkage, and public resolvability. The DID serves as the decentralized 

anchor for credential exchange. 

3.  Layer 3  – Verifiable Credentials.  A rich ecosystem of issuer -defined VC 

templates, government -mediated content -blind issuance, triple -signature 

authentication, and selective disclosure at presentation. 

The chain is a deployment parameter of Layer 2, not an architectural requirement of 

the model. The model prescribes  properties  – public readability, DID resolvability, 

cryptographic verifiability, multi -stakeholder governance of registries  – not a

specific chain type. 

# 7.2 Chain Agnosticism 

The three -layer model deploys differently depending on the legal status of public 

permissionless blockchains in a given jurisdiction. 37 

Where public permissionless chains are legal  (e.g., Singapore, Hong Kong), the 

architecture deploys directly on an existing public chain (Ethereum, Polygon, etc.). 

Chain consensus is already decentralized  – the governance challenge shifts from 

the chain layer to the smart contract layer. The DID Registry, Template Registry, and 

Revocation Registry are implemented as smart contracts governed by multi -

stakeholder mechanisms (multi -signature wallets, DAO -style governance, or 

institutional consortium agreements). The state issues DIDs as transactions to 

these contracts (requiring gas fees, which are permissible in these jurisdictions); 

verifiers query the public chain without restriction. 

Where public permissionless chains are restricted  (e.g., China), the architecture 

deploys on an open permissioned chain with consortium governance. The same 

three smart contracts exist, but the validator set is permissioned to consortium 

members, and the chain itself requires consortium governance. 

In both cases, the essential guarantee is identical:  no single entity  — including the 

state  — can unilaterally alter DIDs, approve templates, or revoke credentials .

The mechanism differs (smart -contract governance on public chains; chain -plus -

contract governance on permissioned chains), but the architectural property is 

preserved. Table 4 summarises the differences across jurisdictions. 

China  Singapore  Hong Kong 

Layer 1  CTID  National ID system  National ID system 

Chain type  Open 

permissioned 

Public 

permissionless 

Public 

permissionless 

Constraint  Crypto gas fees 

illegal 

No legal restriction  No legal restriction 

Governance 

target 

Chain + smart 

contracts 

Smart contracts 

only 

Smart contracts 

only 

Table 4: Chain -agnostic deployment of the three -layer model across jurisdictions. 

The generalizability of the model is not theoretical. Cross -border deployments are 

in progress with Singapore and Hong Kong, testing the three -layer model in practice: 

DIDs anchored to each jurisdiction’s national identity system, cross -border VC 

exchange without exposing identity infrastructure across borders, and the Chinese 

permissioned chain serving as a neutral verification ground. Results will be reported 

in future work. 

# 7.3 Prerequisites for Adoption 

Deploying the three -layer model in a new jurisdiction requires five prerequisites, 

summarized in Table 5. 

Prerequisite  Rationale 38 

Prerequisite  Rationale 

Centralized legal identity with biometric 

verification 

Provides the Layer 1 root of trust  – DIDs 

must anchor to verified legal persons 

Chain with public read access and DID 

resolution 

Verifiers anywhere must resolve DIDs 

and validate signatures without 

authorization 

Multi -stakeholder governance of smart 

contracts 

Prevents unilateral control of DID 

issuance, template approval, and 

revocation 

VC template standardization  Enables cross -issuer and cross -border 

interoperability of credential types 

Regulatory framework for the linkage 

table 

Defines who may deanonymize, under 

what process, with what oversight 

Table 5: Prerequisites for adopting the three -layer model. 

# 7.4 Limitations and Stakeholder Gaps 

The three -layer model is not universally applicable.  Countries without centralized 

identity infrastructure  lack the Layer 1 root of trust and cannot adopt the model 

without first building a national ID system  — a multi -decade infrastructure project 

that the model does not address.  Regions with political resistance to state 

involvement in digital identity  may prefer pure self -sovereign identity models in 

the tradition of Allen [19], accepting the absence of legal anchoring as a trade -off 

for freedom from state oversight; the substantial critical literature on Aadhaar’s 

centralized identity architecture [20, 21] is a reminder that “national identity 

infrastructure” is not a neutral premise.  Cross -border legal recognition  remains 

an open challenge: a VC valid under China’s PIPL may not automatically satisfy 

GDPR adequacy requirements (§6.1.2), requiring bilateral or multilateral legal 

frameworks that do not yet exist. 

Beyond model -level limits, the architecture as described leaves three categories of 

stakeholders under -served, and we name them honestly here. 

People without devices or biometrics.  The protocol assumes a user device that 

generates and stores a private key (§4.3 step 2) and a population that can complete 

CTID biometric and documentary verification. Elderly users without smartphones, 

children below the biometric -enrollment age, people whose biometrics fail to enroll 

reliably (a known issue in large -scale biometric systems [20]), and persons with 

disabilities all sit outside the architecture’s assumed user model. An inclusive 

deployment requires assisted -issuance, guardian -mediated, or delegated -

presentation flows; none are specified in the current design. 39 

Non -citizens and persons of irregular status.  CTID is structured around verified 

citizens of China. Foreign residents, dual nationals, stateless persons, and 

irregular -status migrants either fall outside the system or require parallel 

infrastructure. The cross -border generalization argument in §7.1 –§7.2 addresses 

interoperation  between national identity roots (§7.1 –§7.2) but does not address 

persons who have no national identity root at all. 

Key loss and recovery.  Catastrophic loss of the private key (lost device, hardware 

failure, key compromise) currently cascades to loss of every VC bound to the 

affected DID. Plausible recovery routes  — social recovery, government -mediated 

reissuance through a fresh CTID re -verification, threshold -secret recovery with 

consortium custodians  — each have distinct constraints on the trust model. Social 

recovery weakens the user -side cryptographic bound; government -mediated 

reissuance strengthens the state’s structural power further. The architecture as 

currently specified does not commit to a recovery design; we treat this as one of the 

most important open questions for production deployment. 

These limitations bound the model’s applicability and do not undermine its value 

for the substantial set of countries that already possess centralized legal identity 

infrastructure and are seeking to bridge it to decentralized verification  — but they 

should bound the claims made on its behalf. 

# 8. Conclusion 

This paper has presented China’s RealDID system as a case study in bridging 

centralized national legal identity with decentralized verifiable credentials. The core 

finding is that these two paradigms are not contradictory: they can be combined 

into an asymmetric, state -bounded trust model  — decentralized verification with 

centralized legal anchoring  (§4.4, §6.2)  — in which the state prevents identity 

fabrication but cannot impersonate or read credential contents, and the user 

controls presentation privacy but cannot fabricate a legal identity or evade state -

side metadata observation. The broader implication is that decentralized 

verification can exist without decentralized identity roots, and this framing may be 

more practically achievable and legally compatible than the full self -sovereign 

identity vision, particularly in jurisdictions where the state has a legitimate and 

legally mandated role in establishing legal identity. 

We have made three specific contributions. First, we described the RealDID three -

layer architecture (CTID, RealDID, VCs) in protocol -level detail, including the DID 

issuance protocol, the key custody model that establishes the asymmetric trust 

structure, the VC lifecycle with issuer -driven template registry, the triple -signature 

chain (issuer, government, holder), and the SD -JWT -based selective disclosure 

mechanism  — together with explicit  acknowledgment  of the architecture’s 

metadata -level privacy limits. Second, we analyzed the architecture’s policy 

implications: alignment with China’s PIPL data minimization principle, a40 

comparison with the EU’s GDPR (including the tension between user erasure rights 

and immutable on -chain registries) and eIDAS 2.0, the dual -root trust model 

evaluated honestly as asymmetric, verifier privacy as an under -appreciated 

dimension of the identity ecosystem, and risks including linkage -table compromise, 

revocation breadth, and credential -graph metadata accumulation. Third, we argued 

that the three -layer model is chain -agnostic and generalizes to jurisdictions with a 

centralized legal identity system, supported in principle by in -progress cross -border 

deployments with Singapore and Hong Kong; empirical evaluation is reserved for 

future work. 

Future work should address several open questions. Formal verification of the 

linkage secrecy property  – proving that an observer of on -chain data cannot 

associate DIDs with real -world identities under defined threat models  – would 

strengthen the privacy guarantees. Zero -knowledge proofs for selective disclosure 

could further reduce what verifiers learn about holders (e.g., proving age over 18 

without revealing the exact birth date, even to the verifier). Cross -border legal 

recognition frameworks are needed to establish mutual recognition of VCs across 

jurisdictions with different data protection regimes. The Singapore and Hong Kong 

deployment results should be reported as empirical evidence for the model’s 

generalizability. Finally, the governance questions raised in Section 6.4  – checks on 

revocation power, template approval oversight, and consortium capture risk  –

deserve dedicated treatment as the model moves from sandbox to production. 

# Acknowledgements 

In preparing this manuscript, the author used Anthropic's Claude as an AI -assisted 

tool. The assistance includes literature search, copyediting, grammar , and 

proofreading,  and is therefore disclosed here in full, in accordance with the 

publisher's policy on generative AI in scientific writing. All AI -assisted output was 

reviewed, edited, and approved by the author. 

# Competing Interests 

The author, Yifan He, is the Chief Executive Officer of Red Date Technology (Hong 

Kong) Ltd.  Red Date Technology is the architect and principal operator of China’s 

Blockchain -based Service Network (BSN) and is, together with entities under 

China’s State Information Center, a co -developer of the China RealDID system that 

is the subject of this paper. Red Date Technology also operates Guoxin Chain, the 

open permissioned chain on which RealDID is deployed, and is a stakeholder in the 

Singapore and Hong Kong cross -border sandbox engagements discussed in §7.2. 

The author therefore has a direct material and professional interest in the favorable 

reception of the architecture analyzed in this paper. Readers are asked to weigh the 

paper’s normative and comparative claims (in particular: claims of regulatory 

alignment in §6.1, the dual -root trust model in §6.2, and the generalizability 41 

argument in §7) against this interest. The paper’s descriptions of architecture and 

protocols (§§4 –5) reflect insider knowledge and are, to the author’s best 

understanding, accurate; readers seeking independent verification should consult 

the cited primary materials and the public RealDID and BSN documentation. 

No external funding was received for the preparation of this paper. 

# References 

[1] M. Sporny, A. Guy, M. Sabadello, and D. Reed, “Decentralized Identifiers (DIDs) 

v1.0,” W3C Recommendation, July 2022. https://www.w3.org/TR/did -core/ 

[2] M. Sporny, D. Longley, and D. Chadwick, “Verifiable Credentials Data Model 

v2.0,” W3C Candidate Recommendation, 2024. https://www.w3.org/TR/vc -data -

model -2.0/ 

[3] European Parliament and Council,  “Regulation (EU) 2024/1183 of the European 

Parliament and of the Council of 11 April 2024 amending Regulation (EU) No 

910/2014 as regards establishing the European Digital Identity Framework (eIDAS 

2.0),” Official Journal of the European Union, April 2024. https://eur -

lex.europa.eu/eli/reg/2024/1183/ 

[4] Unique Identification Authority of India (UIDAI), “Aadhaar (Authentication and 

Offline Verification) Amendment Regulations, 2024,”  published 31 January 2024. 

https://uidai.gov.in/en/about -uidai/legal -framework/regulations/16500 -the -

aadhaar -authentication -and -offline -verification -amendment -regulations -2024 -

published -on -31 -1-2024.htmlen/about -uidai/legal -framework/regulations/16500 -

the -aadhaar -authentication -and -offline -verification -amendment -regulations -2024 -

published -on -31 -1-2024.html 

[5] Sovrin Foundation, “Sovrin: A Protocol and Token for Self -Sovereign Identity and 

Decentralized Trust,” White Paper, January 2018. 

[6] Standing Committee of the National People’s Congress, “Personal Information 

Protection Law of the People’s Republic of China  (个人信息保护法 ), ” promulgated 

20 August 2021, effective 1 November 2021. 

[7] J. Mayer, P. Mutchler, and J. C. Mitchell, “Evaluating the privacy properties of 

telephone metadata,”  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , vol.  113, 

no. 20, pp.  5536 –5541, 2016. 

[8] Y. -A. de Montjoye, L. Radaelli, V. K. Singh, and A. Pentland,  “Unique in the 

shopping mall: On the reidentifiability of credit card metadata,”  Science , vol.  347, 

no. 6221, pp.  536 –539, 2015. 

[9] J. Camenisch and A. Lysyanskaya, “An efficient system for non -transferable 

anonymous credentials with optional anonymity revocation,” in  Advances in 

Cryptology  — EUROCRYPT 2001 , LNCS 2045, Springer, pp.  93 –118, 2001. 42 

[10] T. Looker, V. Kalos, A. Whitehead, and M. Lodder, “The BBS Signature Scheme,” 

IETF Internet -Draft draft -irtf -cfrg -bbs -signatures, Crypto Forum Research Group, 

2024. 

[11] J. Camenisch and A. Lysyanskaya, “Signature Schemes and Anonymous 

Credentials from Bilinear Maps,” in  Advances in Cryptology  — CRYPTO 2004 , LNCS 

3152, Springer, pp.  56 –72, 2004. 

[12] D. Fett, K. Yasuda, and B. Campbell, “Selective Disclosure for JWTs (SD -JWT),” 

IETF Internet -Draft draft -ietf -oauth -selective -disclosure -jwt, OAuth Working Group, 

2024. 

[13] S. Josefsson and I. Liusvaara,  “Edwards -Curve Digital Signature Algorithm 

(EdDSA),” RFC 8032, IETF, January 2017. 

[14] R. L. Barnes, K. Bhargavan, B. Lipp, and C. A. Wood, “Hybrid Public Key 

Encryption,” RFC 9180, IETF, February 2022. 

[15] European Commission, “The European Digital Identity Wallet Architecture and 

Reference Framework (EUDI ARF),” version 1.4.0, eIDAS Expert Group, 2024. 

https://github.com/eu -digital -identity -wallet/eudi -doc -architecture -and -reference -

framework 

[16] International Organization for Standardization,  “ISO/IEC 18013 -5:2021  —

Personal identification  — ISO -compliant driving licence  — Part 5: Mobile driving 

licence (mDL) application,” 2021. 

[17] European Parliament and Council, “Regulation (EU) 2016/679 (General Data 

Protection Regulation, GDPR),” Official Journal of the European Union, April 2016. 

https://eur -lex.europa.eu/eli/reg/2016/679/ 

[18] G. Ateniese, B. Magri, D. Venturi, and E. Andrade, “Redactable Blockchain  — or 

— Rewriting History in Bitcoin and Friends,” in  Proc. IEEE European Symposium on 

Security and Privacy (EuroS&P) , pp.  111 –126, 2017. 

[19] C. Allen, “The Path to Self -Sovereign Identity,” Life With Alacrity blog, April 2016. 

https://www.lifewithalacrity.com/2016/04/the -path -to -self -sovereign -identity.html 

[20] R. Khera,  Dissent on Aadhaar: Big Data Meets Big Brother , Orient BlackSwan, 

2019. 

[21] S. Totapally, P. Sonderegger, P. Rao, J. Gosselt, and G. Gupta, “State of 

Aadhaar: A People’s Perspective  — 2019 Edition,”  Dalberg Advisors, 2019. 

https://stateofaadhaar.in/ 

[22] Hyperledger Foundation, “AnonCreds Specification v1.0,” 2023. 

https://hyperledger.github.io/anoncreds -spec/ 43 

[23] Trust over IP Foundation, “ToIP Technology Architecture Specification,” V1.0 

First Public Review Draft, November 2022. https://trustoverip.github.io/TechArch/ 

[24] J. Camenisch and E. Van Herreweghen, “Design and Implementation of the 

idemix Anonymous Credential System,” in  Proc. 9th ACM Conference on Computer 

and Communications Security (CCS) , pp.  21 –30, 2002. 

[25] American Association of Motor Vehicle Administrators (AAMVA), “Mobile 

Driver’s License (mDL) Implementation Guidelines,” Version 1.2, 2023. 

https://www.aamva.org/topics/mobile -drivers -license 

[26] P. A. Grassi, M. E. Garcia, and J. L. Fenton, “Digital Identity Guidelines,”  NIST 

Special Publication 800 -63 -3, National Institute of Standards and Technology, June 

2017. https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/SpecialPublications/NIST.SP.800 -63 -3.pdf 

[27] K. Vassil, “Estonian e -Government Ecosystem: Foundation, Applications, 

Outcomes,” Background Paper for the World Development Report 2016, World 

Bank Group, June 2016. 

https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/24818 

[28] I. Calzada,  “Citizens’ Data Privacy in China: The State of the Art of the Personal 

Information Protection Law (PIPL),”  Smart Cities , vol.  5, no. 3, pp.  1129 –1150, 2022. 

https://doi.org/10.3390/smartcities5030057 

[29] Z. Tan and D. Zhang, “China’s PIPL and DSL: Is China Following the EU’s 

Approach to Data Protection?”  Journal of Data Protection & Privacy , vol.  5, no. 1, 

pp.  7–25, 2021. 

[30] Blockchain -based Service Network (BSN) and First Research Institute of the 

Ministry of Public Security,  “RealDID and Yan’an Chain Launch Announcement,” 

December 2023. As reported in  South China Morning Post , “Blockchain -managed 

IDs arrive in China with new government -backed scheme aiming to reduce data 

leaks,” 12 December 2023, and  Biometric Update , “China’s project to verify real -

name digital ID leans into national blockchain ambitions,” December 2023. 

[31] Blockchain -based Service Network (BSN),  “BSN  延安链正式更名为  BSN  国信链” 

(BSN Yan’an Chain Officially Renamed to BSN Guoxin Chain), BSN Official WeChat 

Account, 20 July 2026. 

[32] N. Naik and P. Jenkins, “uPort Open -Source Identity Management System: An 

Assessment of Self -Sovereign Identity and User -Centric Data Platform Built on 

Blockchain,” in  Proc. IEEE International Symposium on Systems Engineering (ISSE) ,

2020. https://doi.org/10.1109/ISSE49799.2020.9272223 

[33] H. Li, Y. Chen, X. Shi, X. Bai, N. Mo, W. Li, R. Guo, Z. Wang, and Y. Sun,  “FISCO -

BCOS: An Enterprise -grade Permissioned Blockchain System with High -

performance,” in  Proc. International Conference for High Performance Computing, 44 

Networking, Storage and Analysis (SC ’23) , 2023. 

https://doi.org/10.1145/3581784.3607053