Title: Doping HAp manuscript_MT_FINAL

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.13339v1

Published Time: Thu, 16 Apr 2026 00:18:10 GMT

Number of Pages: 31

Markdown Content:
1

## Uncovering the role of ionic doping in hydroxyapatite: The building blocks 

## of tooth enamel and bones 

Mahdi Tavakol 1, 2 , Jinke Chang 1, Cyril Besnard 1, Gabriel Landini 2, Richard M. Shelton 2,

Jin -Chong Tan 1*, and Alexander M. Korsunsky 1, 3**       

> 1Multi -Beam Laboratory for Engineering Microscopy (MBLEM )and Multifunctional Materials &
> Composites (MMC) Lab oratories , Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford OX1
> 3PJ , UK
> 2School of Dentistry, University of Birmingham, 5 Mill Pool Way, Edgbaston, Birmingham B5 7EG,
> UK
> 3Professor and Fellow Emeritus, Trinity College, Oxford OX1 3BH , UK

Corresponding authors: 

> **

alexander.korsunsky@eng.ox.ac.uk 

> *

jin -chong.tan@eng.ox.ac.uk 

Abstract 

Hydroxyapatite (HAp) is the primary mineral component of various mineralized tissues in the 

human body, including bone and teeth, where it performs critical roles of structural support and 

load transmission . In the context of dental health , the two most crucial properties of HAp are 

mechanical stability, which ensures resistance to forces, and chemical stability, which preserves 

surface integrity in acidic environments. During early stages of human evolution, e.g. when 

teeth were used to crush uncooked food , mechanical stability was of paramount importance .

However , with changes in diet and lifestyle, the principal origins of tooth damage and lo ss

shifted towards bacterially mediated chemical attack, known as tooth decay, or caries . To 

enhance the chemical stability, ion doping has emerged as a particularly significant approach, 

and it lies at the focus of the present study. 

A Molecular Dynamics (MD) framework wa s developed to investigate the effects of ion 

doping on the chemical and mechanical stability of HAp and to identify optimal doping 

candidates. Th e framework combines conventional MD with Steered Molecular Dynamics 

(SMD), Thermodynamic Integration (TI) and uniaxial compression test simulation s to provide 

comprehensive insights into the doping process. The findings revealed surface atoms as the 

most viable candidates for doping , as demonstrated by SMD and conventional MD simulations. 2

Notably , TI calculations have identif ied magnesium ions as a better candidate among the ions 

considered here for enhancing the chemical stability of HAp. The results presented in this study 

offer valuable guidelines for synthesizing HAp -based substitu ent materials with properties 

tailored to meet the demands of modern dental applications such as implant coatings, enamel 

remineralization agents and restorative materials .3

Introduction 

Hydroxyapatite (HAp) with the chemical formula of Ca 10 (PO 4)6(OH) 2 for its stoichiometric 

pure form is the main mineral of tooth enamel and bone [1] . Among various properties of HAp, 

the mechanical and chemical stability are central to the functions of the organs and tissues made 

of it. Mechanical stability pertains to the material's ability to withstand forces without 

fracturing while chemical stability refers to the material's resistance to dissolution and 

degradation . The relative importance of each one of these properties in each organ and tissue 

is determined by the characteristic function of that organ. In teeth, for example , the mechanical 

prope rties mattered the most at the early stages of evolution so that the tooth could resist the 

high forces occurred in eating hard foods . Nowadays, however, given the diet is softer and rich 

in carbohydrates , the chemical stability of HAp has bec ome more important, where HAp must 

resist acidic conditions from dietary sources and microbial fermentation of those dietary 

carbohydrates [2] . Ensuring the chemical stability of HAp is essential for preventing caries ,

along with the consideration of the possibility of remineralizing enamel lesions, and promoting 

overall dental health [3, 4] .

Despite the undeniable importance of mechanical properties such as compressive strength and 

high strength , HAp is found to be somewhat deficient in maintaining the chemical balance 

necessary for tooth remineralization [5] . Therefore, prioritizing the chemical stability of HAp 

is crucial for effective dental health maintenance, treatment and the long -term preservation of 

tooth structure. To strike a balance between chemical and mechanical stability , the chemical 

content of HAp can be tailored through ion ic doping that forms the topic of the present study. 

Ions can be incorporated into the tooth structure to enhance the chemical stability of HAp ,

improving its resistance to demineralization [6] .

HAp doping with various ions ha s been previously investigate d utiliz ing mostly experimental 

techniques , with stud ies consider ing specific dopant s due to their unique properties . For 

instance, the antimicrobial properties of zinc (Zn) and silver (Ag) motivated several studies to 

investigate either Zn - or Ag -doped H Aps [7 -11] . In the case of Ag doping , better antibacterial 

protection against gram -positive and gram -negative bacteria was observed [9, 10] . Various 

synthe tic methods such as co -precipitation and pulsed laser deposition ha ve been considered 

and optimized to achieve a uniform distribution of silver ions that is important for the structural 

integrity of HAp [10, 11] .

Magnesium, fluoride and carbonate have also been extensively researched in the context of 

ionic doping of HAp [12 -22] . The incorporation of Mg²⁺ at the level of 1 mol% has been shown 4

to enhance bioactivity, particularly by supporting the proliferation and differentiation of 

osteoblastic cells — key processes involved in the early stages of bone regeneration [12, 13] .

Introducing fluoride ions into the HAp structure leads to the formation of fluorapatite, which 

has improved stability and lower solubility compared with pure HAp. This modification has 

been reported to improve bonding strength and promote the deposition of bone -like apatite, 

both of which are favorable factors that may contribute to improved osseointegration in dental 

and orthopedic applications [15, 16] . Additionally, fluoride -doped HAp has been shown to 

promote dental remineralization, effectively occluding dentinal tubules and reducing 

sensitivity [17] . Incorporating CO₃²⁻ into the HAp lattice can enhance its solubility and 

bioactivity, mimicking the natural mineral composition of bone [20, 23 -27] . Studies have 

shown that carbonate -doped HAp exhibits improve d osteoconductiv ity and promotes 

mineralization processes compared to undoped HAp [23] . The presence of carbonate ions can 

also influence the crystallinity , morphology of HAp and mechanical properties [25 -27] .

In summary, in the context of modern healthcare the chemical stability of HAp has become 

relatively more important for tooth enamel. Despite numerous studies investigating the effects 

of ionic doping on the HAp mineral, many aspects remain unclear , e.g., the impact of various 

ions on different facets of HAp crystals across a range of pH values and ionic concentrations. 

Th e present study address es these gaps by investigat ing the microscopic details of ion doping 

that remained elusive and are lacking in literature to date through a combination of both the 

computational and experimental approaches . This study reveals a more pronounced effec t of 

Mg 2+ compared to the fluoride and carbonate ions. 5

Results 

The results section is organized in several subsections . First, the results of the conventional 

MD simulations are summarized to determine the preferred location of the dopants inside HAp. 

The results of SMD simulations are presented in which the kinetics of the ion doping are 

revealed. Finally, the last two subsections contain information on the effect of dopant on the 

thermodynamics and mechanical stability. 

Conventional MD simulation s

The conventional MD simulations for 001 and 010 facets of HAp at pH values of 5 and 7 

solv ate d in a Mg 3(PO 4)2 solution we re carried out to investigate the possibility of the ion doping 

in the HAp. These two pH values were simulated because at pH 5 , the HAp is composed of 

dihydrogen phosphate while there is a combination of both monohydrogen and dihydrogen 

phosphates at pH 7. The adsorption of the Mg 2+ ion on the surface of HAp is observed through 

ionic density profiles and simulation snapshots while there is no sign of ion doping inside the 

HAp surface. Even increasing the salt concentration to the values as high as 2M does not lead 

to ionic doping inside HAp (Figure S1) . Three possible reasons for this observation are either 

(a) the ions doped on the surface are more stable than those in the interio r, (b) the limited 

timespan of the conventional MD simulation did not reveal doping inside HAp , or (c) the ionic 

doping inside HAp is not possible without ionic demineralization . To test the first hypothesis ,

conventional MD simulation with ions substituted ins ide HAp we re performed to see if the ions 

inside the HAp move to the surface. These simulations did not show such a possibility which 

highlights the importance of the second and third hypothesis. Regarding the m, the first step of 

the ion substitution inside HAp requires the creation of a void inside it. The possibility of ion 

substitution inside HAp in the simulation time or over longer timescales depends on the 

availability of the activation energy of such a void which is studied in the next subsection. 

SMD simulation 

SMD simulations were carried out for 001 and 010 facets of HAp at pH values of 5 and 7 

(Figure 1) . The free energy profiles illustrate that the pulling distance for each case is large 

enough for the pulled ion to evade the interaction sphere of the HAp (Figure 1a). The minimum 

free energy values show that the free energy of the surface ions is at least an order of magnitude 

lower than the rest of the ions making them the suitable candidate for the dissolution from the 

HAp creating the vacancies required for the ion doping (Figure 1b) . Even though this 6

observation does not exclude the possibility of the ion doping in the HAp interior, the higher 

free energy of the ions in deeper layers of HAp suggests that the surface ions are only viable 

candidate s for ion doping. These energies also hint at the possibility of HAp dissociation 

through a row -by -row process rather than the formation of dislocations perpendicular to the 

HAp surface.              

> Figure 1–SMD simula1on results showing the kine1cs of the ion doping. a) The SMD free energy profiles obtained fro m the
> average work for the forward and reverse paths. The distance is measured from the ini1al posi1on of the atom being pulled
> away towards the solu1on .b) The value of the minimum free energy profiles which provides informa1on about the plausible
> ion dissocia1on pathway sfrom the HAp surface.

Chemical Stability 

The chemical stability values shed light on the thermodynamics of ion doping in HAp. Th e

chemical stability values as a result of different doping extent of (in atomic percent) 10%, 20% 

and 50% for three ion substitution of Ca !" to Mg !" , OH # to F# and PO $ 

> %#

to CO % 

> !#

are depicted 

in Figure 2a . The highest effect is seen for the substitution of Ca !" with Mg 2+ which increases 7

with the percentage from 10% to 30% , observing a change in the chemical stability from the 

value of -0.37±0.06 kcal/mol to -2.14±0.27 at pH 5. For the do ping of PO $ 

> %#

with CO % 

> !#

and 

OH # with F# the chemical stability does not change significantly even for the highest 

percentage of 50%. To decipher the effect of solvation from the surface , the change in the free 

energy of HAp with the ionic substitution is also obtained (Figure 2b) . The HAp free energy 

for the 50% Ca !" to Mg !" replacement at pH 5 is -10.35±1.76 kcal/mol which is higher than 

the value of -2.14±0.27 kcal/mol for the chemical stability. Interestingly , the HAp free energy 

change reaches a positive value of 1.75±1.1 kcal/mol at pH 5 for PO $ 

> %#

doping with CO %

> !#

despite the negligible chemical stability for this case , and finally the HAp free energy for the 

OH # doping with F# is zero . Thus, for the Ca !" doping with Mg !" the solvation free energy 

becomes less favorable decreasing the chemical stability while for the for the PO 43- doping 

with CO % 

> !#

the solvation is more favorable counteracting the unfavorable change in the free 

energy of the HAp , and solvation free energy does not change for the substitution of OH # with 

F#.

Comparison of ionic doping for the 001 surface with different pH values show that 

considering the error bars, the pH neither affects the HAp free energy nor the chemical stability 

of the system . This is expected considering the fact that just the protonation of the surface 

phosphate ions changes as a result of pH changes , an d inside HAp where ionic doping mostly 

occurs the structures remain the same. There seems to be a trend towards pH effects on the 

HAp free energy for higher percentages which might be du e to the higher possibility of the ion 

doping occurring with in the surface where the protonation change due to variations in pH 

occurs. 8    

> Figure 2–Change in the chemical stability of HAp as a result of doping of various ions with different concentra1ons showing
> various influencing factors. a) HAp free energy and b) the chemical stability of the doped HAp system as a func1on of diffe rent
> doping concentra1ons and ions.

Mechanical stability 

The final aspect of the ion doping investigated in the current study is the mechanical properties 

defined as the resistan ce towards mechanical forces. The stress -strain curves for all ion doping 

variants and percent age s considered here showed a drop in the stress after the Ultimate 

Compressive Strength (UCS) and a final constant stress (Figures 3a, b, c) . The simulation 

snapshots illustrate the sudden change in the crystalline to the amorphous structure at the UCS 

point which may be considered the reason for the drop in the stress value. The final constant 

stress is the artifact of the simulation method as our simulations with solvated HAp structure 

did not show such a behavior .

The UCS and stiffness were taken as the measure s of mechanical stability and obtained 

through analysis of the stress -strain curves (Figures 3d, e, f) . Interestingly, the UCS and the 

stiffness illustrate the largest change for Ca 2+ doping with Mg 2+ which increases with the 

doping percentage with a decrease of the stiffness from 141.44±0.16 GPa for 5% to 

91.43±1.09 GPa for 30% substitution. For the other two cases of OH - doping with F - and doping 

of PO 43- doping with CO 32- there is no noticeable change in the mechanical stability. 9        

> Figure 3–Uniaxial compression simula1on results for the HAp systems with various doped elements and concentra1ons
> illustra1ng changes in the HAp mechanical proper1es. (a), (b), (c) Stress -strain plots and (d), (e), (f) UCS and s1ffness values
> for (a), (d) Ca 2+ doping with Mg 2+ , (b), (e) OH -doping with F -and (c), (f) PO 43-doping with CO 32-with various doping
> concentra1ons .

Discussion 

HAp is the main mineral of bone, tooth enamel and various mineralized organs in the human 

body. The chemical stability is particularly important for tooth enamel compared with its 

mechanical stability in the oral cavity , as it is required to resist dissolution in the acidic 

conditions from dietary sources or microbial activities [28, 29] . Ion doping is a significant 

approach to enhance chemical stability which can also be used to enhance other properties too .

Despite the wealth of information available in the literature on the effect of HAp doping with 

various ions [7 -22, 30 -35] , it remained hitherto un clear how the chemical and mechanical 

stability of HAp changes with the doping percentage , whilst the molecular mechanisms of 

doping we re insufficiently well understood . The current study presented novel insights into 

these aspects of ion doping. First , the location of doped ions was determined through 

conventional MD and Steered Molecular Dynamics (SMD) , and then the chemical and 

mechanical stability aspects of the Mg 2+ , OH - and CO 32- doped HAp were systematically 

evaluated through Thermodynamic Integration (TI) and the uniaxial compression test 

simulation .

Despite various studies dedicated to HAp doping with different ions [7 -22, 30 -35] , the 

unanswered question from the literature survey was where the ions end up in the HAp structure ,10 

with important implications for the molecular evolution of the dop ed HAp species in the 

biological media . This is summarized below. Neither for the Mg 2+ -doped HAp nor for the pure 

HAp solvated in a high concentration solution of Mg 3(PO 4)2 solution was there an exchange of 

Mg 2+ /Ca 2+ ions observed between the interior of HAp and ions in the solution . This has two 

implications: either the simulation duration was insufficient , or this doping process is not 

possible. T hese hypotheses were tested , noting that the first stage of bulk HAp ion doping is 

the creation of vacancies with in HAp to place ions there . The free energy of this process is the 

activation free energy of the doping process. The SMD simulations deployed calculate d the 

activation free energy and investigate d the possibility of ion doping for different atomic 

coordinates inside HAp. The free energy values for desorption of a Ca 2+ ion from the first HAp 

ionic layer f rom 001 and 010 facets at pH values of 5 and 7 we re found to be -9.13, -12.44, -

12.55 and -36.9 kcal/mol . Equation 8 relates the time required to pass the barrier (𝑡 ) with 𝐴 

which is in the order of 10 13 s-1 for many reactions , and 𝐸 &, 𝑘 and 𝑇 represent ing the activation 

free energy, the Boltzmann ’s constant and the temperatur e. Accordingly , these free energy 

values translate to the time scales of 4.33 ×10 -7 s, 5.75 ×10 -4 s, 6.06 ×10 -4 s and 2.83 ×10 13 s.

However, the desorption free energy for the interior layers of HAp is above 100 kcal/mol which 

leads to the required barrier crossing time of 2.6 ×10 54 s, indicating that it is practically 

impossible . This leav es the surface ions the only candidates for vacancy creation and ion 

doping at pH 5 and 7 without demineralization . Thus, the values of the activation free energy 

obtained through SMD simulations are in line with the finding of ion doping in the surface 

obtained through the conventional MD simulation .

𝑡 = 1

𝐴 𝑒 # (!

> )*

(8)

Another important implication of this finding is that the ion doping in the interior of 

HAp can only occur during the mineralization process, in which the ions can be doped on the 

surface of the growing mineral .

Assuming that chemical stability is more important than the mechanical stability in the 

tooth enam el , it remained hitherto un clear which ions at what concentration can serve the goal 

of improving HAp chemical stability . To elucidate this aspect of ion doping , alchemical 

transformation and uniaxial compression simulations were deployed on HAp systems with 

various concentrations of several ions. It was found that F - doping for concentrations as high 

as 50% affect neither the mechanical stability nor the chemical stability . This is in line with the 11 

findings of Wang et al . [36] on inefficacy of F - in protecting the 001 facets and the lack of 

change in the mechanical properties due to F - doping. Here, it was theoretically established 

that , among Mg 2+ , F - and CO 32- ions , magnesium has the largest impact on both the mechanical 

and chemical properties , while fluorine has the least influence. Even though the overall system 

charge remained neutral through distributi on of the extra charge into the remaining phosphate 

ions, the observed trend can be attributed to the change in the local arrangement of partial 

charges. Substitution of Ca 2+ with Mg 2+ leads to a change in the partial charges from +1.5e to 

+1.8e (+0.3e , where e = 1.602 × 10 –19 C) while there is a change of charge from -2.2e to -2.0e 

(+0.2e) and -0.9e to -1.0e ( -0.1e) for the substitution of PO 43- with CO 32- and OH - with F -,

respectively. Thus, the effic acy of a given ion in the doping process is dependent on its partial 

charges in side the HAp structure which in turn is dependent on the covalent and ionic nature 

of the interaction , and itself is affected by its various chemical properties including 

electronegativity and polarizability. 

Another unexplored aspect of the HAp doping covered in the current study was the 

effect of solvation . To isolate the effect of water molecules from HAp in the chemical stability 

of doped HAps, the contribution of HAp to the total free energy change was also reported in 

the current study. In the case of doping with Mg 2+ , water molecules decrease the chemical 

stability , while for the CO 32- an opposite trend is observed. Thus, it is expected that Mg 2+ ion 

doping decreases the HAp solubility while the CO 32- has an opposite effect . The latter 

observation is in agreement with the finding of Mohammad et al. [37] on the effect of B -

carbonate presence in HAp. 

The author in the current study deployed various computational approaches for each 

utilizing a different strategy to ensure its validity which is explained in the supplementary 

information. The authors are still aware that the present study may have shortcomings. In the 

current study , the partial charges of the Mg !" and F# ions were estimated based on their 

polarization , while the CHARMM general forcefield parameters were adapted for the CO %

> !#

ion . A better approach would have been to recalibrate the forcefield parameters for these ions ,

but this lies out side the scope of the current study. While the SMD results presented here are 

qualitatively reliable despite not yielding precise free energy values, future studies will address 

this limitation through constant -pH MD simulations at lower pH and a more detailed 

investigation of dopant incorpor ation and its potential effects on hydroxyapatite morphology. 

Conclu ding remarks 12 

In the present study, a combination of c onventional MD simulation s, Steered Molecular 

Dynamics (SMD), Thermodynamics Integration (TI) and uniaxial compression test approaches 

were deployed to investigate the kinetics, thermodynamics and mechanics of ion doping in the 

hydroxyapatite (HAp) as the main mineral of tooth enamel. The simulation results identified 

that the surface was the only feasible location for ion doping , while pre -formed HAp clusters 

leaving the doping during the crystal growth was the only option for interior doping of HAp. 

Besides, it was revealed that M g2+ is more effective in increasing the chemical stability of HAp 

while it decreases the mechanical properties at pH values of 5 and 7 . F - and CO 32- were the 

other ions investigated in the current study which have either minimal or negligible effect on 

the HAp behaviour . This study provides guidelines for designing new doped HAp crystals with 

mechanical and chemical properties tailored for the specific needs of either tooth enamel or 

bone. 

Methods 

The methodology is explained in several subsections. In the first subsection, the details of the 

model and the forcefield parameters are presented. Then, the methods are detailed used in each 

simulation type presented in the current study. Each type of MD simu lation employed in the 

current study is reviewed, including the conventional MD simulation, Steered Molecular 

Dynamics (SMD), Thermodynamic Integration (TI) and uniaxial compression test simulation. 

Finally, the experimental approaches deployed in the cur rent study are explained. 

Computational model setup 

The MD simulation system shown in Figure 4 wa s utilized in the current study to investigate 

the change in the mechanical and chemical stability of HAp caused by ionic substitution. The 

HAp model taken from the Interface forcefield database [38] was solvated in TIP3p water 

models (Figure 4a) . Several ionic substitutions were considered in which calcium, hydroxyl 

and phosphate ions were partially replaced with magnesium, fluorine and carbonate ions 

(Figure 4b) . The system depicted in Figure 4a was deployed to study the chemical stability, 

while the mechanical stability was investigated through systems with various sizes to avoid the 

periodic box effects (Figure 4c) . More details on the forcefield parameters and the partial 

charges of ions is provided i n the supplementary information. 13 

Simulation techniques 

Various simulation techniques were employed in this study. First, conventional MD simulations 

were conducted to explore the feasibility of ion doping within the simulation timescales. 

Subsequently, three different aspects of ion substitution were investiga ted using simulations in 

three distinct categories. The first aspect focuses on the initial step of ionic substitution, which 

involves the dissolution of ions from HAp to create space for the incoming ions. The free 

energy associated with this step, corres ponding to the activation free energy, dictates the rate 

of ionic substitution and was investigated through SMD simulations, shedding light on the 

kinetics of the process. Next, the change in the chemical stability of the system provides 

insights into the thermodynamics of the process. This includes a comparison of the substitution 

capabilities of various ions and their effectiveness in protecting against chemical agents such 

as acids, studied through TI. Finally, mechanical stability simulations elucidate the resistance 

of HAp to mechanical loading, assessed via uniaxial compression test modelling. Each of these 

methods is explained in detail below. 

Conventional MD simulations of ion substitution 

Several MD simulations with Mg 2+ or F − ions in the solutions we re performed with 

conventional MD simulations to investigate the possibility of ion ic doping in the time scales 

accessible to the conventional MD simulations. In each case the distribution of ions near the 

surface wa s investigated through a moving average approach. The simulations were done in 

NPT ensemble with temperature and pressure controlled to 310 K and 1 bar. 

Kinetics of the ion substitution 

SMD was employed to pull different components of pure HAp away from the surface, allowing 

the obtention of the free energy of their dissociation. This free energy represents the activation 

energy of ionic substitution, providing valuable insights into the kinetics of the process. First, 

the HAp facets of (001 ) and (010 ) at pH values of 5 and 7 and solvated in the 0.1 M NaCl 

solution we re equilibrated for 50 ns simulations twice (or for 30 ns simulations three times) 

with different seed numbers to create the initial random configurations for the SMD 

simulations. Afterwards, for each one of the HAp components of Ca (,)

> !"

, Ca (,, ) 

> !"

, Ca (./01234 ) 

> !"

, ,

PO $ 

> %#

and PO $(./01234 ) 

> %#

, 50 -150 SMD simulations we re run from the configurations sampled in 14 

the 50 ns simulations in which that component is pulled away from the surface with the pulling 

rate of 1 Å/ns for either 15 or 25 Å and then they are pulled back to their initial positions in 

the reverse direction . More details on the free energy calculations from the SMD simulations 

and the processing of the results are available in the supplementary information. 

Chemical Stability 

TI was deployed to calculate the chemical stability which is defined as the free energy 

difference between the original HAp system with its doped counterpart . In TI the free energy 

difference between the state A (for instance Ca 2+ for Ca 2+ substitution with Mg 2+ ) and state B 

(Mg 2+ ) is obtained through equation 7 in which Δ𝐺 56 , 𝑈 and 𝜆 represent the free energy 

difference, potential energy and the control parameter whose value changes from 0 to 1 in 

switching from state A to state B. A new command in LAMMPS was written to calculate the 

value of 𝜕𝑈 𝜕𝜆 ⁄ for each intermediate state. To verify that the distance between windows is 

small enough the value of 𝜕𝑈 𝜕𝜆 ⁄ for smaller distances between windows was calculated which 

showed no difference. More details are available in the Supplementary Information (SI) 

document. 

Δ𝐺 56 = > 〈𝜕𝑈 

𝜕𝜆 〉7

> 8
> 9

(7) 

Three different pathways for thermodynamic integration were utilized in the current study 

corresponding to each of the ion substitution candidates . The first pathway wa s related to the 

substitution of calcium ion s with magnesium in which the values of non -bonded interaction 

parameters and charges we re changed from the initial value to the final one. 51 windows with 

the spacing of 𝛿𝜆 = 0.02 we re used in the stratification. Since the charge difference of F# with 

OH # is lower than Mg !" with Ca !", in the second pathway for F# ion substitution only 10 

windows we re utilized. Since i n this case the hydrogen atom of the hydroxyl group does not 

have any Lennard -Jones interactions with the other atoms and the effect of bonds in the free 

energy calculations is negligible [39] , the hydrogen atom and its bonded interaction remain ed 

intact during the alchemical transformation. For all these cases the thermodynamic integration 

control parameter wa s defined as 𝜆 : = (𝜀 : − 𝜀 :;:<:&= ) (𝜀 >:;&= − 𝜀 :;:<:&= )⁄ in which 𝜀 :, 𝜀 :;:<:&= 

and 𝜀 >:;&= represent the Lennard -Jones epsilon value for the stratification window 𝑖 , Ca !" (O)

and Mg !" (F#), respectively. 15 

The third pathway is related to the alchemical transformation from PO $ 

> %#

to CO % 

> !#

for 

which the situation is slightly different than the previous cases , as in this case one oxygen atom 

in the phosphate turn ed into dummy atoms and some bond and angle interactions we re turned 

off. Due to the convergence issue near the end points in atom annihilation [40] , the soft -core 

potential wa s used for this transformation. The bonds and angles we re linearly scaled between 

the corresponding values for phosphate and carbonate ions for the interactions present in both 

the structures. The extra bonds and angles of the phosphate molecule we re interpolated between 

their original values and the final value of zero (the single topology approach) .

Mechanical Stability 

Mechanical stability is defined as the ability of a system to resist mechanical deformation. 

Uniaxial compression simulation wa s deployed to measure the change in the mechanical 

stability of HAp caused by ionic substitution ( Figure 4d) . To eliminate the system size effect 

for each case , various sizes of the system were considered to find the length after which the 

response is independent of the system size. The strain rate of 10 5 s-1 wa s adapted here. 16                      

> Figure 4–The MD simula1on setup for the current study. a) The main system of HAp solvated in TIP3p water molecules with
> NaCl concentra1on of 0.1 M. Subs1tu1on of b) Calcium with Magnesium, Hydroxyl with Fluorine and Phosphate with
> Carbonate ions for which the chemical and mechanical stabili1es are inves1gated. c) The simula1on setup for studying the
> mechanical stabilit ywith computa1onal boxes of different sizes. Due to the periodic boundary effect several different system
> sizes we re used in studying the mechanical stability which are shown in the ini1al state (upper part of panel c) and the final
> compressed state (lower part of panel c).

Acknowledgements 

Th e project made use of HPC time granted via the UK High -End Computing Consortium for 

Biomolecular Simulation, HECBioSim ( http://hecbiosim.ac.uk ), supported by EPSRC (grant 

no. EP/X035603/1). Via our membership of the UK's HEC Materials Chemistry Consortium 

(MCC) funded by EPSRC (EP/X035859), the present work used the ARCHER2 UK National 

Supercomputing Service ( http://www.archer2.ac.uk ). Some of the computations described in 

this paper were performed using the University of Birmingham's BlueBEAR HPC service, 

which provides a High -Performance Computing service to the University's research 

community. See http://www.birmingham.ac.uk/bear for more details. 

Author Contributions 17 

M.T. designed the molecular dynamics simulation approach, selected and implemented 

relevant models, performed all simulations and data analysis, and drafted the manuscript. The 

computational methodology was developed beyond the outline provided in the original 

proposal. A. M. K. contributed input on experimental context and identified key parameters of 

interest. G. L. and R.M .S. provided feedback on manuscript drafts, mainly contributing to the 

introduction and general scientific framing and also provided acc ess to the BlueBear HPC . J.C 

and C.B reviewed the manuscript. J.C. T. provided institutional support , facilitated access to 

UK HEC MCC and reviewed the final manuscript. A. M. K., G.L, R.M. S. and C.B. were 

involved in grant writing and funding acquisition. 

All authors reviewed and approved the final version of the paper. 

Funding 

AMK , JCT and all the co -authors wish to acknowledge the UK Engineering and Physical 

Sciences Research Council for the award of the principal funding for the present study under 

EPSRC grant no. EP /W009412 /1 “Elucidating the pathways for human tooth enamel 

mineralization by 4D microscopy and microfluidics ”. 

References 

1. Besnard, C., et al., Synchrotron X -ray studies of the structural and func4onal 

hierarchies in mineralised human dental enamel: A state -of -the -art review. Den9stry 

Journal, 2023. 11 (4): p. 98. 

2. Pajor, K., L. Pajchel, and J. Kolmas, Hydroxyapa4te and fluorapa4te in conserva4ve 

den4stry and oral implantology —A review. Materials, 2019. 12 (17): p. 2683. 

3. Butera, A., et al., Biomime4c ac4on of Zinc Hydroxyapa4te on remineraliza4on of 

enamel and den4n: A Review. Biomime9cs, 2023. 8(1): p. 71. 

4. Seredin, P., et al., Biomime4c mineraliza4on of tooth enamel using nanocrystalline 

hydroxyapa4te under various dental surface pretreatment condi4ons. Biomime9cs, 

2022. 7(3): p. 111. 

5. Klimek, L., et al., An evalua4on of the mechanical proper4es of a hybrid composite 

containing hydroxyapa4te. Materials, 2023. 16 (13): p. 4548. 

6. Shiga, Y., et al., In vitro demineraliza4on of ar4ficial large -scale hydroxyapa4te single 

crystal: Implica4ons of fluoridized tooth enamel for acid resistance. The Showa 

University Journal of Medical Sciences, 2021. 33 (4): p. 111 -117. 

7. Predoi, D., et al., Evalua4on of an4bacterial ac4vity of zinc -doped hydroxyapa4te 

colloids and dispersion stability using ultrasounds. Nanomaterials, 2019. 9(4): p. 515. 

8. Devanand Venkatasubbu, G., et al., Nanocrystalline hydroxyapa4te and zinc -doped 

hydroxyapa4te as carrier material for controlled delivery of ciprofloxacin. 3 Biotech, 

2011. 1: p. 173 -186. 18 

9. Ciobanu, C.S., et al., An4bacterial ac4vity of silver -doped hydroxyapa4te 

nanopar4cles against gram -posi4ve and gram -nega4ve bacteria. Nanoscale 

Research Le[ers, 2012. 7: p. 1 -9. 

10. Ciobanu, C.S., et al., Synthesis and an4microbial ac4vity of silver-doped 

hydroxyapa4te nanopar4cles. BioMed Research Interna9onal, 2013. 2013 (1): p. 

916218. 

11. Prekajski, M.D., et al., Synthesis of silver doped hydroxyapa4te nanospheres using 

Ouzo effect. Processing and Applica9on of Ceramics, 2016. 10 (3): p. 169 -174. 

12. Predoi, D., et al., Complex evalua4on of nanocomposite -based hydroxyapa4te for 

biomedical applica4ons. Biomime9cs, 2023. 8(7): p. 528. 

13. Predoi, D., et al., Physicochemical and biological evalua4on of chitosan -coated 

magnesium -doped hydroxyapa4te composite layers obtained by vacuum deposi4on. 

Coa9ngs, 2022. 12 (5): p. 702. 

14. Predoi, D., et al., Obtaining and characterizing thin layers of magnesium doped 

hydroxyapa4te by dip coa4ng procedure. Coa9ngs, 2020. 10 (6): p. 510. 

15. Sun, R.X., et al., Hydrothermal synthesis of microstructured fluoridated 

hydroxyapa4te coa4ng on magnesium alloy. Surface Engineering, 2016. 32 (11): p. 

879 -884. 

16. Xia, W., et al., Highly packed and aligned fluoride subs4tuted hydroxyapa4te via a 

surfactant-free process. Journal of Biomedical Materials Research Part B: Applied 

Biomaterials, 2012. 100 (1): p. 75 -81. 

17. Sathish, A.K., P. Gopalkrishna, and S. Kumar, In vitro evalua4on of remineralizing 

agents on den4nal tubule occlusion: A scanning electron microscopic study. Journal of 

Indian Society of Periodontology, 2023. 27 (4): p. 362 -367. 

18. Ionescu, A.C., et al., Dental 4ssue remineraliza4on by bioac4ve calcium phosphate 

nanopar4cles formula4ons. Scien9fic Reports, 2022. 12 (1): p. 5994. 

19. Zhao, Z., et al., Ion -doping as a strategy to modulate hydroxyapa4te nanopar4cle 

internaliza4on. Nanoscale, 2016. 8(3): p. 1595 -1607. 

20. Brozovich, A.A., et al., Osteogenesis in the presence of chemotherapy: A biomime4c 

approach. Journal of Tissue Engineering, 2022. 13 : p. 20417314221138945. 

21. Elmehalawy, N.A., et al., Prepara4on and Evalua4on of the Physico -Mechanical 

Proper4es of the Magnesium Silicate/Hydroxyapa4te Composites. Egyp9an Journal of 

Chemistry, 2024. 67 (3): p. 99 -106. 

22. Ryu, H. -S., et al., Varia4ons of structure and composi4on in magnesium incorporated 

hydroxyapa4te/ β-tricalcium phosphate. Journal of materials research, 2006. 21 (2): p. 

428 -436. 

23. Spence, G., et al., Carbonate subs4tuted hydroxyapa4te: resorp4on by osteoclasts 

modifies the osteoblas4c response. Journal of Biomedical Materials Research Part A: 

An Official Journal of The Society for Biomaterials, The Japanese Society for 

Biomaterials, and The Australian Society for Biomaterials and the Korean Society for 

Biomaterials, 2009. 90 (1): p. 217 -224. 

24. Radulescu, D. -E., et al., Latest research of doped hydroxyapa4te for bone 4ssue 

engineering. Interna9onal Journal of Molecular Sciences, 2023. 24 (17): p. 13157. 

25. Teraoka, K., et al., Mechanical proper4es of hydroxyapa4te and OH -carbonated 

hydroxyapa4te single crystals. Journal of dental research, 1998. 77 (7): p. 1560 -1568. 19 

26. Safarzadeh, M., et al., Effect of sintering temperature on the morphology, crystallinity 

and mechanical proper4es of carbonated hydroxyapa4te (CHA). Ceramics 

Interna9onal, 2020. 46 (17): p. 26784 -26789. 

27. Saroj, S. and U. Vijayalakshmi, Structural, morphological and biological assessment of 

magne4c hydroxyapa4te with superior hyperthermia poten4al for orthopedic 

applica4ons. Scien9fic Reports, 2025. 15 (1): p. 3234. 

28. Loke, C., et al., Factors affec4ng intra-oral pH –a review. Journal of oral rehabilita9on, 

2016. 43 (10): p. 778 -785. 

29. Takahashi, N. Microbial ecosystem in the oral cavity: metabolic diversity in an 

ecological niche and its rela4onship with oral diseases . Elsevier. 

30. Suciu, O., T. Ioanovici, and L. Bereteu, Mechanical proper4es of hydroxyapa4te doped 

with magnesium, used in bone implants. Applied Mechanics and Materials, 2013. 

430 : p. 222 -229. 

31. Noori, A., et al., Exploring the various effects of Cu doping in hydroxyapa4te 

nanopar4cle. Scien9fic Reports, 2024. 14 (1): p. 3421. 

32. Najim, A., F.J. Hmood, and I.K. Sabree, Structural and biological features of Cu, Mg 

Co -doped hydroxyapa4te prepared by wet chemical precipita4on. Egyp9an Journal of 

Chemistry, 2022. 65 (9): p. 219 -227. 

33. Mounika, S. and P. Ramakrishnan. Synthesis and Comparison of Chemical Changes 

Using FTIR Spectroscop for Copper Subs4tuted Hydroxyapa4te . EDP Sciences. 

34. Rajendran, R. and D.P. Antony, Development and Elemental Analysis of a Novel 

Stron4um -Doped Nano -Hydroxyapa4te Paste and Evalua4on of Its Remineraliza4on 

Poten4al: An In Vitro Study. Cureus, 2023. 15 (11). 

35. Yan, T.T., Y.S. Cui, and Q.H. Chen, Study on the prepara4on of stron4um -doped 

hydroxyapa4te whisker. Advanced Materials Research, 2013. 738 : p. 26 -29. 

36. Wang, M., et al., How does fluoride enhance hydroxyapa4te? A theore4cal 

understanding. Applied Surface Science, 2022. 586 : p. 152753. 

37. Mohammad, N.F., R. Othman, and F.Y. Yeoh. Pore characteris4cs of mesoporous 

carbonated hydroxyapa4te synthesised with different nonionic surfactant and 

carbonate concentra4on . Trans Tech Publ. 

38. Lin, T. -J. and H. Heinz, Accurate force field parameters and pH resolved surface 

models for hydroxyapa4te to understand structure, mechanics, hydra4on, and 

biological interfaces. The Journal of Physical Chemistry C, 2016. 120 (9): p. 4975 -4992. 

39. Shirts, M.R. and D.L. Mobley, An introduc4on to best prac4ces in free energy 

calcula4ons. Biomolecular Simula9ons: Methods and Protocols, 2013: p. 271 -311. 

40. Beutler, T.C., et al., Avoiding singulari4es and numerical instabili4es in free energy 

calcula4ons based on molecular simula4ons. Chemical physics le[ers, 1994. 222 (6): 

p. 529 -539. S1

## Supplementary Information 

## Uncovering the role of ionic doping in hydroxyapatite: The building blocks 

## of tooth enamel and bones 

Mahdi Tavakol 1, 2 , Jinke Chang 1, Cyril Besnard 1, Gabriel Landini 2, Richard M. Shelton 2,

Jin -Chong Tan 1* , and Alexander M. Korsunsky 1,3**  

> 1

Multi -Beam Laboratory for Engineering Microscopy (MBLEM) and Multifunctional Materials & 

Composites (MMC) Laboratories, Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford OX1 3PJ, UK 

> 2

School of Dentistry, University of Birmingham, 5 Mill Pool Way, Edgbaston, Birmingham B5 7EG, UK 

> 3

Professor and Fellow Emeritus, Trinity College, Oxford OX1 3BH, UK 

Corresponding authors: 

> **

alexander.korsunsky@eng.ox.ac.uk 

> *

jin -chong.tan@eng.ox.ac.uk S2

Supplementary tables and figures 

Table S 1 – The nonbonded interaction parameters used in the current study. 

Atom 𝒒 𝜺 𝝈 Ref 

𝐶𝑎 !" +1.5 0.1299984877 2.9399690301 [1] 

𝑂 (𝑃𝑂 #

> $%

) -0.8 0.0699984928 3.0290604000 

𝑃 (𝑃𝑂 #

> $%

) 1.0 0.2800057201 3.8308580628 

𝑂 (𝑂𝐻 %) -1.1 0.0800014955 3.2963200383 

𝐻 (𝑂𝐻 %) 0.2 0.0000000000 0.0000000000 

𝑃𝑂 # 

> $%

-2.2 ----------------- -----------------

𝑂𝐻 % -0.9 ----------------- -----------------

𝑀𝑔 !" 1.8 0.0150000000 2.1114299620 [2] 

𝐹 % -1.0 0.0400000000 3.4121400000 [3] 

𝐶 (𝐶𝑂 $

> !%

) 0.97 0.0175000000 3.5635948730 [4] 

𝑂 (𝐶𝑂 $

> !%

) -0.99 0.0300000000 3.0290556420 

𝐶𝑂 $ 

> !%

-2.0 ----------------- -----------------S3

Figure S 1 – The results of the conventional MD simulation for the doping with Mg 2+ ions show doping in 

the surface of HAp for various facets and pH values. The final simulation snapshot for the a), b) 001, and 

c), d) 010 fac ets of HAp at pH of a), c) 5 and b), d) 7 solvated in 2 M solution of Mg 3(PO 4)2. The doped Mg 2+ 

ions are indicated with arrows which all are located only on the surface. S4

Figure S 2 – The stress -strain and mechanical properties plots for various ionic substitutions as a function 

of simulation box size showing convergence for boxes larger than 8 ×8×4 lattices. S5

Figure S 3 – The distribution of dU for the thermodynamics integration for the whole system (red plot s) and 

HAp (blue plot s), showing enough overlap between neighboring windows validating the outcome of the 

thermodynamics integrations for various ion doping with different concentrations. S6

Supplementary information on the forcefield details 

A vital part of MD simulation is the interatomic forcefield used in calculating the interatomic interactions. In the current study, 

two different interatomic forcefields were employed. In all simulations except for the TI of PO # 

> $%

to CO $ 

> !%

the Lennard -Jones 

(LJ) potential for non -bonded interactions and the Coulomb law for electrostatic interactions were utilized (equations 1, 2). 

However, when a site is created or annihilated in TI such as the alchemical transformation from PO # 

> $%

to CO $

> !%

, results diverge 

near the initial or the final structure [5] . Thus, soft -core alternatives for the LJ and Coulombic interactions were deployed in 

this case (equations 3, 4). Here, the parameters 𝑈 &' , 𝑟 &' , 𝜀 , 𝜎 , 𝐶 , 𝑞 &, 𝜖 , 𝜆 , 𝛼 () , 𝛼 * and 𝑛 represent the potential energy, interatomic 

distance, LJ potential well, LJ diameter, Columb law constant, charge, dielectric constant, the alchemical transformation 

control parameter, LJ and Coulomb parameters for the soft -core potential and the soft -cor e exponent, respectively. In the 

current study the values of 2, 0.5 and 10 were chosen for the parameters 𝑛 , 𝛼 () and 𝛼 * , respectively.        

> 𝑈 !" =4𝜀 [(𝜎
> 𝑟 !"
> )#$ −(𝜎
> 𝑟 !"
> )%]

(1)   

> 𝑈 !" =𝐶 𝑞 !𝑞 "
> 𝜖 𝑟 !"

(2)                 

> 𝑈 !" =4𝜀 𝜆 &[1
> 2𝛼 '( (1−𝜆 )$+5𝑟 !"
> 𝜎 6
> %
> 7
> $−1
> 𝛼 '( (1−𝜆 )$+5𝑟 !"
> 𝜎 6%]

(3)         

> 𝑈 !" =𝜆 &𝐶 𝑞 !𝑞 "
> 𝜖 8𝛼 )(1−𝜆 )$+𝑟 !"
> $

(4) 

In the current study the interface forcefield parameters were deployed for the pure HAp [1] . Since the interaction between 

Ca !" with PO # 

> $%

is not completely ionic and has a slight covalent character, the charge of the calcium ion is set to +1.5, slightly 

lower than its nominal charge of +2.0. Similarly, the charge of OH %, is -0.9 which is slightly lower in magnitude than its 

nominal value of -1.0. In the current study, the parameter 𝑞 ! 𝑟 ⁄ was used to judge the polarizability of ions and accordingly 

select their partial charges. With regards to the value of this parameter, the charge values of +1.8 and -1.0 were chosen for 

Mg !" and F% ions, respectively. The selection of non -bonded parameters is less challenging than the determination of partial 

charges. The non -bonded parameters for Mg !", F% and CO $ 

> !%

ions were adapted from the values reported in references [2 -4] .

The list of interatomic parameters for the ions in the current study is shown in Tabel S1 .

Supplementary information on free energy calculations through SMD simulations 

The pulling free energy can be calculated either through the Jarzynski equation (equation 5) or the Bennet Acceptance Ratio 

(BAR, equation 6) in which Δ𝐺 , 𝑊 +,-./-0 , 𝑊 -121-31 , 𝑘𝑇 , 〈 〉4 and 〈 〉4 

> ′

represent the free energy change, forward work, 

reverse work, the thermal energy, the ensemble average for the forward work and the ensemble average for the reverse work. 

Although, in principle, the ensemble average for the reverse process should be obtai ned from an equilibrium simulation in 

which the pulled atom is initially placed at its final position from the forward pulling, we omitted this equilibration step since 

our preliminary results indicated no significant differences. 

The processing of the SMD simulation results was automated through some bash and C++ codes [6] . The pymbar module of 

python was utilized for the BAR analysis [7] . In the BAR formula the 𝑊 +,-./-0 is defined as the forward work moving from 

the initial SMD position of 0 to the final position of 𝑧 , while the 𝑊 -121-31 is the work in reverse direction from position 𝑧 to 

the position of 0 covering the same distance span but in the reverse direction.       

> 𝑒 *+,-. ⁄=〈𝑒 *0!"#$%#& -. ⁄〉1

(5)        

> 𝑒 *2, /-. =
> <1
> 1+𝑒 0!"#$%#& *2, =1
> <1
> 1+𝑒 0#'('#)' 42, =1
> ′

(6) S7

Supplementary information for thermodynamic integrations 

A new command was added to LAMMPS for thermodynamic integration. During equilibrating the system at 𝜆 = 𝜆 4, the new 

command at every n steps first backed up the atomic forces, non -bonded parameters and charges. Then, the non -bonded 

parameters and charges were changed to the value corresponding to 𝜆 4 − 𝑑𝜆 and then the potential energy value was calculated 

(𝑢 5). Then, the same procedure was repeated for 𝜆 4 + 𝑑𝜆 to obtain 𝑢 6. Finally, the parameter 07  

> 08

(𝜆 = 𝜆 4) = 7!%7" 

> !08

was 

calculated. The alternative approach in the form of postprocessing is to first equilibrate the system at 𝜆 = 𝜆 4 and then for each 

snapshot obtained from the trajectory change the value of charges and non -bonded parameters and calculate the 𝑢 5 and 𝑢 6

parameters to obtain the 09 

> 08

. Since in the current study the trajectories have output with single precision the alternative method 

has a single precision in contrary to the new method with the double precision. 

To verify the new command the value of 𝑢 (𝑢 5(𝑑𝜆 = 0)) from the command with the LAMMPS output from compute PI was 

compared. Fi gure S4 depicts values of the parameter 𝑢 for the whole system (Figure S4 a and Figure S4c ) and the HAp (Figure 

S4 b and Figure S4 d) for various ionic substitution alongside the values calculated from the LAMMPS output illustrating a 

good agreement (error of less than 10 -4 %). 

Figure S 4 - Comparison of the potential energy values obtained from the new command in the current study 

(compute TI) and the LAMMPS compute PE command for (a), (c) the whole system and (b), (d) HAp in the 

substitution of (a), (b) 10% of hydroxyl groups to fluoride and (c), (d) 50% of calcium ions to magnesium 

showing the agreement with the original method. 

To investigate the effect of numerical precision in the thermodynamics integration the results of the new command are 

compared with the outcome from the trajectory postprocessing with single precision. The values for substitution of hydroxyl 

with fluoride (Figure S 5), and calcium with magnesium ( Figure S 6), show that even though the error in the values of 𝑢 5 and 

𝑢 6 is less than 1 percent the error in the 09  

> 08

can reach several 100 percent with a higher error for HAp. The reason for such a 

behavior is the differential is calculated through subtracting two almost identically large values from each other ( 𝑢 6 − 𝑢 5) and 

dividing the result by a very small value ( (𝑢 6 − 𝑢 5) 𝑑𝜆 ⁄ ) to obtain the 09 

> 08

. Thus, numerical precision has a strong effect on the 

result accuracy. 

Finally, to verify the correctness of the calculations for 𝑑𝑈 𝑑𝜆 ⁄ , the result of the calculation with three values of 𝑑𝜆 = 0.02 ,

𝑑𝜆 = 0.01 and 𝑑𝜆 = 0.005 are compared ( 

Figure S7). The outcome shows no effect of the 𝑑𝜆 parameter on the 𝑑𝑈 𝑑𝜆 ⁄ parameter for the selected value of 𝑑𝜆 which 

illustrates that the chosen value of this parameter is small enough to get valid outcomes. S8

Figure S 5 – The numerical precision affects the thermodynamic integration outcomes. The values of (a), (d) 

𝑢 !, (b), (e) 𝑢 " (c), (f) 𝑑𝑢 𝑑𝜆 ⁄ and error values for (g), (h) 𝑢 !, (h), ( ?) 𝑢 " (i), (l) 𝑑𝑢 𝑑𝜆 ⁄ for (a), (b), (c), (g), 

(h), (i) HAp and (d), (e), (f), (j), (k), (l) the whole system for substitution of 10% of hydroxyl groups with 

fluoride .S9

Figure S 6 - The numerical precision affects the thermodynamic integration outcomes. The values of (a), (d) 

𝑢 !, (b), (e) 𝑢 " (c), (f) 𝑑𝑢 𝑑𝜆 ⁄ and error values for (g), (h) 𝑢 !, (h), () 𝑢 " (i), (l) 𝑑𝑢 𝑑𝜆 ⁄ for (a), (b), (c), (g), 

(h), (i) HAp and (d), (e), (f), (j), (k), (l) the whole system for substitution of 50% of calcium ions with 

magnesium. S10 

Figure S 7 – The values of 𝑑𝑈 𝑑𝜆 ⁄ for (a), (b), (c) HAp and (d), (e), (f) the whole system and various amounts 

of 𝑑𝜆 of (a), (d) 0.02, (b), (d) 0.01 and (c), (f) 0.005. S11 

Supplementary information for validation of results 

In the current study, computational approaches such as uniaxial compression, free energy calculations through SMD 

simulations, and TI were deployed, each requiring specific simulation strategy to ensure the validity of the results. To test the 

possibility of the artifacts caused by the periodic boundary in the uniaxial compression test, several box sizes were used which 

illustrated that for box sizes larger than a specific threshold, there is no size effect ( Figure S 2). All the values reported in the 

current study for mechanical stability are for the largest computational box. In addition to the statistical errors, the free energy 

calculations are also prone to sampling errors which are harder to identify since their r oots are in the unvisited pathways or 

states [8] . For the SMD free energy calculations the results of BAR were compared with the average work obtained through 

2 simulations with pulling speeds of 0.1 Å/ns and 0.01 Å/ns (10 and 100 times slower than the original one). The results for 

the 0.1 Å/ns and 0. 01 Å/ns pulling simulations (ran for 150 days on a machine with a 48 core Intel Xeon Platinum 8268 CPU) 

were almost identical for pulling 𝐶𝑎 (;) 

> !"

from the 010 facet of HAp at pH 5 which shows that the reversible work regime was 

reached. Even though the BAR values for other cases can have errors as high as 31% with respect to the reversible work values 

(0.01 A /ns), this does not affect the conclusi on regarding ion doping on the surface, since the difference between the activation 

free energy for surface and interior atoms is much higher than that. For the TI, sufficient overlap between neighboring windo ws 

is required to avoid biasing errors. In the current study the overlap was shown to be adequate from results shown in Figure S 3.S12 

References 

1. Lin, T. -J. and H. Heinz, Accurate force field parameters and pH resolved surface models for 

hydroxyapatite to understand structure, mechanics, hydration, and biological interfaces. The Journal of 

Physical Chemistry C, 2016. 120 (9): p. 4975 -4992. 

2. Huang, J., et al., CHARMM36: An improved force field for folded and intrinsically disordered proteins. 

Biophysical Journal, 2017. 112 (3): p. 175a -176a. 

3. Orabi, E.A., et al., Corrections in the CHARMM36 parametrization of chloride interactions with 

proteins, lipids, and alkali cations, and extension to other halide anions. Journal of Chemical Theory 

and Computation, 2021. 17 (10): p. 6240 -6261. 

4. Vanommeslaeghe, K., E.P. Raman, and A.D. MacKerell Jr, Automation of the CHARMM General Force 

Field (CGenFF) II: assignment of bonded parameters and partial atomic charges. Journal of chemical 

information and modeling, 2012. 52 (12): p. 3155 -3168. 

5. Shirts, M.R. and D.L. Mobley, An introduction to best practices in free energy calculations. 

Biomolecular Simulations: Methods and Protocols, 2013: p. 271 -311. 

6. Tavakol, M. Free energy . 2024; Available from: https://github.com/MahdiTavakol/Free_Energy .

7. Shirts, M.R. and J.D. Chodera, Statistically optimal analysis of samples from multiple equilibrium 

states. The Journal of chemical physics, 2008. 129 (12). 

8. Chipot, C., In Free Energy Calculations . 2007, Springer.