Title: Evaluator Ensembles Under Reward Hacking: Covariance Geometry and Finite-Search Guarantees

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.08002v1

Published Time: Tue, 11 Aug 2026 00:32:06 GMT

Number of Pages: 25

Markdown Content:
# Evaluator Ensembles Under Reward Hacking: Covariance Geometry and Finite-Search Guarantees 

Fariya Afrin 1* and Ibne Farabi Shihab 2* † 1Department of Computer Science, Kalinga Institute of Industrial Technology 

> 2

Department of Computer Science, Iowa State University 

ishihab@iastate.edu 

Abstract 

Language-model judges and reward models en-able scalable supervision, but finite optimiza-tion can exploit evaluator errors rather than improve response quality. We characterize this failure through the covariance geometry of evaluator ensembles. For calibrated judges, the ensemble mean retains common-mode er-ror along the all-ones direction, whereas cross-judge disagreement captures only orthogonal error. Consequently, disagreement can be high despite robust aggregation, or low while shared response-dependent errors persist. We prove that common-mode error is not identifiable from internal judge scores alone. Under a joint sub-Gaussian model, we bound best-of-K se-lection overstatement and target-quality regret, extending the guarantees to predictably adap-tive search under conditional calibration. The resulting search terms scale as √log K and are asymptotically tight for Gaussian projected errors. We further show that noisy quality proxies introduce artificial rank-one covariance without changing disagreement, and propose a bounded two-anchor Bernstein certificate for finite-search error and regret. Fixed-seed Gaus-sian stress tests over 120 (J, ρ, K ) configura-tions and real-model audits validate the the-ory while revealing the limits of disagreement-based diagnostics under increasing search pres-sure. 

1 Introduction 

Learned reward models and language-model judges have become central to reinforcement learning from human feedback, direct preference optimiza-tion, reranking, and automatic evaluation (Chris-tiano et al., 2017; Stiennon et al., 2020; Ouyang et al., 2022; Rafailov et al., 2023). Their scalabil-ity comes with a structural vulnerability. Once a generator is optimized against a fixed evaluator, it  

> *Equal contribution.
> †Corresponding author: ishihab@iastate.edu .

can increase the evaluator’s score by exploiting im-perfections in the proxy rather than by improving the quality that the proxy was intended to represent. This behavior is commonly described as reward hacking, evaluator gaming, or reward overoptimiza-tion (Amodei et al., 2016; Gao et al., 2023; Skalse et al., 2022). An ensemble is a natural defense. If different judges make different mistakes, averaging their scores can prevent a response from succeeding by exploiting only one member. Empirical work confirms that ensembles often mitigate overopti-mization, especially when their members differ be-fore reward-model fine-tuning (Coste et al., 2024; Eisenstein et al., 2023). Yet the same studies also expose a limit: judges trained from related data, architectures, and preference signals can share the errors that optimization discovers. Adding more correlated judges then creates additional votes with-out adding commensurate information (Kim et al., 2025; Goel et al., 2025; Kohli, 2026). This paper makes the connection between error dependence and optimization pressure explicit. The key object is not the raw number of judges but the projection of their joint error onto the aggregation direction. For a uniform ensemble, this direction is the all-ones vector. The error component parallel to it changes the ensemble mean and can therefore be exploited by search. The orthogonal component makes judges disagree but cancels under averaging. This geometric view recovers the familiar equal-variance formula 

Var(¯ e) = σ2

 1

J + J − 1

J ρ



, (1) but it also shows why that identity alone is not a reward-hacking result: an operational guarantee must concern the candidate selected by the proxy and the target-quality loss induced by that selec-tion. We therefore analyze a generator that draws KarXiv:2608.08002v1 [cs.LG] 8 Aug 2026 candidates and selects the one with the highest en-semble score. Under a joint sub-Gaussian error model, we bound the selected response’s proxy overstatement and its regret relative to the candi-date with the highest target quality. The bound separates prompt-level offsets, which change abso-lute scores but not within-prompt selection, from response-dependent common-mode errors, which remain exploitable after averaging. It also makes the role of the search budget explicit. The guaran-tee is an upper bound of order √log K in general. For independent Gaussian projected errors, clas-sical extreme-value theory makes this order tight for E max k≤K ¯ek; it does not by itself establish tightness for selected-response overstatement or target-quality regret under arbitrary target quali-ties. We do not infer an exact empirical scaling law from the upper bound alone. A conditional version covers finite adaptive proposal sequences, making explicit the calibration obligation created when search reacts to earlier evaluator outputs. The same geometry clarifies what disagreement measures. Disagreement is often used for active learning and uncertainty sampling (Seung et al., 1992; Houlsby et al., 2011; Gal et al., 2017), in-cluding for language reward models (Gleave and Irving, 2022). It is informative about the orthog-onal, judge-specific component of error, but it is blind to an error shared by all judges. This limi-tation is compounded by a measurement problem: true response quality is rarely observed, so em-pirical studies often subtract one stronger judge as a proxy. We prove that independent noise in this quality proxy appears as a rank-one common mode in every estimated judge error. A two-anchor cross-covariance construction removes this partic-ular contamination and separates the theoretical object from an artifact of the audit instrument. Our contribution is consequently narrower than introducing ensembles, correlated-error analysis, or disagreement sampling. Gleave and Irving re-port that ensemble-based active learning for lan-guage reward models does not outperform random selection (Gleave and Irving, 2022); Eisenstein et al. show that shared reward-model errors survive ensembling (Eisenstein et al., 2023); Kohli quanti-fies effective independence in discrete judge panels (Kohli, 2026); CARE models latent confounders for static judge aggregation (Zhao et al., 2026); and concurrent work shows that pairwise correlation cannot identify the all-model co-failure tail in dis-crete orchestration (Chen, 2026). Against this back-ground, we provide an optimization-aware analysis for continuous evaluator scores. Specifically, we characterize the decomposition of ensemble error into common-mode and disagreement components and prove that the former is not identifiable from internal judge scores alone; derive finite and pre-dictably adaptive search guarantees for selected-response overstatement and target-quality regret; and show how a noisy quality anchor induces a spu-rious rank-one common mode together with a finite-sample two-anchor correction. We evaluate these results using controlled Gaussian stress tests, a best-of-K real-model audit, a multi-family finite-search audit over five eligible ensemble models from three families with a separately held-out Llama-family proxy excluded from every ensemble, two gen-erators (§5.2), an anchor-sensitivity and verifier-backed evaluation (§5.3), and an exploratory DPO pilot reported in Appendix G. These experiments measure the quantities predicted by the theory and assess its practical implications, without claiming universality beyond the evaluated settings. 

2 Related Work 

Reward overoptimization has been measured under best-of-n, policy optimization, and direct align-ment algorithms (Gao et al., 2023; Rafailov et al., 2024).Complementary work detects proxy gaming through invariance-based evaluator stress tests that separate sensitivity to exploitable features from content-driven improvements under controlled per-turbations (Akter et al., 2026). Whereas that work diagnoses whether proxy-score gains arise from exploitable sensitivities, we characterize which components of correlated evaluator error survive ensemble aggregation and how best-of-K search amplifies them. Ensemble defenses include mean aggregation, worst-case aggregation, uncertainty penalties, and weight averaging (Coste et al., 2024; Ramé et al., 2024). Eisenstein et al. show that di-versity introduced before reward-model fine-tuning is more useful than diversity introduced only dur-ing fine-tuning, while common qualitative fail-ures remain exploitable by every ensemble mem-ber (Eisenstein et al., 2023). Our search analy-sis is complementary: it does not propose that the mean is the optimal aggregator, but character-izes how error in a chosen aggregation direction is amplified by a finite candidate budget. The di-rectly adjacent decision-level audit of Landesberg (2026) shows on a 5,000 -prompt Chatbot Arena best-of-4 benchmark that global judge–label cor-relation badly overstates within-prompt selection value, because global agreement is dominated by prompt-level baseline effects; that work diagnoses the score-versus-decision gap for a single judge, whereas our contribution is the covariance geome-try of a judge ensemble under search—which error component averaging removes, what disagreement can and cannot certify, and a bounded variance cer-tificate for the selected candidate—so the two are complementary rather than overlapping. Likewise, inference-time analyses of best-of-n reward hack-ing and its guarantees (Gao et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2025) treat the proxy–true-reward gap for a given scalar proxy; we locate that gap in the common-mode component of an ensemble’s error covariance and make it auditable. Disagreement is a long-standing acquisition sig-nal in query-by-committee and Bayesian active learning (Seung et al., 1992; Houlsby et al., 2011; Gal et al., 2017). In the closest reward-model study, Gleave and Irving (2022) find that ensemble active learning does not beat random sampling and that estimated epistemic uncertainty is only weakly re-lated to error. More recent work documents cor-related failures across large model families (Kim et al., 2025; Goel et al., 2025), measures the ef-fective number of votes in judge panels (Kohli, 2026), and learns confounder-aware static aggre-gators (Zhao et al., 2026). Concurrent work on routing and voting further shows that pairwise er-ror correlation does not identify the probability that all models fail on the same item (Chen, 2026). That result concerns a discrete co-failure tail; our covari-ance is likewise not presented as a tail certificate. The distinction here is between static aggregation accuracy and optimization-induced selection un-der an explicit joint tail condition: even a small residual error can matter when a generator searches specifically for high proxy scores. Because no learned judge is ground truth, eval-uation validity is also central. RewardBench and JudgeBench provide preference and objective-correctness tests for reward models and language-model judges (Lambert et al., 2025; Tan et al., 2025); self-preference and model-family effects further show why a held-out judge need not be an independent quality anchor (Panickssery et al., 2024). Appendix B develops these connections and states the novelty boundary in greater detail. 

3 Setup 

Let x ∈ X be a prompt and a ∈ A x a candidate response. Judge j ∈ { 1, . . . , J } assigns a scalar score sj (x, a ). Since independently trained judges can differ in scale and offset, we map their outputs to a common audited scale, 

rj (x, a ) = sj (x, a ) − μj

τj

, τj > 0, (2) where the calibration split is disjoint from search, training, and final evaluation. A rank transform alone does not justify additive comparisons across judges; when raw outputs are not interval-scaled, the mapping must be learned against a common calibration target, for example through held-out isotonic calibration. For a fixed prompt, write the vector of calibrated scores as 

r(x, a ) = q(x, a )1 + b(x) + e(x, a ). (3) Here q(x, a ) is the target quality, b(x) contains judge offsets for the prompt, and e(x, a ) is the response-dependent residual error. Expectations below are over a declared candidate distribution 

a ∼ νx, conditional on x. The offsets absorb the conditional error means, so Eνx [e] = 0. A shared response-dependent failure is part of e, not b: un-like a prompt-constant offset, it can change which candidate wins the search. For weights w satisfying 1⊤w = 1 , the aggre-gate score and error are 

Rw(x, a ) = w⊤r(x, a ), zw(x, a ) = w⊤e(x, a ).

(4) The main text uses the uniform mean w = 1/J ,denoted by R, ¯b, and ¯e. Let Σx = Cov νx (e) and let 

P = I − 1

J 11 ⊤ (5) be the orthogonal projector away from the aggre-gation direction. These two projections, 11 ⊤/J 

and P , organize the remainder of the analysis. We construct preference data using the calibrated disagreement-selection DPO arm described in Al-gorithm 1. 

4 Covariance Geometry Under Finite Search 

4.1 The aggregation direction 

We first retain the equal-variance formulation be-cause it gives a transparent scalar summary. Assumption 1 (Calibrated equal-variance judge errors) . For a fixed prompt x, E[ej ] = 0 , 0 <

Var( ej ) = σ2 < ∞, and ρjk = Cov( ej , e k)/σ 2.The average pairwise correlation is 

ρ = 1

J(J − 1) 

X 

> j̸=k

ρjk , − 1

J − 1 ≤ ρ ≤ 1.

Lemma 2 (Variance of the ensemble-mean error) .

Under Assumption 1, 

Var(¯ e) = σ2

 1

J + J − 1

J ρ



. (6) Equation (6) is the continuous-score analogue of the classical design effect (Kish, 1965). Defining 

Jeff = J

1 + ( J − 1) ρ (7) gives Var(¯ e) = σ2/J eff , directly connecting the analysis to recent effective-vote measurements for discrete judge panels (Kohli, 2026). The identity is exact but is not itself our novelty claim. In the heteroskedastic case, the corresponding quantity is simply 

Var(¯ e) = 1

J2 1⊤Σx1. (8) For a heterogeneous panel, we use the variance-equivalent effective size 

¯σ2 

> x

= 1

J tr(Σ x), Jhet eff = ¯σ2

> x

Var(¯ e) = J tr(Σ x)

1⊤Σx1 .

(9) This quantity equals Equation (7) under equal marginal variance. In the experiments, bJhet eff is computed from the calibration-split residual co-variance exactly via Equation (9)—the implemen-tation’s J/ (1 + ( J − 1)¯ coff /¯cdiag ), with mean off-diagonal and diagonal entries of bΣcal , is alge-braically identical—as a single point estimate; no bootstrap interval is reported for it. 

4.2 Disagreement is the orthogonal component 

Define calibrated cross-judge disagreement by 

D(x, a ) = 1

J

> J

X

> j=1

(rj (x, a ) − R(x, a )) 2

= 1

J ∥P r(x, a )∥2 .

(10) 

Proposition 3 (Exact projector decomposition) .

Under the setup in Section 3, 

E[D(x, a )] = 1

J ∥P b(x)∥2 + 1

J tr( P Σx). (11) 

If the calibrated prompt offsets are common across judges and Assumption 1 holds, this reduces to 

E[D(x, a )] = σ2 J − 1

J (1 − ρ). (12) The first term in Equation (11) is necessary: global score calibration does not automatically re-move judge-specific prompt offsets. Once that term is controlled, disagreement measures energy orthogonal to the ensemble mean. By contrast, Equation (8) measures energy parallel to the mean. In the exchangeable positive-correlation model 

ej = c + uj , suppose the centered shared com-ponent c and centered judge-specific components 

uj are mutually independent. The two quantities become 

Var(¯ e) = Var( c) + Var( uj )

J ,

E[D] = J − 1

J Var( uj ).

(13) Thus a shared error can produce low disagreement and high ensemble risk, while decorrelated judge-specific errors can produce high disagreement and low ensemble risk. The separation creates an identification bound-ary before any tail assumption or search analysis enters. 

Proposition 4 (Identification limit) . For any scalar function h(x, a ) with Eνx [h] = 0 , define 

q(h) = q + h, e(h) = e − h1. (14) 

The scores and the centering convention are un-changed, while 

P e(h) = P e, ¯e(h) = ¯ e − h. (15) 

Consequently, internal judge scores and their disagreement cannot identify response-dependent common-mode error without an external anchor or additional structural assumptions. 

Figure 1 illustrates the distinction between id-iosyncratic disagreement and common-mode judge error. The former is captured by the projector P ,whereas the latter lies along the aggregation direc-tion 1 and therefore survives averaging. Figure 1: Conceptual distinction between idiosyncratic and common-mode judge errors. Idiosyncratic errors generate disagreement and can be reduced through averaging when sufficiently decorrelated. Common-mode errors are shared across judges, remain after averaging, and can induce reward hacking despite apparent consensus. The projector P measures the former, while the aggregation direction 1 measures the latter. 

4.3 What finite search can exploit 

The covariance identity controls a second moment, but reward hacking is a selection problem. For candidates a1, . . . , a K , define 

kR ∈ arg max  

> k≤K

R(x, a k),kq ∈ arg max  

> k≤K

q(x, a k). (16) 

Assumption 5 (Joint sub-Gaussian search errors) .

For a fixed prompt x, candidates are sampled from the declared search distribution. Their centered error vectors satisfy, for every t ∈ RJ ,

E exp( t⊤e) ≤ exp 

 12 t⊤Γxt



(17) for a positive semidefinite proxy matrix Γx. For the uniform ensemble, let vx = J−21⊤Γx1. Can-didate errors share this conditional marginal bound; independence across candidates is sufficient but not required by the union-bound argument. 

Theorem 6 (Selected overstatement and tar-get-quality regret) . Under Assumption 5, the re-sponse selected by the ensemble satisfies 

E [R(x, a kR ) − q(x, a kR )] ≤ ¯b(x) + p2vx log K. 

(18) 

With probability at least 1 − δ,

R(x, a kR ) − q(x, a kR ) ≤ ¯b(x) + p2vx log( K/δ ).

(19) 

The loss in target quality relative to the best searched candidate obeys 

E q(x, a kq ) − q(x, a kR ) ≤ 2p2vx log K, 

(20) 

q(x, a kq ) − q(x, a kR ) ≤ 2p2vx log(2 K/δ )

(21) 

with probability at least 1 − δ.

The constant prompt offset ¯b(x) affects abso-lute overstatement but cancels from the within-prompt regret. The exploitable term is the response-dependent error projected onto the ensemble direc-tion. For general sub-Gaussian errors, Theorem 6 is an upper bound rather than an equality. If the pro-jected candidate errors are independent Gaussian variables with variance vx, classical extreme-value theory gives E max k ¯ek = √2vx log K(1 + o(1)) ,so the order is asymptotically tight (Leadbetter et al., 2012). 

Corollary 7 (Error diversity) . Under Assumption 1 and a Gaussian proxy, or a sub-Gaussian proxy with matching covariance, the variance-driven terms in Theorem 6 decrease as d = 1 − ρ in-creases, holding J, K, and σ fixed. Diversity does not remove a shared response-dependent compo-nent or the prompt offset. 

The same theorem applies to any fixed weights 

w after replacing vx by w⊤Γxw. When Γx is pos-itive definite and unconstrained signed weights are allowed, the minimum-variance weights are pro-portional to Γ−1 

> x

1. Nonnegative weights require the corresponding simplex-constrained quadratic program. This observation motivates covariance-aware ensemble construction but does not address unobserved bias by itself. The fixed-distribution statement also has a finite adaptive counterpart. It is deliberately conditional: adaptive search is safe only if calibration continues to hold after conditioning on the search history. 

Corollary 8 (Predictable finite adaptation) . Let 

Fk−1 contain the prompts, candidates, scores, and random choices observed before proposal k.The proposal distribution for ak may be Fk−1-measurable. If, for every k ≤ K and λ ∈ R,

E[exp( λz k) | F k−1] ≤ exp( λ2vx/2) ,zk = ¯ e(x, a k), (22) 

then all four bounds in Theorem 6 hold for selection from the K adaptively proposed candidates. 

4.4 Noise in the quality anchor 

Proposition 4 makes an external quality signal nec-essary. Yet the covariance in Equation (8) is de-fined relative to the target quality, which is rarely observed. Let a held-out quality proxy be eq = q+η,and define proxy-relative errors ee = r − eq1 − b.

Proposition 9 (Quality-anchor contamination) . If 

η is centered, independent of e, and has variance 

τ 2, then 

Cov( ee) = Σ x + τ 211 ⊤. (23) 

Consequently, the uniform-ensemble variance is in-flated by τ 2, whereas P ee = P e and disagreement is unchanged. 

The contamination therefore looks exactly like an error shared by all judges. A single stronger judge can still define a useful proxy-relative au-dit, but it cannot identify true common-mode risk without assumptions about its own error. 

Corollary 10 (Two-anchor decontamination) . Sup-pose eq(1) = q +η1 and eq(2) = q +η2, where the an-chor errors are centered and conditionally indepen-dent of each other and of e. If ee(m) = r−eq(m)1−b,then 

Cov 

ee(1) , ee(2) 

= Σ x. (24) This cross-covariance construction is most cred-ible when the anchors arise from different mech-anisms, such as an exact verifier and a held-out judge, rather than two closely related language models. 

4.5 From estimated variance to a valid bounded tail 

The covariance analysis identifies the direction that search can exploit, but covariance alone does not certify a sub-Gaussian proxy. We close this gap on a declared bounded score scale: one split fits the aggregator, a disjoint certification split estimates its residual variance; pairing two candidates from the same prompt removes prompt-level offsets, two quality anchors remove the rank-one contamina-tion above under an explicit cross-orthogonality condition, and Bernstein’s inequality converts the variance upper bound and the declared range into a valid search tail. Fix a predeclared task–generator stratum s and an aggregation rule A that is fixed independently of the certification split. For a random prompt X

in this stratum and candidate a ∼ νX , write 

Y (X, a ) = A(r(X, a )) − q(X, a ),Z(X, a ) = Y (X, a ) − E[Y (X, a ) | X]. (25) Thus E[Z | X] = 0 , and the prompt-constant offset cancels from within-prompt selection. 

Theorem 11 (Bounded two-anchor Bernstein cer-tificate) . Let (Xi, a i, a ′

> i

)mi=1 be independent cer-tification triples ( Xi from stratum s; ai, a ′ 

> i

con-ditionally independent draws from νXi ), inde-pendent of the subsequent search sample. For anchors eq(ℓ) = q + η(ℓ), ℓ ∈ {1, 2}, define 

U (ℓ)(X, a ) = A(r(X, a )) − eq(ℓ)(X, a ) and ∆(ℓ) 

> i

=

U (ℓ)(Xi, a i) − U (ℓ)(Xi, a ′

> i

). Assume, conditional on X, that each anchor error is centered, each is uncorrelated with Z, and the two anchor errors are mutually uncorrelated: 

E[η(ℓ) | X] = 0 , E[Zη (ℓ) | X] = 0 ,

E[η(1) η(2) | X] = 0 . (26) 

Suppose the declared score and anchor ranges im-ply |∆(ℓ) 

> i

| ≤ Cℓ,s and |Z| ≤ cs almost surely. Set 

bvs = 12m

> m

X

> i=1

∆(1)  

> i

∆(2)  

> i

,vU 

> s

= max 

(

0, bvs + C1,s C2,s 

r log(1 /δ est )2m

)

.

(27) 

Then, with probability at least 1 − δest over the certification sample, 

Var( Z) ≤ vU 

> s

. (28) For a new random prompt from s and any K

searched candidates having the same marginal can-didate law, define 

Bs(K, δ ; v) = p2v log( K/δ ) + cs

3 log( K/δ )

(29) 

and B± 

> s

(K, δ ; v) = Bs(2 K, δ ; v). If kA maximizes the aggregate score and kq maximizes target qual-ity, then, jointly over certification and search, with probability at least 1 − δest − δsearch ,

Z(X, a kA ) ≤ Bs(K, δ search ; vU 

> s

),

(30) 

q(X, a kq ) − q(X, a kA ) ≤ 2B± 

> s

(K, δ search ; vU 

> s

).

(31) 

The probability statement is marginal over prompts within the predeclared stratum. It becomes prompt-conditional only when the assumptions and the variance upper bound are established separately for that prompt. 

The theorem does not require Gaussian er-rors and does not equate covariance with a sub-Gaussian proxy; its linear term records the price of a bounded but otherwise unknown tail. A tighter Bennett inversion, the declared-constant conven-tions, and a Bonferroni-simultaneous version ap-pear with the proof in Appendix A; other proofs are in Appendix A. The assumptions, failure modes, and claim boundaries underlying these conclusions are detailed in Appendix K. 

5 Empirical Audits 

5.1 Controlled Gaussian stress test 

Before using learned evaluators, we test the im-plementation in the model where the order of the maximum-error envelope is known to be tight. The parameter grid is 

J ∈ { 1, 2, 4, 8},K ∈ { 2, 4, 8, 16 , 32 },ρ ∈ { 0, . 25 , . 50 , . 65 , . 75 , . 90 }.

(32) For each setting, we generate 50 ,000 prompts with 

qk ∼ N (0 , 1) and 

ejk = √ρ c k+p1 − ρ u jk , ck, u jk iid 

∼ N (0 , 1) .

(33) The fixed seed is 20260802, and nested candi-date prefixes are reused across K. Across the 120 cells no Monte Carlo mean exceeds its pop-ulation upper bound (largest observed-to-bound ratio 0.787 for the envelope, 0.557 for overstate-ment, 0.116 for regret; every MC standard error below 0.0042 ). Figure 2 also checks the quality-anchor algebra: one noisy anchor inflates the esti-mated projected variance by ≈ τ 2 while the two-anchor cross-covariance stays within 0.002 of the true 0.625 at all noise levels. These verify the code path and the rank-one contamination identity under their stated model—not that real judge errors are Gaussian or real anchors independent (full outputs: Appendix F). 

5.2 Multi-family finite-search audit 

The archived multi-family audit (five models, three families, two generators, one panel per row; Ap-pendix C, Table 2) retains three observations: the projected scale falls with panel size but bJhet eff ≈ 1.5

at J=4 ; overstatement falls with J faster than re-gret improves (descriptive—the records audit be-low supplies the paired version); the 0.81 –0.99 

plug-in pass fractions are not coverage. Both J=2 

panels are within-DeBERTa, so no same- versus cross-family conclusion is supported. The comple-mentary two-judge error-envelope audit is reported in Appendix E. 

5.3 Anchor sensitivity and verifier-backed evaluation (summary) 

Because the audits above measure error relative to a held-out learned judge, we additionally ex-amine the sensitivity of the results to the choice of quality anchor by comparing two held-out an-chors from different model families (Appendix D). The anchors exhibit Spearman correlation 0.42 on GSM8K but −0.21 on open-ended prompts, with corresponding anchor-dependent regret, whereas HumanEval provides a degenerate verifiable anchor. The empirical validation of the two-anchor identity and its associated UCB is therefore confined to the controlled synthetic experiment. 

5.4 All-subset and aggregation audit 

We freeze five eligible judges and enumerate every nonempty subset (31 panels; held-out anchors excluded). Every panel receives the same tensors ( 320 GSM8K prompts, Kmax =32 

nested candidates from a frozen SmolLM2-360M sampler; input SHA-256 digests released); 

K ∈ {2, 4, 8, 16 , 32 } uses nested prefixes, so all contrasts are prompt-paired. Disjoint fit/certification/test splits ( 120 /80 /120 ) separate Aggregator selected quality target regret best_single 0.075 [0.033, 0.125] 0.292 [0.217, 0.375] care 0.092 [0.042, 0.142] 0.275 [0.200, 0.358] covariance_weighted 0.108 [0.058, 0.167] 0.258 [0.183, 0.342] minimum 0.108 [0.058, 0.167] 0.258 [0.183, 0.342] uncertainty_penalized 0.108 [0.058, 0.167] 0.258 [0.183, 0.333] uniform_mean 0.100 [0.050, 0.158] 0.267 [0.192, 0.350]     

> Table 1: Aggregation comparison on the largest eligible panel ( J=5 ) and search budget ( K=32 ): mean selected target quality and target regret with prompt-paired bootstrap 95% intervals over the 120 locked test prompts. Best-single, penalty, covariance weights, and CARE hyperparameters are chosen without test access.

learned components, the variance UCB, and fi-nal metrics. Six predeclared rules are compared (best-single, uniform mean, minimum, uncertainty-penalized, Ledoit–Wolf simplex covariance weight-ing, CARE-SVD at the pinned official revision; CARE marked not applicable on J< 3 panels rather than silently replaced). Intervals resample prompts; method contrasts subtract the within-prompt uni-form mean; panel-size contrasts average all  5

> j



panels of a size within prompt before subtracting the singleton average, so ensemble size is no longer confounded with judge identity—the confound that made the archived J=1 vs. J=4 comparison de-scriptive. Additional experimental-design and re-porting requirements, including cross-family evalu-ation and acquisition diagnostics, are provided in Appendix I. Scope: the generator solves only 3% of items ( 41% of prompts have a correct candidate)— low-prevalence contrasts. The paired results are informative in both di-rections (Table 1). No aggregation rule separates from the uniform mean on selected target quality at 

J=5 , K=32 (best-single −0.025 [ −0.067 , 0.008] ;CARE −0.008 [ −0.050 , 0.033] ; the weighted rules 

+0 .008 [ −0.017 , 0.042] ). The rules separate on 

proxy inflation : best-single overstates the selected centered score by +0 .104 [0 .067 , 0.144] versus the mean; covariance weighting is the only rule not worse ( −0.018 [ −0.049 , 0.009] ). Ensembling it-self helps: J=5 beats singletons on selected qual-ity ( +0 .028 [0 .003 , 0.058] ) and cuts centered over-statement ( −0.107 [ −0.139 , −0.080] ; covariance 

−0.126 [ −0.162 , −0.094] )—the common-mode account on real records with prompt-paired uncer-tainty. 

5.5 Real-task bounded certificate (summary) 

On the one predeclared non-degenerate task (GSM8K: exact match is the target and anchor 1, so η1 ≡ 0; GRM-Llama3 is anchor 2), Theorem 11 is valid but uninformative across all 855 cells : at 

m=80 , the estimation correction ( ≈ 0.61 ) domi-nates bvs (median 0.017 ), every radius reaches its range cap, and the 1.0 pass fractions are trivial and therefore do not constitute coverage. Achiev-ing bvs-scale precision would require approximately 

10 5 pairs (Appendix M). A three-seed DPO pilot (Appendix G), while underpowered, provides no statistically reliable evidence for either superiority or equivalence. The full calibrated disagreement-selection protocol, including the matching con-trols and acquisition procedure, is provided in Ap-pendix H. A detailed analysis of the three-seed DPO pilot (Appendix J) further delineates the in-terpretation and limitations of this result; in par-ticular, the pilot neither establishes a benefit nor rules out a practically meaningful effect. The corre-sponding seed-level confidence interval and exact randomization-test calculations are reported in Ap-pendix L. For visualization, see Appendix N. 

6 Conclusion and Implications 

Evaluator ensembles mitigate reward hacking only along directions in which their errors cancel: co-variance projected onto the aggregation direction controls the error exposed to finite search; disagree-ment measures an orthogonal component. This yields overstatement and regret bounds (incl. con-ditionally calibrated adaptive proposals); only the maximum-error envelope has a general Gaussian tightness result; a noisy proxy adds a rank-one com-mon mode, removable by two anchors only under explicit conditional independence. Empirically, en-sembling suppresses proxy inflation and modestly improves selected quality, no weighting rule beats the plain mean, and the real-task certificate is valid but uninformative at audit scale. Panels, budgets, calibration, and external quality evidence must be audited jointly. Limitations 

The Gaussian-model search guarantees are condi-tional on a joint sub-Gaussian proxy, or on history-conditional control for predictable adaptation, and covariance alone does not imply either tail con-dition. The bounded Bernstein certificate (Theo-rem 11) removes the earlier Gaussian bridge, but it does not make the anchor assumptions automatic: its validity requires a predeclared bounded scale, a fit split independent of certification, and centered cross-orthogonal anchor errors; the main statement is marginal over prompts in a declared stratum, not prompt-conditional; the linear Bernstein term can make the certificate conservative, especially after simultaneous correction; and learned anchors from different families remain a sensitivity analy-sis unless their error relationship has independent design-based support. The archived real-model experiments use covariance plug-ins rather than certified proxy matrices. The multi-family audit spans five eligible ensemble judges from three families plus a held-out Llama-family proxy, two small generators, and 200 locked test prompts, with one executed panel per row rather than all sub-sets; scaling to frontier-size generators, larger pan-els, and non-English tasks is unestablished. The expectation-scale benchmark pass fraction is as low as 0.81 , but this descriptive quantity is not nomi-nal coverage because the real-model audit does not certify a prompt-conditional sub-Gaussian proxy; real-data nominal coverage of Equation (19) is un-established. Both executed J=2 panels are within-DeBERTa pairs, so no same- versus cross-family conclusion is available from this run, and no paired 

J=1 versus J=4 contrast, frozen common-mode thresholds, exact checkpoint revision hashes, or per-prompt records are contained in the archived sum-maries. Direct aggregation baselines (best single judge, minimum, uncertainty-penalized, simplex-constrained covariance weighting, and CARE at the pinned official revision) are now executed on the all-subset records audit (§5.4); that audit is single-task (GSM8K), single-generator, and low-prevalence, so its contrasts do not generalize be-yond that scope, and the real-task certificate it feeds is uninformative at m=80 (§5.5). The archived z-scored runs were unbounded without a predeclared clipping rule, so no certificate value is derived from them. The measured covariances remain proxy-relative (Proposition 9); the two-anchor validation mitigates but does not eliminate this, and it shows the anchors themselves disagree beyond sign out-side verifiable domains—GSM8K supplies the only non-degenerate verifiable anchor here, since the 

1.5B generator passes zero HumanEval suites. The DPO study contains only three paired training seeds and one reported external judge; it is underpowered for equivalence, and no human evaluation was avail-able. A power-determined multi-seed study with a predeclared smallest effect of interest remains necessary. Corollary 8 covers finite predictable proposals only when conditional calibration is jus-tified; it does not cover fully co-evolving policy training in which that condition can fail. 

7 Ethics Statement 

This work studies failures of automated evaluation and does not introduce human-subject data. Nev-ertheless, reward-hacking diagnostics can be dual use: the same analyses that identify evaluator weak-nesses could help an adversary target them. 

References          

> Sanjeda Akter, Ibne Farabi Shihab, and Anuj Sharma. 2026. Detecting proxy gaming in rl and llm align-ment via evaluator stress tests. In Findings of the As-sociation for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2026 ,pages 10554–10583. Dario Amodei, Chris Olah, Jacob Steinhardt, Paul Christiano, John Schulman, and Dan Mané. 2016. Concrete problems in ai safety. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.06565 .George Bennett. 1962. Probability inequalities for the sum of independent random variables. Journal of the American Statistical Association , 57(297):33–45. Josef Chen. 2026. When does combining language mod-els help? a co-failure ceiling on routing, voting, and mixture-of-agents across 67 frontier models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.27288 .Paul F Christiano, Jan Leike, Tom Brown, Miljan Mar-tic, Shane Legg, and Dario Amodei. 2017. Deep reinforcement learning from human preferences. Ad-vances in neural information processing systems , 30. Thomas Coste, Usman Anwar, Robert Kirk, and David Krueger. 2024. Reward model ensembles help miti-gate overoptimization. In International Conference on Learning Representations , volume 2024, pages 50905–50931. Florian Eddie Dorner, Vivian Nastl, and Moritz Hardt. 2025. Limits to scalable evaluation at the frontier: Llm as judge won’t beat twice the data. In Inter-national Conference on Learning Representations ,volume 2025, pages 26467–26491.

Jacob Eisenstein, Chirag Nagpal, Alekh Agarwal, Ah-mad Beirami, Alex D’Amour, DJ Dvijotham, Adam Fisch, Katherine Heller, Stephen Pfohl, Deepak Ramachandran, and 1 others. 2023. Helping or herding? reward model ensembles mitigate but do not eliminate reward hacking. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.09244 .Yarin Gal, Riashat Islam, and Zoubin Ghahramani. 2017. Deep bayesian active learning with image data. In 

International conference on machine learning , pages 1183–1192. PMLR. Leo Gao, John Schulman, and Jacob Hilton. 2023. Scal-ing laws for reward model overoptimization. In In-ternational conference on machine learning , pages 10835–10866. PMLR. Yonatan Geifman and Ran El-Yaniv. 2017. Selective classification for deep neural networks. Advances in neural information processing systems , 30. Adam Gleave and Geoffrey Irving. 2022. Uncer-tainty estimation for language reward models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.07472 .Shashwat Goel, Joschka Struber, Ilze Amanda Auz-ina, Karuna K Chandra, Ponnurangam Kumaraguru, Douwe Kiela, Ameya Prabhu, Matthias Bethge, and Jonas Geiping. 2025. Great models think alike and this undermines ai oversight. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.04313 .Wassily Hoeffding. 1963. Probability inequalities for sums of bounded random variables. Journal of the American statistical association , 58(301):13–30. Neil Houlsby, Ferenc Huszár, Zoubin Ghahramani, and Máté Lengyel. 2011. Bayesian active learning for classification and preference learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1112.5745 .Audrey Huang, Adam Block, Qinghua Liu, Nan Jiang, Akshay Krishnamurthy, and Dylan J Foster. 2025. Is best-of-n the best of them? coverage, scaling, and op-timality in inference-time alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.21878 .Elliot Kim, Avi Garg, Kenny Peng, and Nikhil Garg. 2025. Correlated errors in large language models. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.07962 .Leslie Kish. 1965. Survey Sampling . John Wiley & Sons. Guneet Kohli. 2026. Nine judges, two effective votes: Correlated errors undermine llm evaluation panels. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.29800 .Nathan Lambert, Valentina Pyatkin, Jacob Morrison, LJ Miranda, Bill Yuchen Lin, Khyathi Chandu, Nouha Dziri, Sachin Kumar, Tom Zick, Yejin Choi, and 1 others. 2025. Rewardbench: Evaluating reward models for language modeling. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: NAACL 2025 , pages 1755–1797. Eddie Landesberg. 2026. When llm judge scores look good but best-of-n decisions fail. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.12520 .Malcolm R Leadbetter, Georg Lindgren, and Holger Rootzén. 2012. Extremes and related properties of random sequences and processes . Springer Science & Business Media. Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, and 1 others. 2022. Training language models to follow in-structions with human feedback. Advances in neural information processing systems , 35:27730–27744. Arjun Panickssery, Samuel R Bowman, and Shi Feng. 2024. Llm evaluators recognize and favor their own generations. Advances in Neural Information Pro-cessing Systems , 37:68772–68802. Rafael Rafailov, Yaswanth Chittepu, Ryan Park, Harshit Sikchi, Joey Hejna, W Bradley Knox, Chelsea Finn, and Scott Niekum. 2024. Scaling laws for reward model overoptimization in direct alignment algo-rithms. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37:126207–126242. Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Christo-pher D Manning, Stefano Ermon, and Chelsea Finn. 2023. Direct preference optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model. Advances in neural information processing systems , 36:53728–53741. Alexandre Ramé, Nino Vieillard, Léonard Hussenot, Robert Dadashi, Geoffrey Cideron, Olivier Bachem, and Johan Ferret. 2024. Warm: On the benefits of weight averaged reward models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.12187 .H Sebastian Seung, Manfred Opper, and Haim Som-polinsky. 1992. Query by committee. In Proceed-ings of the fifth annual workshop on Computational learning theory , pages 287–294. Joar Skalse, Nikolaus Howe, Dmitrii Krasheninnikov, and David Krueger. 2022. Defining and characteriz-ing reward gaming. Advances in neural information processing systems , 35:9460–9471. Nisan Stiennon, Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Daniel Ziegler, Ryan Lowe, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford, Dario Amodei, and Paul F Christiano. 2020. Learn-ing to summarize with human feedback. Advances in neural information processing systems , 33:3008– 3021. Sijun Tan, Siyuan Zhuang, Kyle Montgomery, William Tang, Alejandro Cuadron, Chenguang Wang, Raluca Popa, and Ion Stoica. 2025. Judgebench: A bench-mark for evaluating llm-based judges. In Interna-tional Conference on Learning Representations , vol-ume 2025, pages 63277–63303. Pat Verga, Sebastian Hofstatter, Sophia Althammer, Yix-uan Su, Aleksandra Piktus, Arkady Arkhangorodsky, Minjie Xu, Naomi White, and Patrick Lewis. 2024. Replacing judges with juries: Evaluating llm genera-tions with a panel of diverse models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.18796 .Jitian Zhao, Changho Shin, Tzu-Heng Huang, Satya Sai Srinath Namburi GNVV, and Frederic Sala. 2026. Care: Confounder-aware aggregation for reliable llm evaluation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.00039 .

A Proofs 

Proof of Lemma 2 Using ¯e = J−1 P 

> j

ej ,

Var(¯ e) = 1

J2

X

> j

Var( ej ) + X 

> j̸=k

Cov( ej , e k)



= 1

J2

 Jσ 2 + J(J − 1) ρσ 2 ,

which is Equation (6). Positive semidefiniteness implies ρ ≥ − 1/(J − 1) . At ρ = 1 , averaging provides no variance reduction; at ρ = 0 , the stan-dard deviation falls as 1/√J; and at the negative endpoint, the equal-variance errors cancel in the mean. 

Proof of Proposition 3 Because P 1 = 0 , Equa-tion (3) gives P r = P b + P e. Since E[e] = 0 ,

E[D] = 1

J E ∥P b + P e∥2

= 1

J ∥P b∥2 + 1

J E[e⊤P e]= 1

J ∥P b∥2 + 1

J tr( P Σx).

If P b = 0 and all marginal variances equal σ2,then 

1

J tr( P Σx) = 1

J tr(Σ x) − 1

J2 1⊤Σx1

= σ2 − Var(¯ e)= σ2 J − 1

J (1 − ρ).

A.1 Proof of Proposition 4 

Substitution gives 

q(h)1 + b + e(h) = ( q + h)1 + b + e − h1 = r.

Moreover, E[e(h)] = 0 because both e and h are centered under νx. Finally, P 1 = 0 gives P e(h) =

P e, whereas uniform averaging gives ¯e(h) = ¯ e −

h. The observations and every statistic computed solely from them are therefore unchanged even though the common-mode error differs. 

Proof of Theorem 6 Let zk = ¯ e(x, a k). As-sumption 5 with t = λ1/J gives E exp( λz k) ≤

exp( λ2vx/2) . For any λ > 0,

E max  

> k

zk ≤ 1

λ log E exp 



λ max  

> k

zk



≤ 1

λ log 

> K

X

> k=1

E exp( λz k)

≤ log Kλ + λv x

2 .

Optimizing at λ = p2 log K/v x yields 

E max k zk ≤ √2vx log K. Since 

R(x, a kR )−q(x, a kR ) = ¯b(x)+ zkR ≤ ¯b(x)+max  

> k

zk,

Equation (18) follows. The sub-Gaussian tail and a union bound give 

P



max  

> k

zk > t 



≤ K exp 



− t2

2vx



,

which proves Equation (19). For regret, the definition of kR gives 

qkR + zkR ≥ qkq + zkq ,

because the prompt offset is common to all candi-dates. Therefore 

qkq − qkR ≤ zkR − zkq ≤ max  

> k

zk − min  

> k

zk.

Applying the expected maximum bound to both 

zk and −zk proves Equation (20). A union bound over both tails of all K variables gives max k |zk| ≤ p2vx log(2 K/δ ) with probability at least 1 − δ,and the range is at most twice this value, proving Equation (21). 

Proof of Corollary 8 Taking expectations in Equation (22) gives 

E exp( λz k) = E[E{exp( λz k) | F k−1}]

≤ exp( λ2vx/2) .

for every adaptively generated candidate. The log-sum-exp argument in the proof of Theorem 6 there-fore applies without independence. Likewise, 

P(zk > t ) = E[P(zk > t | F k−1)] 

≤ exp( −t2/2vx).

and the same statement holds for −zk. Union bounds over the predictable sequence establish the two high-probability conclusions. The regret com-parison remains pathwise after the K candidates have been generated, so its proof is unchanged. Proof of Corollary 7 Let d = 1 − ρ. The variance-driven expected overstatement term is 

B(d) = σp2 log K

 1

J + J − 1

J (1 − d)

1/2

.

At every interior point where the variance is posi-tive, 

∂B ∂d = − σ√2 log K

2

J − 1

J

×

 1

J + J − 1

J ρ

−1/2

< 0.

The same monotonicity applies to the regret bound. Neither derivative contains the constant prompt off-set, and the equal-variance parameterization holds 

σ fixed. 

Proofs of Proposition 9 and Corollary 10 The proxy-relative error is ee = e − η1. Independence and centering give 

Cov( ee) = Cov( e) + Var( η)11 ⊤

= Σ x + τ 211 ⊤.

For uniform weights, J−21⊤(τ 211 ⊤)1 = τ 2. In contrast, P ee = P e − ηP 1 = P e pointwise. With two anchors, 

ee(1) = e − η11, ee(2) = e − η21.

All mixed covariance terms vanish under the con-ditional independence assumptions, leaving 

Cov 

ee(1) , ee(2) 

= Cov( e) = Σ x.

Bennett refinement, declared constants, and si-multaneity The closed-form Bernstein radius is convenient but need not be the tightest valid use of the same variance estimate. Let h(u) = (1 + u) log(1 + u) − u and ¯v = min {vU 

> s

, c 2 

> s

}. The deterministic cap follows directly from the theo-rem’s assumption |Z| ≤ cs, which gives Var( Z |

X) ≤ E[Z2 | X] ≤ c2

> s

; the sharper Popoviciu cap c2 

> s

/4 would additionally require the conditional support width to be at most cs, which the theorem does not assume, so we do not use it. Define 

Ts(K, δ ; vU 

> s

) = min 



cs, ¯vcs

h−1

 c2

> s

¯v log Kδ

 

,

(34) with Ts = 0 when ¯v = 0 . Bennett’s bounded-variance moment-generating function bound im-plies that Equation (30) remains valid after replac-ing Bs by Ts. If target quality has declared range width Wq,s , Equation (31) remains valid with the tighter radius 

min Wq,s , 2Ts(2 K, δ search ; vU 

> s

) . (35) We report the Bennett radius together with the closed-form Bernstein radius and the deterministic cap. The standard inequality h(u) ≥ u2/[2(1 + 

u/ 3)] shows pointwise that the Bennett inversion is no larger than the Bernstein relaxation, while the deterministic cap holds surely. Thus reporting the tightest of these nested bounds introduces no post-selection or additional failure probability. If the aggregate and each anchor are clipped to [0 , 1] before either tuning or certification, then 

C1,s = C2,s = 2 . If both aggregate and target quality lie in [0 , 1] , then cs = 2 is valid because centering a variable with range two produces an absolute deviation of at most two. These constants must be declared rather than estimated from the observed extrema. For M predeclared cells, choosing δest =

δsearch = α/ (2 M ) and applying a union bound makes Equations (30)–(31) simultaneous across all 

M cells with family-wise probability at least 1 − α.Pointwise and simultaneous certificates should be reported in separate columns. 

Proof of Theorem 11 For one certification pair, write U (ℓ) = μX +Z−η(ℓ), where μX = E[Y | X].Candidate differencing removes μX . Conditional on X, independence of a and a′ together with Equa-tion (26) gives 

E

 12 ∆(1) ∆(2) | X



= Var( Z | X). (36) Since E[Z | X] = 0 , averaging over X yields 

E

 12 ∆(1) ∆(2) 



= E[Var( Z | X)] = Var( Z).

(37) Moreover, 12 ∆(1) ∆(2) lies in an interval of width 

C1,s C2,s . The one-sided Hoeffding inequality (Ho-effding, 1963) therefore gives 

P

(

Var( Z) > bvs + C1,s C2,s 

r log(1 /δ est )2m

)

≤ δest ,

(38) which proves Equation (28). On this event, the classical bounded-variable moment-generating-function bound implies, for 

0 ≤ λ < 3/c s,

log E[eλZ ] ≤ λ2Var( Z)2(1 − λc s/3) ≤ λ2vU

> s

2(1 − λc s/3) .

(39) The Chernoff argument consequently yields 

P



Z > 

q

2vU 

> s

t + cst/ 3



≤ e−t. (40) A direct Bennett argument (Bennett, 1962) instead gives 

P{Z > t } ≤ exp 



− ¯vc2

> s

h

 cst

¯v

 

, 0 ≤ t ≤ cs,

(41) where replacing the unknown variance by its up-per bound weakens the tail bound. Inverting this expression after a union bound gives the radius in Equation (34). Applying it to both tails gives Equation (35). For the closed-form relaxation, a union bound over K candidate marginals with t =log( K/δ search ) proves Equation (30); indepen-dence among the searched candidates is unneces-sary for this step. Applying Equation (40) to both 

Z and −Z with t = log(2 K/δ search ) bounds every searched error in absolute value by B± 

> s

. Finally, aggregate-score optimality gives 

q(X, a kq )−q(X, a kA ) ≤ Z(X, a kA )−Z(X, a kq ),

(42) so the two-sided event proves Equation (31). Com-bining the estimation and search events by a final union bound completes the proof. 

B Additional Related Work 

Reward overoptimization and reward hacking 

RLHF fits a learned reward model to pairwise or scalar preference judgments and then optimizes a policy against that model as a proxy for the in-tended objective (Christiano et al., 2017; Stiennon et al., 2020; Ouyang et al., 2022). The reward model is estimated from a finite, imperfectly la-beled sample and must evaluate a policy distribu-tion that changes as optimization proceeds. Its reliability is therefore not a peripheral implementa-tion detail: a region in which the reward model is an unreliable proxy can become the region toward which the optimized policy moves. Gao et al. (2023) operationalize this failure using a large “gold” reward model as a stand-in for hu-man judgment. Optimizing a smaller proxy through best-of-n sampling or PPO initially improves gold reward, but continued optimization eventually de-creases it. Rafailov et al. (2024) observe an analo-gous pattern for direct alignment algorithms such as DPO, showing that the phenomenon is not spe-cific to explicit reinforcement learning against a scalar reward. We use reward overoptimization for this measurable degradation under a stronger evalu-ation signal. We use reward hacking more broadly for behavior that obtains proxy reward in a way the principal would not endorse (Skalse et al., 2022). Overoptimization is one empirically tractable man-ifestation of that broader problem. Our contribution is not to establish that proxy op-timization can fail. Instead, we ask which compo-nent of a learned evaluator’s error remains after an ensemble is aggregated and how a finite search bud-get can exploit that component. This scope matters because it separates the existence of reward hack-ing, which prior work already establishes, from the narrower question of when averaging evaluators can mitigate it. 

Reward-model ensembles and uncertainty The most direct ensemble mitigation replaces a single reward model with several members and aggre-gates their predictions. Coste et al. (2024) compare mean and worst-case objectives with uncertainty weighting. Their experiments show that conserva-tive aggregation can substantially reduce overopti-mization, particularly under label noise. This result also shows why the mean should not be treated as the uniquely correct ensemble objective: different aggregators expose different directions of the joint error and make different bias–variance tradeoffs. Eisenstein et al. (2023) reach a complementary conclusion. Reward models that perform similarly on their training distribution can be underspeci-fied by the available preference data and assign sharply different rewards after the policy moves off distribution. Ensembles that vary in pretraining seed transfer better under optimization than ensem-bles that vary only in fine-tuning seed on top of a shared pretrained model. Even pretraining-diverse ensembles do not eliminate reward hacking, how-ever, because some qualitative failures are shared by every member. Ramé et al. (2024) study weight-space averaging as a less expensive alternative to prediction-space ensembling. Together, these stud-ies establish that ensemble diversity matters empir-ically while also showing that nominal diversity in seeds or models does not guarantee diversity in the errors reached by optimization. The negative disagreement-selection result is also not unprecedented. Gleave and Irving (2022) train bootstrap ensembles of language reward mod-els and find that active learning driven by ensem-ble uncertainty does not outperform random sam-pling. Their estimated epistemic uncertainty is only weakly related to model error, which they attribute in part to the similarity of members fine-tuned from one underlying language model. Our DPO pilot differs in both intervention and outcome: it selects model-generated preference data and mea-sures transfer after policy optimization. Neverthe-less, its three-seed result should be interpreted as a scoped instance of the same broader warning, not as the first negative result for disagreement-based acquisition. These works motivate rather than invalidate our analysis. We do not propose that an ensemble mean is optimal, and we do not claim that covariance is a complete model of adversarial optimization. We identify the projected response-dependent er-ror governing a fixed aggregation rule under finite search, derive selected-response and regret guaran-tees, and state the information that must come from outside the ensemble before its common-mode risk can be estimated. 

Language-model judges and correlated errors 

RewardBench evaluates reward models on chal-lenging chosen–rejected triples spanning chat, rea-soning, and safety, whereas JudgeBench empha-sizes difficult response pairs for which preference and objective correctness can diverge (Lambert et al., 2025; Tan et al., 2025). These benchmarks reveal distinct evaluator failure modes, but static accuracy on either benchmark is not a substitute for evaluating responses generated by a policy that has been optimized against the evaluator. Several studies explain why a held-out judge should not automatically be treated as ground truth. Panickssery et al. (2024) document self-preference: evaluators can recognize and favor outputs from related models even when human raters judge the outputs to be equally good. Dorner et al. (2025) establish a complementary limitation on scalable evaluation. When the judge is no more capable than the evaluated model, a small amount of ground-truth data cannot in general produce an arbitrarily large reduction in evaluation sample complexity through debiasing alone. Correlated wrong answers make the same con-cern visible at the panel level. Across more than 350 language models, Kim et al. (2025) find sub-stantial dependence in model errors; architectural or provider diversity does not guarantee indepen-dent failures. Goel et al. (2025) likewise connect similarity between models to correlated oversight failures and judge preferences. These findings moti-vate evaluating error covariance on responses reach-able by the optimized generator, rather than infer-ring independence from model names, providers, or checkpoint counts. Most directly, Kohli (2026) apply the Kish de-sign effect to a panel of nine frontier judges from seven model families and find only about two ef-fective independent votes. Their analysis concerns discrete panel reliability and the gap from an inde-pendent Condorcet model. Equation (7) uses the same design-effect algebra for continuous residual scores. Our incremental step is to place the resid-ual retained by aggregation inside an optimization-induced selection event and bound both the selected response’s overstatement and its quality regret. Concurrent work by Chen (2026) studies a dif-ferent but adjacent failure object: the probability that every member of a model pool gives the wrong discrete answer. It proves that pairwise correlation cannot identify this all-wrong tail and validates the distinction across a large model pool. That result reinforces a boundary already explicit here: covariance alone is not a tail guarantee. Our ob-ject is the continuous residual projected through a reward aggregator, and our finite-search bounds require a joint moment-generating-function condi-tion; the two analyses should not be collapsed into one correlation-only claim. CARE takes a different next step. Zhao et al. (2026) model static judge scores through latent quality and shared confounders and prove identifi-ability and finite-sample recovery without gold la-bels under their structural assumptions. We do not offer a competing latent-variable estimator. Propo-sition 4 instead states the no-assumption boundary: an unrestricted response-dependent common mode cannot be identified from internal judge scores alone. Proposition 9 then shows how one com-mon audit practice biases the relevant covariance, while Corollary 10 gives a correction when two anchor errors satisfy explicit independence condi-tions. Structured latent models and external-anchor constructions are therefore complementary ways to cross the same identification boundary. 

Disagreement and active learning Query-by-committee selects examples on which members of a committee disagree (Seung et al., 1992). BALD gives a Bayesian interpretation in which acquisi-tion reflects information about model parameters (Houlsby et al., 2011; Gal et al., 2017). Panel-based language-model evaluation applies a related intu-ition: Verga et al. (2024) show that a jury of smaller, diverse-family evaluators can outperform a single large judge on several benchmarks. In each case, disagreement is useful when it is coupled to the error or uncertainty that the intervention is meant to reduce. The reward-hacking setting adds a specific cau-tion. A committee can disagree because its mem-bers make different errors, and that idiosyncratic variation is exactly what averaging can suppress. Yet all members may also respond to the same spu-rious feature. Such an error changes the ensemble mean without generating internal disagreement. In the projector notation of Proposition 3, the shared component lies in the aggregation direction and is annihilated by P . Low disagreement is con-sequently evidence of internal consistency, not a certificate of external correctness. This distinction does not make disagreement use-less. It can identify ambiguous prompts, poorly calibrated score regions, examples on which addi-tional labels are likely to change the committee, or cases dominated by member-specific noise. What it cannot do by itself is rank common-mode errors that all judges endorse. The value of disagreement-based selection therefore depends on the down-stream target: it may improve calibration or label efficiency without reducing the error exploited by an ensemble mean. 

Selective prediction and disagreement filtering 

Selective prediction allows a model to abstain on low-confidence cases, trading coverage for risk (Geifman and El-Yaniv, 2017). Disagreement filter-ing can be viewed as a form of selective evaluation in which the system refuses to trust examples on which its judges are inconsistent. Standard risk– coverage reasoning requires the confidence score to rank the error of interest at least approximately: ab-staining must remove errors faster than it removes correct predictions. A common-mode evaluator failure can violate this premise. Every judge may be confident and mutually consistent on the same wrong response. Filtering high-disagreement examples can then re-move genuinely difficult, idiosyncratic cases while retaining the confidently wrong cases that matter most under optimization. The issue is not merely a different point on a risk–coverage curve; the inter-nal abstention score may be insensitive to the rele-vant risk component. A valid selective-evaluation system therefore needs an external error signal or a structural model linking disagreement to common-mode risk. 

Preference optimization without explicit reward models DPO reparameterizes preference opti-mization so that a policy can be trained directly from a preference dataset without an explicit online reward-model stage (Rafailov et al., 2023). Remov-ing that stage does not remove dependence on the quality of the preference signal. If model-generated labels contain a correlated bias, the bias can be propagated into the policy even when no scalar reward model is optimized online. The overopti-mization results of Rafailov et al. (2024) make this connection empirical. We use DPO as a controlled setting in which the acquisition rule can change while the pair budget and optimization procedure remain fixed. The pilot asks whether selecting prompts with greater cali-brated disagreement changes transfer to an external judge. It does not claim that the DPO objective it-self follows from the covariance theorem, nor that a negative pilot result generalizes to other preference optimizers, larger models, or acquisition budgets. 

Positioning and research gap The literature es-tablishes a progression that constrains our novelty claim. Proxy rewards can be overoptimized (Gao et al., 2023; Rafailov et al., 2024); reward-model ensembles can mitigate but not eliminate this be-havior (Coste et al., 2024; Eisenstein et al., 2023; Ramé et al., 2024); disagreement is a classical un-certainty and acquisition signal (Seung et al., 1992; Houlsby et al., 2011; Gal et al., 2017); and recent work directly measures or models correlated judge errors (Kim et al., 2025; Goel et al., 2025; Kohli, 2026; Zhao et al., 2026). We therefore do not claim to introduce any of those ideas. The contribution is the connection between their remaining gaps in a finite-search setting. The pro-jector decomposition separates the error changed by aggregation from the error observed as disagree-ment while retaining judge-specific prompt offsets. The identification result shows why internal consen-Generator Panel v bJhet eff sel. over-rwd. @ K=32 regret bench. frac. SmolLM2 {D1} 1.80 1.00 1.19 [1.02,1.37] 1.80 0.95 SmolLM2 {D1, D 3} 1.49 1.16 1.00 [0.82,1.19] 1.72 0.94 SmolLM2 {D1, D 2} 1.55 1.10 1.03 [0.85,1.21] 1.64 0.93 SmolLM2 {D1, D 3, G, M } 1.09 1.56 0.80 [0.64,0.95] 1.62 0.94 Qwen-0.5B {D1} 2.07 1.00 1.27 [1.08,1.46] 1.72 0.96 Qwen-0.5B {D1, D 3} 1.72 1.13 0.87 [0.70,1.02] 1.44 0.97 Qwen-0.5B {D1, D 2} 1.66 1.09 1.06 [0.88,1.22] 1.63 0.96 Qwen-0.5B {D1, D 3, G, M } 1.28 1.49 0.69 [0.55,0.83] 1.45 0.98 

Table 2: Multi-family audit on the locked test split (K=32 cells shown; brackets are marginal prompt-bootstrap 95% CIs for selected-response overstatement). Here bv is a pooled projected residual variance and bJhet eff 

is the heterogeneous variance-equivalent panel size de-fined in Equation (9). “bench. frac.” is the descriptive fraction of prompts whose realized error envelope is below p2bv log K. It has no nominal coverage interpre-tation and is not a test of Equation (19). Panels name the judges actually evaluated: D1–D3 are DeBERTa checkpoints, G is Gemma-2B, M is Mistral-7B; both 

J=2 rows are within-DeBERTa pairs. 

sus alone cannot recover the common mode. The search theorem turns the retained direction into guarantees for the response actually selected and for its quality regret, rather than only for the max-imum error among searched candidates. Finally, the anchor analysis distinguishes true common co-variance from rank-one contamination induced by measuring all judges against the same noisy proxy. These results provide an optimization-aware audit framework; they do not replace conservative ag-gregation, latent-confounder modeling, or external evaluation. 

C Archived Multi-Family Audit in Full 

A preliminary two-judge envelope audit (now su-perseded; Appendix E) found the realized proxy-relative envelope below the Gaussian plug-in curve in every (J, K ) cell. We subsequently scaled the evaluation to five eligible models from three fami-lies ( D1–D3 OpenAssistant DeBERTa, Gemma-2B RM G, and Mistral-7B RM M ), together with a held-out Llama-family proxy excluded from ev-ery ensemble. The evaluation used two generators, 

J ∈ { 1, 2, 4}, and K ∈ { 2, . . . , 32 }; covariance was estimated on a calibration split, whereas all reported quantities were computed on a locked 200-prompt test split (Table 2; artifact manifest in Ap-pendix M). The archived run evaluated one panel per row— {D1}, the within-DeBERTa pairs, and 

{D1, D 3, G, M }—and therefore does not support same- versus cross-family comparisons; the earlier “mixed” finding is accordingly withdrawn. The all-subset audit of §5.4 addresses this limitation using prompt-level records. Three observations nevertheless remain. First, the projected scale decreases with panel size ( v:

1.80 → 1.09 and 2.07 → 1.28 from J=1 to J=4 ), while bJhet eff ≈ 1.5 at J=4 (Equation (9)), indicat-ing that correlation forfeits most of the nominal averaging benefit. Second, selected-response over-statement at K=32 decreases with J (1.19 → 0.80 ,

1.27 → 0.69 ), whereas target regret improves more modestly ( 1.80 → 1.62 , 1.72 → 1.45 ). This pat-tern is consistent with the theoretical separation be-tween suppressing proxy over-scoring and improv-ing selection. Because the archived summary lacks paired prompt-level contrasts, these decreases are descriptive rather than inferential; the records audit above provides the paired analysis. Third, the frac-tion of realized envelopes below the expectation-scale benchmark p2bv log K ranges from 0.81 to 

0.99 . This quantity is a pass fraction rather than a coverage probability: it has no confidence param-eter and uses an uncertified bv. Consequently, it neither demonstrates undercoverage nor validates Theorem 6, and we make no nominal coverage claim for the real-model experiments. Finally, we do not report a common-mode com-parison across J. The archived rates were com-puted using within-test-cell thresholds rather than calibration-frozen thresholds, and disagreement is identically zero at J=1 (yielding a rate of 0.25 by construction). A frozen-threshold recomputation requires per-prompt records that are unavailable in the archived summary. Artifact layout, con-tents, and remaining gaps are documented in Ap-pendix M. 

D Anchor Sensitivity and Verifier-Backed Evaluation in Full 

The audits above measure error against a held-out learned judge, exactly the practice Proposi-tion 9 warns about. We therefore compare two held-out learned anchors from different families (Llama-3-8B RM, Mistral-7B RM; fixed Qwen2.5-1.5B generator, K=8 ) with objective verification where the task admits it—a sensitivity analysis, not an instantiation of Corollary 10, since fam-ily difference does not imply conditional indepen-dence. On GSM8K (exact-match anchor, preva-lence 0.37 ) the anchors correlate at Spearman 

0.42 and rank a verified-correct candidate first on 

0.73 /0.66 of solvable prompts (DeBERTa ensem-ble: 0.62 ). On HumanEval the verifiable anchor is degenerate (zero passing suites), reported as such. On open-ended prompts the anchors correlate 

negatively (Spearman −0.21 ) and mean selected-response regret depends strongly on the anchor (3.8 vs 6.1 on GSM8K; 4.0 vs 7.3 open-ended). Only GSM8K supplies a non-degenerate verifier-backed target; the negative correlations reinforce the anchor-validity concern, so the two-anchor identity and its UCB are verified empirically only in the controlled synthetic experiment. 

E Two-Judge Error-Envelope Audit Table 

Setup (moved from §5.2): candidates from SmolLM2-360M-Instruct, two z-calibrated reward-model judges, a stronger held-out proxy eq excluded from the ensemble, and the mean over 120 prompts of the proxy-relative envelope max k≤K ¯e(x, a k)—an upper bound on the selected response’s error, not the selected-response statistic itself. With plug-in variances bvJ=1 = 0 .708 and bvJ=2 = 0 .696 , the ob-served envelope stays below the Gaussian plug-in curve in every (J, K ) cell. The magnitudes are not precisely predicted—the plug-in curves are loose and the run kept no prompt-level intervals—and an equal-variance fit ( σ2 ≈ 0.84 , ρ ≈ 0.65 ) predicts disagreement 0.147 vs. the measured 0.176 : quali-tatively consistent, not exact, with Proposition 9 ex-plaining why the shared proxy prevents reading the fitted correlation as ground-truth common-mode error.                                                         

> JKobserved envelope plug-in obs./plug-in
> 120.233 0.991 0.235 140.491 1.401 0.350 180.794 1.716 0.463 116 1.002 1.981 0.506 132 1.164 2.215 0.525 220.172 0.982 0.175 240.440 1.389 0.317 280.730 1.701 0.429 216 0.898 1.965 0.457 232 1.018 2.196 0.464
> Table 3: Finite-search error-envelope audit across all re-ported (J, K )cells. Observed proxy-relative envelopes remain below the Gaussian plug-in curves p2bvlog K
> computed from bvJ=1 = 0 .708 and bvJ=2 = 0 .696 . The table supports numerical consistency with the upper en-velope; it does not show equality, identify a √log K
> scaling law, or isolate the causal effect of correlation from judge identity.

F Synthetic Stress-Test Details 

The synthetic audit is fully specified by Equa-tion (33). For each of the 24 ( J, ρ ) settings, one draw contains 50 ,000 prompts and 32 can-didates per prompt. The K ∈ { 2, 4, 8, 16 , 32 }

conditions use nested prefixes of the same can-didate tensor. The target qualities and all com-mon and judge-specific error variables are indepen-dent standard Gaussians. Ensemble selection maxi-mizes qk + ¯ ek; the reported quantities are max k ¯ek,

¯ekR , and max k qk − qkR . Their reference curves are the corresponding terms in Theorem 6 with 

v = ρ + (1 − ρ)/J .The anchor experiment uses 200 ,000 indepen-dent scalar projected errors with J = 4 and 

ρ = 0 .5. Two independent Gaussian anchor errors are added at each value of τ 2 ∈ { 0, . 25 , . 50 , 1.00 }.The single-anchor estimator is the sample variance of one proxy-relative projected residual; the cor-rected estimator is the sample cross-covariance be-tween the two proxy-relative residuals. With true projected variance 0.625 , the single-anchor esti-mate rises from 0.621 to 0.871 , 1.121 , and 1.626 

as τ 2 increases, while the two-anchor estimates remain 0.621 , 0.622 , 0.623 , and 0.623 . The exper-iment uses no fitted parameters and no discarded runs. The accompanying simulation script and two CSV outputs reproduce Figure 2 from seed 20260802. This stress test is narrower than a model evalua-tion. Gaussian draws make the sub-Gaussian proxy exact, while the construction makes the anchor er-rors independent. The stress test can reveal imple-mentation mistakes, arithmetic inconsistencies, or a mismatch between a theorem and its claimed statis-tic. It cannot establish that learned judges satisfy the assumptions, which is why the real-model audit and the missing confirmatory experiments remain separately identified. 

G Exploratory DPO Pilot 

This appendix retains the original controlled DPO experiment, while narrowing its conclusion to the available evidence. Two training arms start from the same Qwen2.5-1.5B-Instruct checkpoint and use the same DPO budget over three rounds. One arm selects prompts with high calibrated cross-judge disagreement; the other selects a size-matched random sample. Preference labels in both arms come from the calibrated ensemble mean. Evaluation uses identical held-out prompts and a Figure 2: Fixed-seed synthetic stress test. Left: for ρ = 0 .65 , solid curves are Monte Carlo means of max k≤K ¯ek                      

> and dashed curves are √2vlog K. Right: one noisy anchor inflates projected variance by approximately τ2, while the cross-covariance from independent anchors remains near the true value. Because the data are generated from the assumed Gaussian model, this is an implementation and assumption stress test rather than real-model validation.
> Experimental unit disagreement −random Seed 1 +0 .035
> Seed 2 +0 .033
> Seed 3 +0 .002
> Mean ±SE +0 .023 ±0.011
> 95% tinterval [−0.023 ,0.069]
> Exact two-sided p0.250
> Table 4: Seed-level DPO pilot. All three estimates are positive, but the interval is too wide to establish either a reliable improvement or practical equivalence. Prompts are repeated measurements within a trained model and are not treated as independent experimental units.

held-out judge. The full acquisition protocol and the additional matching controls originally speci-fied for a confirmatory study appear in Appendix H. Across three paired training seeds and 120 eval-uation prompts, the held-out-score differences are 

0.035 , 0.033 , and 0.002 . Their mean is 0.023 with standard error 0.011 . The exact sign-flip test gives one-sided p = 0 .125 and two-sided p = 0 .250 ;the previously reported p = 0 .13 was the rounded one-sided value. A t interval with two degrees of freedom is [−0.023 , 0.069] . The exploratory three-seed DPO pilot is summarized in Table 4. The pilot yields no statistically reliable evidence that high-disagreement selection improves transfer at this scale. It also does not show that the inter-vention has no practically meaningful effect. The pooled-prompt analysis reported p = 0 .41 , but it is secondary because prompts sharing a trained model are not independent experimental units. A confir-matory negative result would require a predeclared smallest effect of interest, an equivalence test, and a seed count chosen by power analysis. Appendix J develops the possible interpretations without treat-ing planned controls as completed results. The accompanying seed-summary artifact records the three values and the exact analysis; candidate-level and training logs were not present in the supplied artifact and remain necessary for full reproduction. 

H Disagreement-Selection Protocol 

The intervention is calibrated disagreement selec-tion. At each round, the current generator samples at least two responses for every prompt under a fixed decoding configuration. Each training judge scores the same responses, and all transformations that place those scores on a common scale are fitted on a calibration split disjoint from prompt selection, policy training, and final evaluation. Reusing the acquisition or evaluation prompts for calibration would allow the score mapping itself to absorb part of the intervention. For response ak to prompt x, the algorithm com-putes the calibrated disagreement in Equation (10). The prompt-level acquisition score is the average of this quantity across its Kr sampled responses. Averaging avoids making the acquisition decision depend on one anomalous sample, while keeping the response-level scores available for diagnostic analysis. The disagreement arm selects prompts from a prespecified top quantile. The random arm draws a size-matched subset from the same eligible pool, and the matched controls draw from that pool subject to the constraints in Table 6. Preference construction is held fixed after acqui-sition. The calibrated ensemble mean labels each response pair, a prespecified margin removes ties and near-ties, and resampling restores the same Algorithm 1 Calibrated disagreement-selection DPO arm 

Require: initial policy πθ0 ; prompt pool Xtrain 

Require: calibrated judges 1, . . . , J ; rounds T ;candidates per prompt Kr

Require: pairs per round M ; selection rule S 

> 1:

set θ ← θ0 

> 2:

for t = 1 , . . . , T do  

> 3:

sample Kr responses per prompt using the fixed decoding configuration  

> 4:

compute calibrated judge scores and per-prompt disagreement bDt(x) 

> 5:

select exactly M preference pairs according to S and its matching constraints  

> 6:

label each pair by the calibrated ensemble mean  

> 7:

discard pairs below the tie margin and re-sample to retain M pairs  

> 8:

update θ with the fixed DPO objective, ref-erence model, and optimizer schedule  

> 9:

end for  

> 10:

return final policy πθ

number of retained pairs in every arm. Thus the intended intervention is the distribution of prompts entering preference construction, not the number of labels, the confidence of those labels, or the amount of optimization. In later rounds, candidates are gen-erated by the current policy rather than the initial checkpoint, so the acquisition rule is evaluated un-der the distribution shift it helps create. The random comparison is the minimum causal control. It measures the effect of performing the same amount of preference optimization without targeting disagreement. Pair counts, generated to-kens, judge calls, DPO steps, decoding settings, and tie-handling rules must be identical. Otherwise, an apparent acquisition gain could be explained by a larger data or compute budget. Length matching addresses a more specific alter-native. High-disagreement prompts or responses may be longer, more likely to reach truncation lim-its, or more likely to elicit verbose outputs. Match-ing prompt and response-length distributions tests whether the result is caused by those properties rather than evaluator uncertainty. Initial-reward matching distinguishes disagreement from ordinary hard-example mining: the control should reproduce the initial ensemble-score distribution without con-ditioning on cross-judge spread. Update-norm matching addresses the possibility that selected examples merely induce larger opti-mization steps. It matches either gradient norms during training or the resulting parameter displace-ment under a declared convention. Finally, compar-ing mean aggregation with a minimum or another conservative rule asks whether any benefit is spe-cific to the mean rather than to the selected data. These controls isolate different mechanisms and are not interchangeable. Only the random comparison is present in the supplied pilot outputs. The length-, reward-, and update-norm-matched arms and the conservative-aggregation comparison therefore remain require-ments for a confirmatory study. They are retained here as part of the full experimental design, not presented as completed evidence. 

I Experimental Design and Reporting Requirements 

The intended unit of randomization is the training seed. Each seed initializes all arms from the same checkpoint and uses identical train, calibration, and evaluation splits. Randomness in candidate sam-pling, pair construction, data ordering, and opti-mization should be paired where doing so does not leak the acquisition decision. Across arms, the number of preference pairs, DPO steps, generated tokens, and judge queries must be matched unless a separate cost-normalized comparison is explicitly reported. This distinction determines the statistical analy-sis. Evaluation prompts are repeated measurements within a trained policy, not independent replica-tions of training. Seed-level paired differences are therefore the primary experimental units. Prompt bootstrap or permutation intervals can describe un-certainty conditional on the trained policies, but they cannot replace inference across independently trained seeds. Hyperparameters and stopping rules must be selected without examining the final paired outcomes. For reproducibility, the minimum in-formation that must be reported for the generator, decoding procedure, judges, DPO configuration, selection procedure, evaluation protocol, and sta-tistical analysis is summarized in Table 5. The checklist specifies the required fields, while the archival configuration should provide the actual values for each field. The primary outcome should be selected-response target quality, accompanied by the train-ing ensemble score and the proxy–anchor gap. Re-Component Required specification Reason Generator checkpoint hash, tokenizer, chat template prevents model ambiguity Decoding temperature, top-p, max tokens, stop strings controls the candidate distribution Judges checkpoint hashes, calibration split, score transform makes aggregation interpretable DPO reference model, β, optimizer, LR, batch size, epochs makes training reproducible Selection acquisition statistic, quantile, tie margin, resampling isolates the intervention Evaluation independent anchors, verifiable metrics, prompt split limits circular validation Statistics seed-level test, interval, equivalence margin, correction avoids pseudo-replication 

Table 5: Minimum information required for a reproducible implementation. A checklist is not a substitute for reporting the actual values; every entry must be instantiated in the archival configuration. 

porting all three distinguishes an intervention that genuinely improves external quality from one that merely increases the score of the evaluators used to generate its labels. When candidates are retained, the analysis should also report regret relative to the best candidate under the external anchor, matching the quantity in Theorem 6. A held-out judge is itself imperfect and should not be described as ground truth. Verifiable math-ematical answers, unit-tested executable code, ex-act structured-output checks, or other task-specific validators provide scalable anchors when human evaluation is unavailable. RewardBench-style pref-erence triples and JudgeBench-style correctness pairs can complement these outcomes because they probe different evaluator failures (Lambert et al., 2025; Tan et al., 2025). Static benchmark accu-racy nevertheless cannot replace evaluation of the optimized policy’s own generations, where the dis-tribution shift induced by search or DPO is present. 

I.1 Evaluation across judge and generator families 

The two-judge pilot cannot separate the effect of adding a member from the identity of the mem-ber added. A confirmatory matrix should therefore vary ensemble size and the source of diversity. At minimum, it should distinguish members that share a pretrained checkpoint but use different reward-model fine-tuning seeds, members with different pretraining seeds, and members from different ar-chitectures or providers. The relevant comparison is measured error covariance on the policy’s candi-date distribution, not the nominal category alone. The generator side should vary both model fam-ily and search pressure. For best-of-K audits, the same base candidates should be reused across nested budgets whenever possible, so changes with 

K are not confounded by independent sampling noise. For trained policies, evaluation should in-clude the initial generator and every final arm under identical decoding. Reporting J ∈ { 1, 2, 4, . . . }

and several K values permits direct comparison of nominal ensemble size, effective size, and the search budget that acts on the residual projected error. Every judge subset must be calibrated without access to its test responses. Covariance, disagree-ment, external-anchor error, and judge-call cost should be reported for each subset. This design can reveal whether cross-family diversity genuinely re-duces the aggregation direction or merely increases orthogonal disagreement. It also prevents one favor-able pair of judges from being treated as evidence for a general ensemble-size law. 

I.2 Diagnostics connecting acquisition to error 

The first diagnostic plots calibrated disagreement against error under an independent anchor. In addition to a correlation coefficient, it should display the full joint distribution and the low-disagreement, high-error quadrant that exposes common-mode failures. Stratification by prompt length, response length, task, and initial ensemble score tests whether the acquisition statistic is acting as a proxy for a simpler observable property. The second diagnostic compares the projected covariance in Equation (8) with selected-response overstatement across judge subsets and search bud-gets. The unit of analysis and uncertainty interval must be declared: prompt-level intervals should be clustered by prompt, while comparisons be-tween trained policies must retain seed-level repli-cation. A third calibration diagnostic should com-pare raw and calibrated score distributions, because a disagreement trend that disappears after placing judges on a common scale is a units artifact rather than evidence of epistemic diversity. All diagnostics should report judge calls, gener-ated tokens, and wall-clock or accelerator cost. A method that reduces error only by multiplying eval-uator cost may still be useful, but its advantage is Comparison Variable isolated Must be matched Interpretation if tied Disagreement vs. random acquisition rule pairs, tokens, judge calls no detected acquisition benefit Disagreement vs. length-matched verbosity or truncation prompt and response length apparent gain may be length-driven Disagreement vs. reward-matched initial difficulty initial ensemble score apparent gain may be hard-example mining Disagreement vs. norm-matched update magnitude gradient or parameter norm apparent gain may be step-size driven Mean vs. minimum ensemble aggregation rule selected data and budget tests a conservative reward baseline 

Table 6: Prespecified controls for attributing an improvement to calibrated disagreement selection. The current pilot executes only the first row; the table defines the complete confirmatory design and does not report additional results. 

different from a covariance-efficient ensemble. Di-agnostic plots are mechanism checks; they do not replace the primary external-quality comparison. 

J Interpreting the DPO Pilot 

The three seed-level differences are positive, but their interpretation is constrained by the size of the experiment. The mean difference of 0.023 

is a point estimate, not evidence that the acqui-sition rule reliably improves transfer. The t interval crosses zero and includes effects that would be practically meaningful in either direction, while the exact two-sided randomization test has only four attainable levels below one. Conversely, fail-ure to reject zero is not evidence that the methods are equivalent. An equivalence claim would re-quire a prespecified smallest effect of interest and an interval lying entirely inside the corresponding equivalence region. The result is compatible with the covariance anal-ysis but is not predicted by it. The theory shows that disagreement observes the component orthogonal to mean aggregation. It does not say that exam-ples with large orthogonal error contain no useful training signal. Such examples could still improve calibration, expose ambiguous preferences, diver-sify response styles, or produce harder preference pairs. Whether those benefits transfer to an exter-nal evaluator is an empirical question determined by the data distribution, label mechanism, model capacity, and optimization budget. Several alternative mechanisms remain unre-solved in the current pilot. High-disagreement prompts may be longer or harder, may receive lower initial ensemble scores, or may generate larger DPO updates. A held-out reward model can also share errors with the training judges, which would make transfer under that judge an incomplete measure of common-mode failure. The matched controls and independent anchors specified above are needed to distinguish these possibilities. The defensible conclusion is therefore deliber-ately local: under the reported checkpoint, three-round DPO budget, acquisition procedure, and three paired seeds, the experiment does not provide statistically reliable evidence that disagreement se-lection improves held-out judge score. It neither establishes a benefit nor rules out a practically im-portant one, and it does not support a universal claim about disagreement-based data selection. 

K Claim Boundaries and Failures 

The formal claim is deliberately conditional. Under calibrated scores, a declared candidate distribution, and a joint sub-Gaussian error proxy, the error pro-jected onto a fixed aggregation direction controls selected-response overstatement and target-quality regret. Covariance alone does not imply the re-quired tail condition. Heavy-tailed or adversarially dependent errors may make a covariance plug-in severely optimistic even when the second moment is estimated accurately. The empirical curves in Table 3 must therefore remain working-model di-agnostics unless the proxy matrix or tail condition is independently justified. Finite search is another substantive boundary. The union-bound argument allows dependence among the K candidate errors. Corollary 8 also allows proposal distributions to react predictably to earlier evaluator outputs, but only when the pro-jected error remains conditionally centered and sub-Gaussian after conditioning on that history. Re-peated policy training can invalidate precisely this condition by moving toward regions in which cal-ibration fails. The corollary is therefore a finite adaptive-search result, not a certificate for unre-stricted policy–evaluator co-adaptation. The primary structural failure is a response-dependent common error. If every judge rewards the same spurious feature, the ensemble can agree confidently while assigning the wrong ordering to candidates. Proposition 4 shows that the re-sulting common mode cannot be recovered from judge scores alone without additional structure. A prompt-only calibration offset is different: it changes absolute overstatement but cancels from within-prompt selection. Keeping these notions separate avoids attributing an optimization failure to a constant that search cannot exploit. Score calibration introduces a second boundary. Reward models can differ in offset, scale, nonlin-earity, and saturation. Without a common interval interpretation, one judge can dominate the mean and disagreement can reflect units rather than uncer-tainty. Global calibration also does not guarantee that judge-specific prompt offsets vanish, which is why Proposition 3 retains the ∥P b∥2 term. Cali-bration must be audited on held-out data and, when possible, by task and score region rather than only in aggregate. The external quality anchor is not exempt from evaluator error. A single held-out reward model can share training data, architecture, style pref-erences, or blind spots with the training ensem-ble. Even independent anchor noise contributes the rank-one term in Proposition 9; correlated an-chor noise can be more difficult to separate. The two-anchor correction is valid only under its condi-tional independence assumptions. Closely related language models should not be called independent anchors merely because they use different check-point names. Selection itself induces distribution shift. Prompts selected this way may differ from ran-dom prompts in length, difficulty, topic, adversarial structure, initial reward, or the size of the resulting gradient. If disagreement beats random selection but not a length- or reward-matched control, the appropriate conclusion is that the observed gain is explained by that matched property. Table 6 is designed to separate these mechanisms, but only its random comparison was executed in the supplied pilot. Finally, the analysis does not establish that the ensemble mean is optimal or that disagree-ment selection should improve preference optimiza-tion. Worst-case, uncertainty-weighted, covariance-aware, and latent-confounder-aware objectives re-main competing approaches (Coste et al., 2024; Zhao et al., 2026). The theoretical contribution characterizes a chosen aggregation rule and an iden-tification problem; the empirical pilot tests one acquisition intervention. Neither should be general-ized into a universal ranking of ensemble designs. 

L Statistical Details for the DPO Pilot 

For paired seed differences d =(0 .035 , 0.033 , 0.002) , the sample mean is 

¯d = 0 .02333 , the sample standard deviation is 

0.01850 , and the standard error is 0.01068 . Using 

t0.975 ,2 = 4 .303 gives 

¯d ± t0.975 ,2 SE( d) = [ −0.0226 , 0.0693] .

An exact sign-flip randomization test enumerates the eight possible sign assignments. One assign-ment is at least as large as the observed positive mean, giving one-sided p = 1 /8 = 0 .125 ; two assignments are at least as extreme in absolute value, giving two-sided p = 2 /8 = 0 .250 . With three seeds, exact p-values are necessarily coarse. The prompt-pooled p = 0 .41 is retained only as a secondary descriptive analysis because it treats repeated prompts within a trained model as if they supplied independent training replicates. A confirmatory study should specify a small-est effect of interest before looking at final out-comes. Demonstrating no practically important benefit then requires the confidence interval to fall inside the equivalence region, not merely a failure to reject zero. The pilot interval is too wide for such a conclusion. 

M Artifact Manifest and Model Inventory 

Model inventory Table 7 lists every model with its role and aggregation eligibility. The executed runs loaded checkpoints by repository name with-out pinning immutable revision hashes; the hashes therefore cannot be reconstructed honestly after the fact and are marked as not recorded. A rerun that pins revisions is required before hash-level repro-ducibility can be claimed. 

Aggregation baselines (executed) For a compar-ison of aggregation rules on identical candidate ten-sors, calibration split, test prompts, and search bud-gets, the predeclared baseline set is: each individual judge with any “best single” designation chosen on calibration data only; the uniform mean; min-imum aggregation min j rj ; uncertainty-penalized ID Repository Family Role Eligible for aggregation                                     

> D1OpenAssistant/reward-model-deberta-v3-large-v2 DeBERTa judge yes
> D2OpenAssistant/reward-model-deberta-v3-large DeBERTa judge yes
> D3OpenAssistant/reward-model-deberta-v3-base DeBERTa judge yes
> Gweqweasdas/RM-Gemma-2B Gemma judge yes
> Mweqweasdas/RM-Mistral-7B Mistral judge yes —Ray2333/GRM-Llama3-8B-rewardmodel-ft Llama held-out proxy no —HuggingFaceTB/SmolLM2-360M-Instruct SmolLM generator ——Qwen/Qwen2.5-0.5B-Instruct Qwen generator ——Qwen/Qwen2.5-1.5B-Instruct Qwen generator (§5.3, DPO) —

Table 7: Model inventory. Revision hashes were not pinned by the executed runs and are not recorded; the DeBERTa checkpoints are one family (three checkpoints), so the eligible pool spans three families (DeBERTa, Gemma, Mistral). Panels actually evaluated: {D1}, {D1, D 3}, {D1, D 2}, {D1, D 3, G, M }; an all-subsets design ( J=2 :three DeBERTa-within-family pairs and all seven cross-family pairs; J=4 : the three three-family panels) was not executed. 

aggregation ¯r − λ√D with λ chosen on calibration data only; simplex-constrained covariance weight-ing bw ∈ arg min w≥0,1⊤w=1 w⊤ bΣcal w; and the closest executable confounder-aware aggregation baseline (CARE-SVD) at its public implementation revision. All six are now executed in the all-subset records audit (§5.4) with selected target quality, regret, selected and centered overstatement, dis-agreement, judge calls, and prompt-paired intervals against the uniform mean, released per (panel, K,method) cell in the artifact CSVs. 

Certification protocol (deferred from §5.5). 

For the one predeclared non-degenerate task (GSM8K; exact match is target and anchor 1, so 

η1 ≡ 0 by construction; the held-out GRM-Llama3 reward model is anchor 2), we invoke Theorem 11 on one independent pair per certification prompt (m=80 ; first two candidates in the frozen order), all scales fixed before outcomes were inspected (C1=C2=c=2 , target width 1; δest =δsearch =0 .025 

pointwise, Bonferroni across the 855 -cell family). Reported exactly as observed: the certificate is 

valid but uninformative in all 855 cells . bvs is small (median 0.017 , max 0.27 ) but the estimation correc-tion C1C2

plog(1 /δ est )/2m ≈ 0.61 dominates it, so every Bernstein and Bennett radius hits its deter-ministic range cap and the pass fractions of 1.0 are trivial, not coverage. Reaching bvs-scale precision at these constants needs m ≈ 10 5 pairs: at pa-per scale the certificate’s contribution is the honest sizing formula, not a usable bound (Appendix M). 

Real-task certificate cells Table 8 reports representative certificate cells from the 855 -cell family (all cells share m=80 , C1=C2=c=2 ,target width 1; per-cell values, both radius families, and the Bennett inversion are in 

real_outputs/anchor_ucb_cells.csv ).                                                                                       

> Panel Rule KmbvsvUpt vUsim Bpt
> sTpt
> sBsim
> sTsim
> s
> J=1 (repr.) uniform mean 32 80 0.0165 0.624 1.038 2.0 1.0 2.0 1.0
> J=2 (repr.) uniform mean 32 80 0.0142 0.622 1.036 2.0 1.0 2.0 1.0
> J=3 (repr.) uniform mean 32 80 0.0159 0.623 1.038 2.0 1.0 2.0 1.0
> J=4 (repr.) uniform mean 32 80 0.0141 0.621 1.036 2.0 1.0 2.0 1.0
> J=5 uniform mean 280 0.0096 0.617 1.031 2.0 1.0 2.0 1.0
> J=5 uniform mean 880 0.0096 0.617 1.031 2.0 1.0 2.0 1.0
> J=5 uniform mean 32 80 0.0096 0.617 1.031 2.0 1.0 2.0 1.0

Table 8: Representative anchor-UCB certificate cells (Bs: selected-error radius, capped at C1=2 ; Ts: regret radius, capped at the target width 1; pt/sim: pointwise 

δest =δsearch =0 .025 vs. Bonferroni-simultaneous). The estimation correction C1C2

plog(1 /δ est )/2m ≈ 0.61 

dominates bvs at m=80 , so all 855 cells are range-capped; Bennett radii equal Bernstein radii at these constants after capping. 

No cell is favorable: bvs ∈ [0 .009 , 0.27] (median 

0.017 ) is dominated by the m=80 estimation correction, so every pointwise and simultaneous radius—Bernstein and Bennett alike—is capped at its deterministic range bound in all 855 cells. The pass fractions of 1.0 are trivial consequences of the caps, not coverage. 

N Supplementary Figures 

Figure 3 visualizes the corresponding selected-quality estimates and prompt-paired bootstrap in-tervals. Figure 4 shows the corresponding target-regret comparison. Figure 5 shows the corresponding seed-level dif-ferences and their uncertainty interval. Figure 3: Aggregation comparison on selected target quality for the largest eligible panel ( J = 5 ) and search budget (K = 32 ). Points show mean selected target quality and horizontal bars show prompt-paired bootstrap 95% intervals over the 120 locked test prompts. 

Figure 4: Aggregation comparison on target regret for the largest eligible panel ( J = 5 ) and search budget ( K = 32 ). Points show mean target regret and horizontal bars show prompt-paired bootstrap 95% intervals over the 120 locked test prompts. Figure 5: Three-seed DPO pilot comparing disagreement selection with random selection. Points show the seed-level differences, and the diamond shows the mean with its 95% t interval. The interval crosses zero, so the pilot does not establish a reliable improvement or practical equivalence.