Title: Innovative Tooth Segmentation Using Hierarchical Features and Bidirectional Sequence Modeling

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2602.21712v1

Published Time: Thu, 26 Feb 2026 01:40:09 GMT

Number of Pages: 35

Markdown Content:
# Innovative Tooth Segmentation Using Hierarchical Features and Bidirectional Sequence Modeling 

Xinxin Zhao a, Jian Jiang b,c , Yan Tian a,f,i, ∗, Liqin Wu d, Zhaocheng Xu e, Teddy Yang g,Yunuo Zou h, Xun Wang a

> a

School of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang Gongshang University, 310018, Hangzhou, China 

> b

School of Computer and Cyber Sciences, Communication University of China, 100024, Beijing, China 

> c

Center of Big Data, China Digital Culture Group Co., Ltd, 100176, Beijing, China 

> d

Department of Stomatology, Tongxiang Hospital of Traditional Chinese Medicine, 100024, Tongxiang, China 

> e

School of Mathematical and Computational Sciences, Massey University, 100024, Auckland, New Zealand 

> f

Shining3D Tech Co., Ltd., 311258, Hangzhou, China 

> g

Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery at the Faculty of Dentistry,University of Hong Kong, 999077, Hong Kong, China 

> h

School of Art Design, Zhejiang Gongshang University, 310018, Hangzhou, China 

> i

Zhejiang Key Laboratory of Big Data and Future E-Commerce Technology, 310018, Hangzhou, China 

Abstract 

Tooth image segmentation is a cornerstone of dental digitization. However, traditional image encoders relying on fixed-resolution feature maps often lead to discontinuous segmentation and poor discrimination between target regions and background, due to insu ffi cient modeling of environmental and global context. Moreover, transformer-based self-attention introduces substantial computational overhead because of its quadratic complexity (O(n²)), making it ine ffi cient for high-resolution dental images. To address these challenges, we introduce a three-stage encoder with hierarchical feature repre-sentation to capture scale-adaptive information in dental images. By jointly leveraging low-level details and high-level semantics through cross-scale feature fusion, the model eff ectively preserves fine structural information while maintaining strong contextual 

> ⋆

This work was supported by the Zhejiang Province Natural Science Foundation (No. LZ24F020001), the Opening Foundation of the Tongxiang Institute of General Artificial Intelligence (No. TAGI2-B-2024-0009), and the State Key Laboratory of Advanced Medical Materials and Devices (No. SQ2022SKL01089-2025-14). ∗Corresponding author 

Email address: tianyan@zjgsu.edu.cn (Yan Tian) 

> 1

Xinxin Zhao and Jian Jiang contributed equally to this work. 

> arXiv:2602.21712v1 [cs.CV] 25 Feb 2026

awareness. Furthermore, a bidirectional sequence modeling strategy is incorporated to enhance global spatial context understanding without incurring high computational cost. We validate our method on two dental datasets, with experimental results demon-strating its superiority over existing approaches. On the OralVision dataset, our model achieves a 1.1% improvement in mean intersection over union (mIoU). 

Keywords: Image Segmentation, Digital Dentistry, Linear Attention Mechanism, Deep Learning, Computer Vision 

1. Introduction 

Tooth segmentation, a specialized task in pattern recognition, aims to identify and delineate individual teeth and related anatomical structures from dental images. It holds significant importance in the realm of dental digitization, with possible uses such as di-agnosing dental diseases [1], tracking the progress of treatments [2, 3], and conducting image analysis [4]. Recently, foundation segmentation models such as the Segment Anything Model (SAM) [5] have shown promising generalization capabilities, moti-vating their exploration in dental image segmentation. Several recent segmentation approaches [6, 7] have focused on improving gener-alization and e ffi ciency in practical applications. However, these methods still face limitations in capturing multi-scale and global contextual information, which hampers their ability to comprehensively model fine-grained details and large-scale contextual relationships. This limitation becomes particularly evident when handling complex dental images with noise, where the quality of the generated segmentation masks is often compromised. Earlier studies [8] have primarily focused on the Transformer framework and its self-attention mechanism. However, the quadratic computational complexity of Trans-formers significantly limits their ability to e ffi ciently process high-resolution dental images. Nevertheless, existing high-quality segmentation methods [9, 10] often su ff er from slow inference speed and high computational overhead. Therefore, our work aims 2to develop a segmentation algorithm that achieves high segmentation quality while sig-nificantly improving e ffi ciency. Inspired by the linear-complexity sequence modeling capability of Mamba [11] and the strong mask quality and boundary-aware design of HQ-SAM [12], this study aims to develop an e ffi cient and high-quality framework tailored for dental image seg-mentation. Mamba’s linear computational complexity in sequence modeling makes it a promising candidate for capturing long-range dependencies with reduced computa-tional cost. However, directly adopting existing Mamba-based designs in the visual domain does not adequately address the requirements of dental image segmentation, where precise boundary delineation and multi-scale structural details are critical. HQ-SAM further demonstrates the e ff ectiveness of enhancing mask quality in SAM-based frameworks by emphasizing fine-grained structures. Nevertheless, as illustrated in Fig. 1, although HQ-SAM produces high-quality masks, it still exhibits blurry bound-aries in certain dental scenarios and su ff ers from limited inference e ffi ciency at high resolutions. In this study, we extend the SAM framework toward the dental domain by designing a task-oriented image encoder that emphasizes both segmentation quality and compu-tational e ffi ciency. The proposed framework introduces a hierarchical representation strategy to well capture the multi-scale characteristics of dental images, enabling more accurate delineation of fine anatomical structures. To further enhance global contex-tual understanding, a bidirectional sequence block (BSB) is incorporated into the en-coder, allowing information to be aggregated from complementary spatial directions. Compared with HQ-SAM (as shown in Fig. 1), this design improves the perception of complex oral environments while maintaining e ffi cient inference. Unlike previous bidirectional Mamba designs [13, 14], our BSB is task-aware and optimized for high-resolution dental image segmentation through lightweight integration. A more in-depth explanation of our approach can be found in Fig. 2. 3Image   

> Prompt Encoder
> Mask
> Decoder
> high quality
> Ours
> MBConv. MBConv. BSB

.  

> Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3
> Prompt
> Fusion
> Layer
> Image
> Prompt Encoder
> Image Encoder
> Mask
> Decoder
> medium quality
> Refinement
> Module

.

HQ-SAM 

Ours 

> Prompt
> Image Encoder

Figure 1: For the dental segmentation dataset, we conducted a comprehensive comparison between our method and the advanced segmentation approach HQ-SAM in terms of architectural design. Across image processing tasks with varying resolutions, our method leverages optimized feature extraction strategies and e ffi cient architectural design to maintain low latency while delivering high-quality segmentation results. The blue area represents the mask generated after image segmentation. The white dashed box visually highlights the di ff erences between the segmentation masks generated by our method and those produced by HQ-SAM. 

The main contributions of this paper are outlined below: 

• An e ff ective and e ffi cient dental image segmentation framework is proposed, which achieves high-quality and fine-grained segmentation by enhancing multi-scale representation and contextual modeling, demonstrating superior perfor-mance on complex dental images. 

• A hierarchical feature representation strategy is employed to enable e ff ective multi-scale feature extraction and fusion, which strengthens environmental per-ception and improves segmentation accuracy, particularly in complex dental imag-ing scenarios. 

• A Mamba-based image encoder is developed, integrating a bidirectional sequence block for position-aware sequence modeling, and utilizing Mamba’s selective mechanism to reduce computational complexity while enabling multi-scale fea-ture extraction. 4The experimental results on the dental segmentation dataset (DSD) [15] and OralVi-sion [16] dataset demonstrate that our method e ff ectively generates high-quality seg-mentation masks while e ffi ciently handling the challenges posed by high-resolution input images. Even at higher image resolutions, our approach maintains lower latency compared to other methods, showcasing the balance between performance and e ffi -ciency. 

2. Related Work 

We provide a concise overview of recent studies on high-quality segmentation, zero-shot image segmentation, linear attention models, and multi-scale feature extrac-tion. 

2.1. High-quality Segmentation 

High-quality image segmentation aims to precisely delineate specific regions within an image [17]. The use of high-quality segmentation techniques has become prevalent across a range of applications, including semantic segmentation [18], instance seg-mentation [19], and panoptic segmentation [20], as shown in numerous studies [21]. Traditional approaches [22], especially those leveraging convolutional neural networks (CNNs), have been widely adopted. Nevertheless, these strategies frequently encounter challenges in e ff ectively capturing long-range dependencies and contextual nuances, prompting researchers to investigate more advanced architectures. The introduction of Transformers provided a new approach to addressing these challenges. Mask Trans-former [23] has successfully employed Transformer-based architectures to address the limitations of CNNs in high-quality segmentation tasks. For instance, Segmenter [24] proposed a Transformer architecture specifically designed for semantic segmentation. By employing an e ff ective self-attention mechanism and positional encoding, it sig-nificantly enhances the accuracy and e ffi ciency of semantic segmentation. To further 5unify the image segmentation framework, Mask2Former [23] introduced a masked-attention mechanism. This approach processes image regions selectively and combines a shared encoder with task-specific decoders to handle various segmentation tasks, sub-stantially improving segmentation precision. Moreover, the growing demand for real-time, high-quality segmentation on mobile devices has brought increased attention to mobile segmentation. MobileFormer [25] combines the lightweight MobileNet with Transformer architecture, proposing an e ffi cient model tailored for high-quality image segmentation tasks on mobile devices. However, these methods overlook the issue that the self-attention mechanism of Transformers has high computational complexity in long-sequence tasks, particularly in high-resolution images. 

2.2. Zero-shot Image Segmentation 

Zero-shot image segmentation seeks to accurately segment specific categories within an image without having seen samples of these categories during training. Liang et al. [9] have leveraged large-scale image-text pairs for pre-training, endowing models with strong image understanding and text alignment capabilities, thereby enhancing their ability to segment unseen categories. The SAM [5] further advances this capa-bility by utilizing large-scale pre-training, multimodal learning, contrastive learning, and flexible input prompts, achieving zero-shot segmentation on unseen images. Some studies [12, 10] have built upon SAM as a foundational model to enhance zero-shot segmentation in specific domains. For example, Ma et al. proposed MedSAM [10], which maintains the core SAM architecture but is trained on an extensive medical im-age dataset. They implemented necessary modifications and enhancements to enable zero-shot performance in medical image segmentation tasks. To enhance environmen-tal perception and adapt to new, unseen tasks and complex environments, zero-shot learning enables models to generalize from previously acquired knowledge. This ca-pability helps models understand and process diverse inputs without requiring direct exposure to the specific data, thereby improving performance in challenging scenarios. 62.3. Linear Attention Model 

The emergence of the linear attention model mainly tackles the shortcomings of conventional attention models, such as those found in Transformers, in terms of com-putational complexity and memory usage. Mamba [26] and RWKV [27, 28] present advantages over Transformers in computational e ffi ciency and memory consumption. Mamba achieves reduced computational complexity by optimizing the attention mech-anism, while RWKV significantly reduces memory usage by incorporating RNN char-acteristics and improving memory management. Duan et al. [28] applied RWKV to the visual domain, where VRWKV outperformed ViT [8] in image processing performance and demonstrated significantly faster speeds and lower memory usage when handling high-resolution inputs. Another significant contribution is vision mamba (Vim) [11], which integrates bidirectional SSM [29] for comprehensive global visual context mod-eling, along with position embeddings that facilitate a position-aware interpretation of visuals. Nonetheless, these methods often overlook the importance of multi-scale feature representation in visual tasks. 

2.4. Multi-scale Feature Extraction 

Multi-scale feature extraction plays a crucial role in dense prediction tasks by si-multaneously capturing fine-grained details and global contextual information. Tradi-tional convolutional networks often face a trade-o ff between accuracy and e ffi ciency when handling multi-scale features. To overcome this limitation, recent studies have extensively explored hybrid architectures and e ffi cient feature fusion mechanisms. ViT-CoMer [30] embeds convolutional modules into a Transformer-based architecture, achiev-ing more e ff ective multi-scale feature interaction while preserving the advantage of a global receptive field. In the domains of remote sensing and geological hazard analysis, multi-scale attention mechanisms have also demonstrated strong segmentation perfor-mance under complex textures. Cai et al. [31] and Yang et al. [32] proposed attention-based multi-scale modeling approaches that significantly enhance the model’s ability to 7Bidirectional    

> Sequence Block(BSB)
> Silu
> Silu
> 1D
> Conv.
> Linear
> Projection
> Linear
> Projection
> Forward
> SSM
> Backward
> SSM
> Linear
> Projection
> Image Encoder
> M
> Head Block
> Stage 1
> Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3
> Residual
> Networks BSB
> Prompt
> Encoder

.

> Fusion
> Layer  Token to Image
> Attention
> Output
> Token
> Mask Feat.
> Mask Decoder
> MLP
> Stem
> Conv.
> 3x3
> Conv.
> 3x3
> LN
> GELU
> Conv.1x1
> Conv.1x1
> GELU
> DWConv. 3x3
> LN
> GELU
> Conv.1x1
> Conv.1x1
> GELU
> DWConv. 3x3
> Prompt
> Transposed
> Convolution
> x
> y
> z

Figure 2: Overall structure of the proposed approach. The proposed approach adopts a classic encoder-decoder architecture. First, the input dental images undergo a three-stage downsampling process to capture image features at multiple scales. These extracted features are then combined with prompt vectors created by the prompt encoder and processed together by the mask decoder to generate segmentation masks that correspond to the original images. In BSB, the sigmoid linear unit (Silu) activation function combines the smoothness of the sigmoid with a linear component to enhance feature representation. The blue region indicates the mask generated following the image segmentation process. 

perceive subtle regional di ff erences in geological images. In addition, Jiang et al. [33] and Li et al. [34] designed multi-scale fusion strategies for small object detection and scene parsing, respectively, which improved model performance in high-resolution and noisy environments. Despite the remarkable progress achieved in these areas, most ex-isting methods remain focused on natural or remote sensing images. There is still a lack of targeted exploration in specialized domains such as dental imagery, where both structural detail and inference e ffi ciency are critical. 

3. Our Approach 

We propose a dental image segmentation method based on the SAM model archi-tecture. This method generates corresponding segmentation masks by inputting dental images along with point or box prompts. As shown in Fig. 2, our method employs a classical encoder-decoder framework. Initially, dental images are processed through a 8three-stage downsampling pipeline in the encoder. In the third stage, a bidirectional sequence block performs forward and backward scanning over patch blocks to capture global contextual features. These extracted features are then integrated with prompt embeddings produced by the prompt encoder. The integrated information is then pro-cessed by the mask decoder, producing segmentation masks for the input images. 

3.1. Preliminaries: State Space Model 

State space models (SSM) were originally designed to handle time series or data with causal relationships, which makes their direct application to 2D image data non-trivial. In this case, images are typically unrolled into sequences, and scanning ensures that all pixel information is captured, enabling the conversion of spatial features into visual features. The SSM is a framework for describing time series data, commonly used for handling dynamic systems and time-varying processes. SSM illustrates how system states change over time and the connection between the observed data and these states. The model is represented by a hidden latent state h(t) ∈ RN , mapping a one-dimensional sequence x(t) ∈ R 7 → y(t) ∈ R. This process can be expressed by the following linear ordinary di ff erential equations: 

h′(t) = Ah (t) + Bx (t), (1) 

y(t) = Ch (t) + Dx (t). (2) where the parameter matrices A ∈ RN×N , B ∈ RN×1, C ∈ R1×N , and D ∈ R define the relationships between the system’s states, inputs, and outputs. Within the Mamba framework, the continuous-time state space model is discretized by introducing a sampling interval ∆t. Specifically, the continuous parameters A and B

are transformed into their discrete counterparts Ad and Bd through the zero-order hold 9(ZOH) method: 

Ad = exp( A∆t), (3) 

Bd =

Z ∆t

> 0

exp( Aτ) dτ

!

B. (4) The discretized representation of this system can be stated as: 

ht = Adht−1 + Bdxt, (5) 

yt = Ch t + Dx t. (6) Mamba, evolving from the standard SSM, modifies the original linear constraints by rendering β and θ contingent on the input. This adaptation allows Mamba to up-hold linear computational complexity throughout the forward propagation phase. For simplicity and computational e ffi ciency, we set D = 0 in our implementation. 

3.2. The bidirectional sequence block 

Transformer-based image segmentation methods require processing the entire im-age representation in each layer to capture global attention, which significantly in-creases the computational burden. Moreover, when dealing with high-resolution im-ages, the input must be divided into more patches, leading to a substantial increase in sequence length and resulting in a computational complexity of O(n2). To reduce computational costs, we draw inspiration from the Mamba framework. While vanilla Mamba blocks reduce computational complexity, their unidirectional scanning mech-anism may limit the propagation of early visual information. Additionally, Mamba’s position-awareness capability in vision tasks is limited. To address these issues, we introduce a bidirectional sequence block into the Mamba-based architecture, enabling the consideration of both forward and backward visual contexts. As shown in Fig. 3, we illustrate the di ff erences in scanning sequences be-10 (a)Vanilla Mamba Block (b)The Bidirectional Sequence Block Figure 3: Illustration of the comparison between the vanilla mamba block and the bidirectional se-quence block. (a) Vanilla mamba blocks are scanned in a sequential order from start to finish. (b) The bidirectional sequence module scans in a forward and backward order. The green and purple dots represent patch blocks at di ff erent positions, while the arrows in di ff erent colors indicate various scanning orders. 

tween the two methods. Our approach performs both forward and backward scan-ning simultaneously and integrates the outputs, thereby capturing more comprehensive contextual information from the image. Algorithm 1 summarizes the implementation process of the bidirectional sequence block. In particular, the input sequence Pl−1 is first normalized to obtain P′

> l−1

. From this normalized representation, two branches are derived: one projected into x, which is further processed by a one-dimensional convolution and nonlinearity, and the other projected into y, which serves as a gating signal. Meanwhile, we explicitly define z

which represents the residual connection carried from the block input. The processed 

x is passed through forward and backward SSMs to obtain k′ 

> forward

and k′

> backward

. These are modulated by the gate from y, fused, and finally added to the residual z to produce the updated sequence: 

Pl = BSB( Pl−1) + z, (7) where BSB is the bidirectional sequence block, with l indicating the layer number. The BSB replaces the quadratic self-attention with a linear-complexity state-space model and introduces two direction-specific gating mechanisms to adaptively fuse the 11 Algorithm 1: BSB Process  

> 1

Input: token sequence Pl−1; 

> 2

Output: token sequence Pl; 

> 3

Definition: pi denotes the learnable continuous-time state parameter;  

> 4

P′ 

> l−1

= Norm( Pl−1);  

> 5

x = Linear x(P′

> l−1

);  

> 6

y = Linear y(P′

> l−1

);  

> 7

z = Pl−1; 

> 8

for i ∈ { forward , backward } do  

> 9

x′ 

> i

= SiLU(Conv1d i(x));  

> 10

Bi = Linear Bi (x′ 

> i

);  

> 11

Ci = Linear Ci (x′ 

> i

);  

> 12

∆i = log(1 + exp(Linear ∆ 

> i

(x′ 

> i

) + pi));  

> 13

Ai = ∆ i ⊗ pi; 

> 14

Bi = ∆ i ⊗ Bi; 

> 15

ki = SSM( Ai, Bi, Ci)( x′ 

> i

);  

> 16

end  

> 17

gforward = SiLU(Linear g

> fwd

(y));  

> 18

gbackward = SiLU(Linear g

> bwd

(y));  

> 19

k′ 

> forward

= kforward ⊙ gforward ; 

> 20

k′ 

> backward

= kbackward ⊙ gbackward ; 

> 21

Pl = Linear( k′ 

> forward

+ k′

> backward

) + z;

forward and backward branches. Unlike a shared modulation, the separate gates gforward 

and gbackward reweight their respective branches independently, which helps emphasize structure-relevant features while reducing redundant responses. This design contributes to more stable feature modeling and improved precision in fine-grained dental segmen-tation. To mitigate the limitations of applying 1D SSMs to 2D data, the BSB operates only on downsampled feature maps with compact spatial size. Combined with lightweight convolution and gated fusion, this design preserves essential spatial dependencies with-out requiring explicit positional encodings. Instead of naïve flattening, the feature map is partitioned into non-overlapping m × n sub-kernels and serialized within each sub-kernel in raster order, which maintains local continuity. Stacked 3 × 3 convolutions, together with pooling and gated fusion, further enlarge the receptive field beyond local neighborhoods, while the bidirectional SSM stage propagates longer-range dependen-12 cies. 

2D to 1D conversion. To transform a 2D feature map into a 1D sequence, we first partition the feature map into non-overlapping sub-kernels of size m × n. Within each sub-kernel, pixels are serialized in raster order, preserving local continuity and avoiding the loss of neighborhood information caused by naïve flattening. Each seri-alized sequence is then processed by the state-space model in both forward and back-ward directions. The bidirectional scan enables tokens to aggregate context from both preceding and succeeding positions. Finally, pooled sub-kernel representations are ag-gregated to capture global dependencies and unpooled back to the original resolution, ensuring that both local and global spatial contexts are e ff ectively modeled. 

3.3. The E ffi cient Segmentation Model 

In previous research, the lack of e ff ective representation of fine-grained features in complex oral images often led to suboptimal dental image segmentation performance. Moreover, conventional techniques focused mainly on local receptive fields, limiting their ability to grasp long-range dependencies and overarching contextual details. Al-though dividing images into fixed-size patches and using self-attention mechanisms can capture some information, these methods struggle to e ff ectively extract multi-scale features due to the absence of explicit multi-scale modeling. Inspired by the feature pyramid structure, we integrated it into the encoder and uti-lized the richer spatial, texture, and other detailed features generated during encoding to guide finer predictions in the decoding phase. This method tackles the problem of in-formation loss that often arises from depending only on high-level features. Moreover, by incorporating multi-scale features, the model becomes more attuned to segmenta-tion targets within the dental imaging context, greatly boosting its robustness. 

Fusion layer. In the decoder, feature fusion is implemented in a top-down man-ner similar to feature pyramid networks. Specifically, the 16 × stage feature F is first upsampled by a factor of 2 (bilinear interpolation) to match the spatial size of the 8 ×

13 feature Fm f . The two feature maps are then concatenated along the channel dimension, followed by a 1 × 1 convolution to unify the channel width (128 in our implementa-tion). The fused feature is further upsampled by another factor of 2 and concatenated with the 4 × feature Fl f , again reduced by a 1 × 1 convolution to 128 channels. Finally, the fused feature passes through a lightweight refinement block. This hierarchical fu-sion progressively restores spatial resolution while integrating semantic context from deeper stages. To enhance the precision of dental image segmentation, we developed a three-tiered feature pyramid architecture within the image encoder, aiming to enrich visual context and accurately capture intricate low-level details. Initially, the input image I undergoes preliminary feature extraction and downsampling. In the first two stages, we perform 4× and 8 × downsampling to extract low-level features of dental images, defined as: 

Fl f = DownSampling( I), (8) 

Fm f = DownSampling( Fl f ). (9) Both stages utilize convolutional blocks to produce higher-resolution feature maps relative to the 16 × stage. In crafting the convolution module, we take a cue from the ViTamin framework [35], initiating the process with layer normalization (LN) as the foundational element. We start with a 1 × 1 convolution to broaden the channel dimen-sions, which boosts the model’s ability to represent features. Next, a 3 × 3 convolution is implemented for spatial mixing, enhancing the model’s overall global perception. Following that, we apply another 1 × 1 convolution for linear projection, which brings the channels back to their original dimensions. Ultimately, the transformed features are integrated with the input features through element-wise addition, allowing for e ff ective feature fusion while preserving the integrity of the information. In the third stage, we introduce the bidirectional sequence block to obtain global 14 features through 16 × downsampling, defined as: 

F = BSB( Fm f ), (10) where F is the feature map generated at this stage. To enhance the mask characteristics, the decoder integrates low-level features ex-tracted during the initial two stages. The refinement process is carried out using the decoder Φdec and the prompt encoder Φprompt , defined as 

M = Φ dec (F, Fl f , Fm f , Φprompt (p)) , (11) where p represents the input visual prompt. In our setting, each image is provided with one positive point prompt per annotated object and an optional bounding box prompt during training. Positive points are randomly sampled from the interior of the ground-truth mask, while negative points are randomly sampled from the background regions. To e ff ectively merge these low-level features, we employ a fusion layer for e ffi cient feature fusion, enabling precise dental image segmentation. The model is designed to produce multi-scale feature maps rather than depending on a singular scale, thus capturing richer details and significantly enhancing segmen-tation performance. We adopted a combination of softmax cross-entropy and Dice loss. Specifically, the softmax function was applied over all classes, and the Dice loss was computed per class and averaged. This design ensures stable optimization while balancing class imbalance. 

4. Results 

We assess the e ffi cacy of our method and compare it with other approaches on two datasets. 15 4.1. Datasets and Evaluation Criteria 4.1.1. Datasets 

We evaluated an assessment of the suggested image segmentation method using two distinct dental datasets, namely the Dental Segmentation Dataset [15] and the OralVi-sion [16] dataset. The following are the details of two dental datasets. 

Dental Segmentation Dataset [15] comprises a training set of 4900 samples, along with validation and test sets containing 151 samples each. Each sample is accompanied by pixel-level annotations. Each sample is accompanied by pixel-level annotations. In our training pipeline, we did not apply noise or rotation augmentations. We only used standard transformations such as flipping, cropping, and color jittering. 

OralVision [16] consists of intraoral images captured by dental scanning devices, with a resolution of 640 ×480. These images were collected from random patients at dental clinics and were annotated pixel by pixel by six researchers from a university using LabelM. The dental images were categorized into tissue types such as gums, lips, teeth, tongue, and cheeks. Each image contains fine-grained segmentation masks and includes noise such as food debris, dental calculus, implant attachments, and saliva. The OralVision dataset comprises a training set, validation set, and test set with 4000, 120, and 120 samples, respectively. The use of the DSD and OralVision datasets strictly adhered to their respective release terms. For OralVision, written informed consent was obtained from all par-ticipants. All images were fully de-identified prior to annotation: direct identifiers and metadata were removed, and each image was assigned a random code. For both datasets, all segmentation categories are present in both training and testing sets, and the training and testing images come from di ff erent patients, ensuring unbiased evalu-ation and preventing potential data leakage. 16 4.1.2. Evaluation Criteria 

Based on previous image segmentation methods, we utilized mean Intersection over Union (mIoU) and boundary mean IoU (mBIoU) as evaluation metrics. These metrics e ff ectively measure the model’s segmentation performance and boundary pre-cision when handling unseen categories. IoU metrics were computed in a per-class manner and then averaged to obtain mIoU and mBIoU, reflecting performance across all tissue categories. We compute boundary IoU following common practice: for each class, compute the boundary region by extracting the class contour and dilating it by a tolerance t

pixels (we use t = 3). Let Bgt and Bpred be the dilated boundary pixels of ground-truth and prediction respectively; the boundary IoU for the class is IoU boundary = |Bgt ∩

Bpred |/|Bgt ∪ Bpred |.We also report three e ffi ciency metrics: frames per second (FPS), memory usage (Memory), and floating point operations (FLOPs). FPS and memory were measured during inference with a batch size of 1 and an input resolution of 640 ×480. FLOPs were computed with fvcore on an input size of 640 ×480 with a single bounding box prompt, covering both encoder and decoder. 

4.2. Implementation Details 

We conducted experiments on a workstation equipped with an Intel Core i5-13900KF processor (24 cores, base clock 3.5 GHz), 32 GB of RAM, and 4 NVIDIA RTX 4090D GPUs. All models were implemented in PyTorch with cuDNN enabled. Training was performed using 4 GPUs, while inference e ffi ciency metrics (FPS and Memory) were measured on a single RTX 4090D GPU. The training batch sizes were set at 32 for the DSD dataset and 24 for OralVision, using SAM as the core framework. For optimization, the AdamW algorithm was uti-lized, featuring a base learning rate of 6e-5 and a weight decay factor of 0.01. Training was run for up to 45 epochs with early stopping based on validation mIoU (patience 17 = 10). The best checkpoints were reached at 31.8 ± 4.6 epochs on DSD and 29.5 ±

5.2 epochs on OralVision. During testing, we applied test-time augmentation (TTA) consisting of horizontal /vertical flips and rotations. Predictions from augmented inputs were transformed back and averaged at the probability level. To ensure fairness, the same TTA procedure was applied consistently across all compared methods. Normalization was block-specific: LayerNorm (eps = 1e-6) was used in Bidirec-tional SSM blocks, while BatchNorm2d (eps = 1e-5, momentum 0.1) was used in convolutional stems and upsampling layers. Newly added convolutional layers were initialized with Kaiming normal, linear layers with Xavier uniform, and all biases to zero. Dropout ( p = 0.1) was applied in decoder projections, and stochastic depth (drop-path) with maximum rate 0.1 increased linearly. We used softmax cross-entropy combined with a multi-class Dice loss, with label smoothing ε = 0.1. To mitigate class imbalance, class weights were set as wc ∝

(freq c)−0.5 and normalized. At inference, predictions were generated by taking the softmax argmax per pixel without any additional post-processing. During inference, all SAM-based models (including ours) were evaluated with YOLOv10-generated [36] bounding box prompts, using the identical prompts across methods. Non-SAM models (e.g., SegFormer, Swin-Unet, Vim, VRWKV, U-Mamba) operated without prompts. This respects each model’s native setting and ensures a fair comparison under consistent datasets and metrics. To assess robustness and generalizability, we performed five-fold cross-validation within the training set of both datasets, while keeping the o ffi cial validation and test sets strictly held out. In each fold, the training portion was further split into four folds for training and one for validation, and the model was trained and evaluated accord-ingly. Hyperparameters were selected based on cross-validation results, and final per-formance was reported on the o ffi cial test sets only. This ensures that the test data remained completely unseen during training and model selection, avoiding any risk of 18 leakage. 

4.3. Ablation Study 

To assess the contribution of each module, we conducted ablation studies on the dental segmentation dataset to analyze how di ff erent design choices influence segmen-tation performance. 

Backbone. To validate the e ffi cacy of the encoder in our method, we selected the SAM [5] model as the backbone for ablation studies. As a powerful image seg-mentation model, SAM demonstrates exceptional performance in multi-scale feature extraction, providing high-quality image feature representations. In the ablation study, we replaced the feature extraction module in our method with SAM’s encoder while keeping the decoder and prompt encoder modules unchanged. This setup allowed us to analyze the impact of our encoder design and the bidirectional sequence block on the overall segmentation performance. By comparing the experimental results, we analyze the e ff ect of the three-stage feature pyramid structure and the bidirectional sequence block on fine-grained feature extraction and segmentation in complex oral environ-ments.             

> Bidirectional Strategy DSD(mIoU)
> None 89.1 ±0.4 Bidirectional SSM 90.7 ±0.3 Bidirectional SSM +Conv1d 90.9 ±0.3
> Table 1: Ablation study on the bidirectional design. We highlighted our block configuration in blue.

Bidirectional SSM. In the third stage, we replaced the standard module with a Mamba block to assess the performance of the bidirectional sequence block in dental image segmentation tasks. We conducted a comparative analysis of di ff erent strategies, as summarized in Table 1. Specifically, when a standard Mamba block was directly ap-plied, the model achieved an mIoU of 89.1% on the dental segmentation dataset. By incorporating the bidirectional SSM module and 1D convolution separately, the mIoU 19 420 630 840 1050 1260 1470 1680 1890 2100 

> FPS (log)
> Input Image Size
> Ours
> SAM
> HQ-SAM
> EfficientSAM

(a) 0 

> 20
> 40
> 60
> 80
> 100
> mIoU (%)
> w/o LDF
> w/  LDF

(b) 0  

> 20
> 40
> 60
> 80
> 100
> mIoU (%)
> SAM Ours

(c) (d) Figure 4: In (a), we compare the FPS performance of our method with SAM, HQ-SAM, and E ffi cientSAM across di ff erent input image sizes. In (b), we present a quantitative evaluation of the impact of low-level de-tailed feature (LDF) aggregation on the model’s mIoU. In (c), we analyze the comparative mIoU performance of our method and SAM under Gaussian noise conditions (standard deviation of 25). In (d), we illustrate the trend in mIoU variations between our method and SAM under random rotation conditions (angle range from -30° to 30°). 

improved to 90.7% and 90.9%, respectively. This improvement suggests that the bidi-rectional SSM and 1D convolution provide complementary benefits. The bidirectional SSM enhances global contextual aggregation from both scanning directions, while the 1D convolution helps preserve local continuity along the sequence. Based on these results, we adopt the combination of the bidirectional SSM layer and 1D convolution as the final configuration for the Mamba block in the third stage, as it yields the best empirical performance among the evaluated variants. Variant mIoU mBIoU No Gate 90.8 ± 0.3 87.2 ± 0.3 Shared Gate 91.4 ± 0.2 87.9 ± 0.3 Dual Gate (Ours) 91.9 ± 0.2 88.7 ± 0.3 

Table 2: Ablation study on the gating mechanism. Results are reported as mean ± standard deviation across 5 folds. 

The Gating Mechanism. To evaluate the e ff ect of the gating mechanism, we con-ducted ablation experiments on the DSD. Three variants were compared: (1) No Gate ,where forward and backward features are directly summed without gating; (2) Shared Gate , where a single gating signal is applied to both branches; (3) Dual Gate (ours), where two independent gates modulate the forward and backward branches separately. As shown in Table 2, removing the gates leads to a notable drop in both mIoU and 20 mBIoU, while using a shared gate partially alleviates the degradation. The dual-gate design achieves the best performance, suggesting that independent gating of forward and backward branches helps retain salient dependencies while suppressing redundant responses. 

Effi ciency Analysis. As shown in Fig. 4(a), our approach achieves higher e ffi -ciency than the compared methods, which can be attributed to the optimized backbone design. FPS comparisons with SAM, HQ-SAM, and E ffi cientSAM, all of which adopt Transformer-based architectures, indicate that their latency increases quadratically with input resolution. In contrast, our Mamba-based design exhibits approximately linear latency growth with respect to input size, making it more scalable for high-resolution inputs. Approach FPS ↑ Memory(MB) ↓ Flops(G) ↓

MedSAM [10] 28.5 3100 34.2 Adapter-SAM [37] 31.5 3050 33.2 SegFormer [38] 43.1 2620 22.6 Swin-Unet [39] 22.7 3450 47.8 

Ours 52.3 1860 12.5  

> Table 3: Effi ciency comparison of di ff erent methods in terms of FPS, GPU memory usage, and FLOPs on the DSD.

Although some components, like the fusion decoder and bidirectional modeling, are not strictly linear, the linear-time BSB greatly reduces computation. As Table 3 shows, our model achieves the best balance of speed, memory, and complexity, running at 52.3 FPS, faster than Adapter-SAM (31.5 FPS), MedSAM (28.5 FPS), Swin-Unet (22.7 FPS), and SegFormer, while using less GPU memory, highlighting its potential for real-time, resource-limited clinical applications. To analyze computational complexity, we break down FLOPs at 640 ×480 reso-lution (0.31M pixels). As Table 4 shows, the encoder’s third-stage Bidirectional Se-quence Block (BSB) dominates, contributing nearly two-thirds of total FLOPs. Al-21 Module FLOPs (G) Percentage of Total Theoretical Complexity Encoder (Stage 1 & 2) 2.1 16.8% O(N)Encoder (Stage 3 – BSB) 7.8 62.4% O(N)Decoder (Fusion & Upsampling) 1.9 15.2% O(N log N)Decoder (Mask Prediction) 0.7 5.6% O(N3/2)        

> Total 12.5 100 %∼O(N)
> Table 4: Theoretical FLOPs breakdown of di ff erent modules (input resolution 640 ×480 ).

though decoder modules have higher theoretical complexity, their absolute FLOPs re-main lower, meaning model scaling is mainly determined by the linear-time BSB stage. Resolution Pixels (M) FLOPs (G) Runtime (ms) 320 ×240 0.08 3.2 2.1 640 ×480 0.31 12.5 19.1 1024 ×768 0.79 31.6 49.8 1536 ×1152 1.77 78.2 126.4  

> Table 5: Empirical scaling of FLOPs and runtime for our method at di ff erent input resolutions.

In addition to FPS, memory, and FLOPs, we analyzed the scaling behavior of our method. The bidirectional SSM stage is near-linear with respect to token length, while decoder, fusion, and upsampling modules introduce mild overhead. As shown in Ta-ble 5, FLOPs grow from 3.2G at 320 × 240 to 78.2G at 1536 × 1152, with runtime increasing from 2.1 ms to 126.4 ms. Log–log fitting gives slopes of 1.15 (FLOPs) and 1.25 (runtime), indicating that the method is theoretically near-linear but practically mildly super-linear due to decoder and memory costs. 

Aggregation of low-level detailed feature (LDF). In computer vision tasks, par-ticularly in dental image processing, the complexity of oral environments and the sim-ilarity between tissues necessitate aggregating low-level features to extract rich spatial information, thereby improving segmentation performance. To evaluate the contri-bution of low-level features to segmentation accuracy, we designed an ablation ex-periment comparing the integration and exclusion of low-level features in the mask decoder. Fig. 5 illustrates the visual results of the experiment, clearly demonstrating 22 Image w/o LDF w/ LDF GT Figure 5: Comparison of aggregation of low-level detailed features (LDF). The results show that aggre-gating low-level detail features e ff ectively mitigates noise from artifacts such as dental calculus and food residues, producing segmentation masks that are closer to the ground truth (GT). The blue regions represent the generated masks after segmentation, and the white dashed boxes highlight the di ff erences in the segmen-tation results. 

that even in the presence of noise such as dental calculus and food debris in dental images, the aggregation of low-level features can still significantly enhance segmen-tation accuracy. Furthermore, the quantitative results presented in Fig. 4(b) indicate that incorporating low-level detailed features increases the mIoU by 2.7% compared to not incorporating them. This improvement can be attributed to the fact that low-level features preserve fine-grained spatial cues and boundary information, which are often lost when relying solely on high-level semantic representations. In contrast, excluding these features leads to insu ffi cient detail recovery, making the model more susceptible to noise and tissue ambiguity. 

Robustness Analysis. To evaluate robustness in complex environments, we adopted SAM as a reference model and applied two types of perturbations, namely Gaussian noise and random rotation. Gaussian noise was utilized to simulate pixel-level cor-ruption commonly encountered in real-world scenarios, with zero mean and a standard deviation of 25 (in pixel intensity units, range [0,255]). Random rotation was applied to assess the impact of varying camera angles on model segmentation performance, with rotation angles ranging from -30° to +30°. As shown in Fig. 6, comparative analysis 23 Image SAM Ours GT Figure 6: We conducted a comparative analysis with SAM under conditions of Gaussian noise and random rotation. The results indicate that on dental images subjected to Gaussian noise and random ro-tation, the segmentation masks generated by our method are more complete and refined. The blue regions represent the generated masks after segmentation, and the white dashed boxes highlight the di ff erences in the segmentation results. 

with SAM demonstrates that under conditions of Gaussian noise and random rotation, the proposed method achieves more precise and detailed segmentation results. Specif-ically, as depicted in Fig. 4(c), the mIoU of the proposed method outperforms SAM by 6.2% under Gaussian noise conditions, demonstrating strong noise robustness. Fur-thermore, Fig. 4(d) illustrates that the proposed method exhibits high robustness across di ff erent rotation angles under random rotation conditions, with a more stable perfor-mance curve and superior overall results. 

4.4. Evaluation of Tooth Segmentation 

We evaluated various image segmentation methods on the DSD and the OralVision dataset, maintaining consistent settings for a fair comparison. These methods[12, 7, 6, 10, 37] are based on the SAM model and utilize Transformer architecture and attention mechanisms to process image data. They can produce segmentation masks for target objects based on user-provided prompts, including clicks, bounding boxes, or textual inputs. By introducing new visual perception techniques, these methods [11, 28, 40] enhance the understanding and analysis of image data while maintaining computational effi ciency. Our method shows better results on the DSD than the aforementioned meth-24 ods in Table 6.                                                                                                                                                          

> Approach DSD OralVision mIoU mBIoU mIoU mBIoU SAM [5] 88.7 ±0.4 85.3 ±0.5 88.1 ±0.3 85.0 ±0.4 HQ-SAM [12] 91.2 ±0.3 88.1 ±0.4 90.3 ±0.3 87.2 ±0.3 Effi cientSAM [7] 87.2 ±0.5 84.4 ±0.5 86.9 ±0.4 83.8 ±0.3 GroundedSAM [6] 88.6 ±0.4 85.5 ±0.3 87.6 ±0.3 84.7 ±0.3 MedSAM [10] 89.0 ±0.3 86.0 ±0.4 88.5 ±0.3 85.8 ±0.3 Adapter-SAM [37] 88.5 ±0.4 85.5 ±0.4 88.0 ±0.3 85.0 ±0.4 SegFormer [38] 89.8 ±0.3 86.3 ±0.3 89.1 ±0.4 85.8 ±0.3 Swin-Unet [39] 89.3 ±0.3 86.0 ±0.3 88.9 ±0.4 85.5 ±0.4 Vim [11] 90.6 ±0.3 86.4 ±0.4 89.9 ±0.4 86.3 ±0.3 VRWKV [28] 89.8 ±0.4 85.7 ±0.3 89.2 ±0.3 84.8 ±0.3 U-Mamba [40] 90.1 ±0.3 85.8 ±0.4 90.0 ±0.3 85.2 ±0.3
> Ours 91.9 ±0.2 88.7 ±0.3 91.4 ±0.3 88.1 ±0.2
> Table 6: Experimental results on the test sets of the DSD and OralVision datasets. All values are reported as mean ±standard deviation.

In comparison to HQ-SAM, our approach yields a 0.7% improvement in mIoU on the DSD and a 1.1% improvement on the OralVision dataset, demonstrating its eff ectiveness in optimizing dental image segmentation results. Additionally, compared to methods using linear mechanisms such as U-Mamba and VRWKV, our approach significantly outperforms them in both mIoU and mBIoU on the two dental datasets. Class SAM HQ-SAM Ours Teeth 90.2 ± 0.3 92.5 ± 0.2 93.6 ± 0.3 

Gums 86.3 ± 0.2 88.7 ± 0.3 89.8 ± 0.2 

Lips 87.4 ± 0.3 89.9 ± 0.2 91.0 ± 0.2 

Cheeks 87.0 ± 0.2 89.5 ± 0.3 90.6 ± 0.3 

Tongue 89.5 ± 0.2 91.0 ± 0.3 92.0 ± 0.2 

mIoU (overall) 88.1 ± 0.3 90.3 ± 0.3 91.4 ± 0.3  

> Table 7: Per-class IoU on OralVision.

As shown in Fig. 4(a), our method outperforms vision transformer–based approaches (e.g., SAM, HQ-SAM, E ffi cientSAM) in e ffi ciency and latency, with its FPS advantage 25 growing at higher resolutions. Although Mamba was designed for long-sequence NLP, it remains e ff ective for moderate-resolution medical segmentation. Table 3 and Table 6 show that our approach achieves competitive accuracy while o ff ering faster inference speed and lower memory usage among the compared methods, meeting the dual de-mands of precision and real-time responsiveness. It should be emphasized that prompt usage was carefully controlled for fairness. SAM-based methods, including our ap-proach, were all tested with identical bounding box prompts, whereas non-SAM base-lines followed their native inference protocols without prompts. This protocol ensures that the performance di ff erences shown in Table 6 truly reflect architectural strengths rather than prompt bias. Table 7 reports per-class IoU (mean ± standard deviation across 5 folds) for the OralVision test set. The improvements across all classes in-dicate that hierarchical feature representation and bidirectional context modeling help preserve fine-grained boundaries and inter-class distinctions, whereas single-scale or unidirectional designs are more prone to losing local details or global consistency, re-sulting in inferior per-class performance. Image SAM HQ-SAM Ours GT   

> Figure 7: The visualization results of SAM, HQ-SAM, and our method on the DSD. Compared to other methods, our approach generates more fine-grained segmentation masks. The blue area represents the mask generated after image segmentation. The white dashed box highlights the di ff erences between the segmen-tation masks generated by our method and those produced by other methods.

In comparison to SAM, HQ-SAM, and our method, the segmentation results on 26 dental images are visualized in Fig. 7. Our approach shows more refined segmentation performance, even in the presence of complex oral environments. Noise factors such as saliva, food debris, and tartar can interfere with the segmentation process, yet our model handles these details more e ff ectively. In the first example, for instance, the molar of the patient has multiple 3D surfaces, and some folding appears in the image. SAM mistakenly segmented the molar into two parts, while HQ-SAM failed to segment the molar completely. In dental image acquisition within oral environments, the quality of segmentation is inevitably a ff ected by noise such as tartar reflections. In the fourth example, our method e ff ectively mitigates the impact of such noise, producing finer-grained and higher-quality segmentation masks. 

4.5. Discussion 

In dental image segmentation, strong noise, complex tissue appearance, and the joint demand for accuracy and e ffi ciency pose significant challenges. Experimental re-sults show that integrating hierarchical feature modeling with bidirectional sequence-based context aggregation enables a more e ff ective balance between segmentation pre-cision, robustness, and computational cost. The bidirectional design improves global context consistency under noisy conditions, which is critical for stable fine-grained segmentation. This balance is particularly important for real-world oral medical appli-cations, where both reliable delineation and fast inference are required. The experimental results on the DSD and OralVision datasets demonstrate that the proposed method consistently achieves superior segmentation performance across dif-ferent dental scenarios. Compared with HQ-SAM, our approach shows noticeable im-provements in mIoU on both datasets, indicating enhanced overall segmentation accu-racy. Moreover, compared with other models based on linear mechanisms, our method achieves better region-level accuracy and boundary quality without sacrificing struc-tural precision. Ablation results further show that both components are independently eff ective: using the BSB yields an mIoU of 90.9%, while incorporating LDF achieves 27 an mIoU of 91.2%, confirming their respective contributions to contextual modeling and fine-grained detail preservation. In addition, the proposed method maintains favor-able inference e ffi ciency, making it suitable for practical dental imaging applications. In dental image segmentation, the core advantage of the proposed architecture lies in its hierarchical representation, which e ff ectively regulates the flow of information across di ff erent semantic levels. Low-level features preserve precise geometric cues and boundary continuity, which are particularly vulnerable to degradation in noisy oral environments, whereas high-level features provide more stable semantic representa-tions to suppress background interference. Their complementary interaction enables the decoder to selectively recover structurally consistent target regions without am-plifying noise. Moreover, the multi-scale representation enhances the model’s adapt-ability to variations in tooth morphology and surrounding tissues, which is crucial for handling noise, illumination changes, and tissue similarity. The e ff ectiveness of the bidirectional sequence block stems from its ability to bal-ance long-range dependency modeling with spatial consistency. By jointly modeling forward and backward dependencies, the bidirectional design enables more symmetric context aggregation, reducing directional bias and stabilizing feature responses across spatial regions. Combined with lightweight convolutions and gated fusion, this design preserves fine-grained spatial details while maintaining linear computational complex-ity, explaining why 1D sequence modeling achieves both high segmentation accuracy and e ffi ciency in complex oral imaging scenarios. Although the proposed method achieves strong performance in most cases, the failure cases reveal several limitations when confronted with challenging oral imag-ing conditions. As shown in Fig. 8, the segmentation results heavily depend on im-age brightness, and when brightness is low, the quality of the generated segmentation masks may deteriorate. Furthermore, when the colors of the gums and cheek tissues are similar, the model might be misled, leading to segmentation errors. 28 Image Ours GT Figure 8: Failure cases of our approach in DSD. The blue area represents the mask generated after image segmentation. The red dashed box highlights areas where incomplete segmentation occurred due to poor image brightness. The green dashed box indicates segmentation errors caused by the similar color between the gums and cheek tissue. The blue dashed box marks regions where the model failed to segment correctly due to saliva noise and misleading folded surfaces. 

In future work, incorporating text prompts may further enhance the semantic guid-ance provided to the segmentation model. Enhancing the model’s performance will enable it to capture richer semantic information, thereby producing higher-quality seg-mentation masks. E ff orts will also be made to expand the OralVision dataset by col-lecting more samples to increase data diversity and provide broader training support for the model. Additionally, we plan to evaluate the proposed method on public dental datasets beyond DSD and OralVision to further assess its generalizability and transfer-ability across diverse clinical imaging scenarios. 

5. Conclusion 

This paper proposes a segmentation method for the dental domain based on bidi-rectional sequence modeling and hierarchical feature representation. Experimental re-sults demonstrate that our approach outperforms other image segmentation methods in dental image segmentation. Specifically, by integrating both low-level features from each encoder layer and high-level features from subsequent layers into the decoder, 29 our method achieves multi-scale feature extraction and fusion, thereby enhancing seg-mentation performance. Moreover, the structured state space model within the Mamba block e ff ectively captures image features while significantly reducing computational complexity through parallel processing. However, despite these advantages, our ap-proach still faces challenges in segmenting regions with poor lighting conditions and anatomically similar oral tissues. Nevertheless, the high-quality segmentation results obtained on two dental image datasets highlight its significant potential for clinical applications. Future research could focus on exploring the feasibility of multimodal semantic segmentation in the dental domain, improving segmentation performance un-der low-light conditions, and further optimizing the model for lightweight deployment. 

References 

[1] R. B. Chauhan, T. V. Shah, D. H. Shah, T. J. Gohil, A. D. Oza, B. Jajal, and K. K. Saxena, “An overview of image processing for dental diagnosis,” Innovation and Emerging Technologies , vol. 10, p. 2330001, 2023. [2] Y. Tian, G. Jian, J. Wang, H. Chen, L. Pan, Z. Xu, J. Li, and R. Wang, “A re-vised approach to orthodontic treatment monitoring from oralscan video,” IEEE Journal of Biomedical and Health Informatics , vol. 27, no. 12, pp. 5827–5836, 2023. [3] Y. Tian, H. Fu, H. Wang, Y. Liu, Z. Xu, H. Chen, J. Li, and R. Wang, “Rgb oralscan video-based orthodontic treatment monitoring,” Science China Informa-tion Sciences , vol. 67, no. 1, p. 112107, 2024. [4] H. Yu and Q. Dai, “Self-supervised multi-task learning for medical image analy-sis,” Pattern Recognition , vol. 150, p. 110327, 2024. [5] A. Kirillov, E. Mintun, N. Ravi, H. Mao, C. Rolland, L. Gustafson, T. Xiao, S. Whitehead, A. C. Berg, W.-Y. Lo et al. , “Segment anything,” in Proceedings 

30 of the IEEE /CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , 2023, pp. 4015– 4026. [6] T. Ren, S. Liu, A. Zeng, J. Lin, K. Li, H. Cao, J. Chen, X. Huang, Y. Chen, F. Yan 

et al. , “Grounded sam: Assembling open-world models for diverse visual tasks,” 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.14159 , 2024. [7] Y. Xiong, B. Varadarajan, L. Wu, X. Xiang, F. Xiao, C. Zhu, X. Dai, D. Wang, F. Sun, F. Iandola et al. , “E ffi cientsam: Leveraged masked image pretraining for effi cient segment anything,” in Proceedings of the IEEE /CVF Conference on Com-puter Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2024, pp. 16 111–16 121. [8] T. Yao, Y. Li, Y. Pan, Y. Wang, X.-P. Zhang, and T. Mei, “Dual vision transformer,” IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence ,vol. 45, no. 9, pp. 10 870–10 882, 2023. [9] F. Liang, B. Wu, X. Dai, K. Li, Y. Zhao, H. Zhang, P. Zhang, P. Vajda, and D. Marculescu, “Open-vocabulary semantic segmentation with mask-adapted clip,” in Proceedings of the IEEE /CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pat-tern Recognition , 2023, pp. 7061–7070. [10] J. Ma, Y. He, F. Li, L. Han, C. You, and B. Wang, “Segment anything in medical images,” Nature Communications , vol. 15, no. 1, 2024. [11] L. Zhu, B. Liao, Q. Zhang, X. Wang, W. Liu, and X. Wang, “Vision mamba: Effi cient visual representation learning with bidirectional state space model,” in 

International Conference on Machine Learning .[12] L. Ke, M. Ye, M. Danelljan, Y. Liu, Y.-W. Tai, C.-K. Tang, and F. Yu, “Segment anything in high quality,” Neural Information Processing Systems , 2023. [13] A. Liang, X. Jiang, Y. Sun, X. Shi, and K. Li, “Bi-mamba +: Bidirectional mamba for time series forecasting,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.15772 , 2024. 31 [14] J. Wang, J. Chen, D. Chen, and J. Wu, “Lkm-unet: Large kernel vision mamba unet for medical image segmentation,” in International Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention . Springer, 2024, pp. 360– 370. [15] Y. Tian, G. Cheng, J. Gelernter, S. Yu, C. Song, and B. Yang, “Joint temporal context exploitation and active learning for video segmentation,” Pattern Recog-nition , vol. 100, p. 107158, 2020. [16] O. Contributors, “Oralvision dataset,” 2024, available at: https: // bit.ly /3Qry3Ry. [17] Y. Tian, Z. Xu, Y. Ma, W. Ding, R. Wang, Z. Gao, G. Cheng, L. He, and X. Zhao, “Survey on deep learning in multimodal medical imaging for cancer detection,” 

Neural Computing and Applications , p. 1–16, 2023. [18] J. Jiang, X. He, X. Zhu, W. Wang, and J. Liu, “Cgvit: Cross-image groupvit for zero-shot semantic segmentation,” Pattern Recognition , p. 111505, 2025. [19] W. Ouyang, Z. Xu, J. Xu, Q. Wang, and Y. Xu, “Mixingmask: A contour-aware approach for joint object detection and instance segmentation,” Pattern Recogni-tion , vol. 155, p. 110620, 2024. [20] T. Chu, W. Cai, and Q. Liu, “Learning panoptic segmentation through feature discriminability,” Pattern Recognition , vol. 122, p. 108240, 2022. [21] Y. Tian, Y. Zhang, W.-G. Chen, D. Liu, H. Wang, H. Xu, J. Han, and Y. Ge, “3d tooth instance segmentation learning objectness and a ffi nity in point cloud,” 

ACM Transactions on Multimedia Computing, Communications, and Applica-tions , vol. 18, no. 4, p. 1–16, 2022. [22] L. Qian, H. Huang, X. Xia, Y. Li, and X. Zhou, “Automatic segmentation method using fcn with multi-scale dilated convolution for medical ultrasound image,” The Visual Computer , vol. 39, no. 11, pp. 5953–5969, 2023. 32 [23] B. Cheng, I. Misra, A. G. Schwing, A. Kirillov, and R. Girdhar, “Masked-attention mask transformer for universal image segmentation,” in Proceedings of the IEEE /CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pp. 1290–1299. [24] R. Strudel, R. Garcia, I. Laptev, and C. Schmid, “Segmenter: Transformer for se-mantic segmentation,” in Proceedings of the IEEE /CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , 2021, pp. 7262–7272. [25] Y. Chen, X. Dai, D. Chen, M. Liu, X. Dong, L. Yuan, and Z. Liu, “Mobile-former: Bridging mobilenet and transformer,” in Proceedings of the IEEE /CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2022, pp. 5270–5279. [26] A. Gu and T. Dao, “Mamba: Linear-time sequence modeling with selective state spaces,” in First Conference on Language Modeling , 2024. [27] B. Peng, E. Alcaide, Q. Anthony, A. Albalak, S. Arcadinho, S. Biderman, H. Cao, X. Cheng, M. Chung, M. Grella et al. , “Rwkv: Reinventing rnns for the trans-former era,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.13048 , 2023. [28] Y. Duan, W. Wang, Z. Chen, X. Zhu, L. Lu, T. Lu, Y. Qiao, H. Li, J. Dai, and W. Wang, “Vision-rwkv: E ffi cient and scalable visual perception with rwkv-like architectures,” 2024. [29] C. Lu, Y. Schroecker, A. Gu, E. Parisotto, J. Foerster, S. Singh, and F. Behbahani, “Structured state space models for in-context reinforcement learning,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 36, 2024. [30] C. Xia, X. Wang, F. Lv, X. Hao, and Y. Shi, “Vit-comer: Vision transformer with convolutional multi-scale feature interaction for dense predictions,” in Proceed-ings of the IEEE /CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition ,2024, pp. 5493–5502. 33 [31] W. Cai, W. Huang, L. Tian, C. Huang, and J. Yan, “Multi-scale global attention for abnormal geological hazard segmentation,” IEEE Sensors Journal , 2024. [32] J. Yang, W. Cai, G. Chen, and J. Yan, “A state space model-driven multiscale attention method for geological hazard segmentation,” IEEE Transactions on In-strumentation and Measurement , 2025. [33] L. Jiang, B. Yuan, J. Du, B. Chen, H. Xie, J. Tian, and Z. Yuan, “M ff sodnet: Multi-scale feature fusion small object detection network for uav aerial images,” 

IEEE Transactions on Instrumentation and Measurement , 2024. [34] P. Li, Y. Wang, T. Si, K. Ullah, W. Han, and L. Wang, “M ff sp: Multi-scale feature fusion scene parsing network for landslides detection based on high-resolution satellite images,” Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence , vol. 127, p. 107337, 2024. [35] J. Chen, Q. Yu, X. Shen, A. Yuille, and L.-C. Chen, “Vitamin: Designing scalable vision models in the vision-language era,” in Proceedings of the IEEE /CVF Con-ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2024, pp. 12 954–12 966. [36] A. Wang, H. Chen, L. Liu, K. Chen, Z. Lin, J. Han et al. , “Yolov10: Real-time end-to-end object detection,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-tems , vol. 37, pp. 107 984–108 011, 2024. [37] J. Wu, Z. Wang, M. Hong, W. Ji, H. Fu, Y. Xu, M. Xu, and Y. Jin, “Medical sam adapter: Adapting segment anything model for medical image segmentation,” 

Medical Image Analysis , vol. 102, p. 103547, 2025. [38] E. Xie, W. Wang, Z. Yu, A. Anandkumar, J. M. Alvarez, and P. Luo, “Segformer: Simple and e ffi cient design for semantic segmentation with transformers,” Ad-vances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 34, pp. 12 077–12 090, 2021. 34 [39] H. Cao, Y. Wang, J. Chen, D. Jiang, X. Zhang, Q. Tian, and M. Wang, “Swin-unet: Unet-like pure transformer for medical image segmentation,” in European Conference on Computer Vision . Springer, 2022, pp. 205–218. [40] J. Ma, F. Li, and B. Wang, “U-mamba: Enhancing long-range dependency for biomedical image segmentation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.04722 , 2024. 35