Title: MADCrowner: Margin Aware Dental Crown Design with Template Deformation and Refinement

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.04771v1

Published Time: Fri, 06 Mar 2026 01:28:23 GMT

Number of Pages: 45

Markdown Content:
# Graphical Abstract 

MADCrowner: Margin Aware Dental Crown Design with Template Deformation and Refinement 

Linda Wei, Chang Liu, Wenran Zhang, Yuxuan Hu, Ruiyang Li, Feng Qi, Changyao Tian, Ke Wang, Yuanyuan Wang, Shaoting Zhang, Dimitris Metaxas, Hongsheng Li 

> arXiv:2603.04771v1 [cs.CV] 5 Mar 2026

# Highlights 

MADCrowner: Margin Aware Dental Crown Design with Template Deformation and Refinement 

Linda Wei, Chang Liu, Wenran Zhang, Yuxuan Hu, Ruiyang Li, Feng Qi, Changyao Tian, Ke Wang, Yuanyuan Wang, Shaoting Zhang, Dimitris Metaxas, Hongsheng Li • Designed a cervical margin-aware AI framework, MADCrowner, for automated dental crown design. • Introduced a compact model, CrownSegger, to extract the cervical mar-gin. • Proposed a novel network, CrownDeformR, to generate dental crowns from coarse to fine, leveraging anatomical context and cervical margin constraint. • Eliminated the superfluous area generated by surface reconstruction by a tailored post-processing method. • Experimented on a large-scale clinical intraoral scan dataset and achieved the SOTA performance. MADCrowner: Margin Aware Dental Crown Design with Template Deformation and Refinement 

Linda Wei a,1 , Chang Liu b,c,1 , Wenran Zhang d, Yuxuan Hu a, Ruiyang Li e,Feng Qi h, Changyao Tian a, Ke Wang a, Yuanyuan Wang b, Shaoting Zhang c, ∗, Dimitris Metaxas f, Hongsheng Li a,g, ∗

> a

Multimedia Laboratory, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 999077, Hong Kong SAR, China 

> b

College of Biomedical Engineering, Fudan University, 200433, Shanghai, China 

> c

Sensetime Research, 200233, Shanghai, China 

> d

Department of Second Dental Center, Shanghai Ninth People’s Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, 200011, Shanghai, China 

> e

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 999077, Hong Kong SAR, China 

> f

Department of Computer Science, Rutgers University, 08854, New Jersey, USA 

> g

Centre for Perceptual and Interactive Intelligence (CPII) under InnoHK, 999077, Hong Kong SAR, China 

> h

Shanghai Stomatological Hospital, Fudan University, 200032, Shanghai, China 

Abstract 

Dental crown restoration is one of the most common treatment modalities for tooth defect, where personalized dental crown design is critical. While computer-aided design (CAD) systems have notably enhanced the efficiency of dental crown design, extensive manual adjustments are still required in the clinic workflow. Recent studies have explored the application of learning-based methods for the automated generation of restorative dental crowns. Nevertheless, these approaches were challenged by inadequate spatial resolu-tion, noisy outputs, and overextension of surface reconstruction. To address these limitations, we propose MADCrowner, a margin-aware mesh genera-tion framework comprising CrownDeformR and CrownSegger. Inspired by the clinic manual workflow of dental crown design, we designed CrownDe-formR to deform an initial template to the target crown based on anatomical 

> ∗

Corresponding authors 

> 1

Linda Wei and Chang Liu are co-first authors Figure 1: Dental Crown Designing Procedure. With the patient’s intraoral scan, the technician utilizes a CAD system to extract the cervical margin, select and modify a digital template of the target tooth, culminating in the design of the final crown. 

context, which is extracted by a multi-scale intraoral scan encoder. Addition-ally, we introduced CrownSegger, a novel margin segmentation network, to extract the cervical margin of the target tooth. The performance of Crown-DeformR improved with the cervical margin as an extra constraint. And it was also utilized as the boundary condition for the tailored postprocessing method, which removed the overextended area of the reconstructed surface. We constructed a large-scale intraoral scan dataset and performed exten-sive experiments. The proposed method significantly outperformed existing approaches in both geometric accuracy and clinical feasibility. The code repository was released in https://github.com/lullcant/MADCrowner .

Keywords: Dental Crown Prosthesis, Mesh Completion, Tooth Segmentation 

1. Introduction 

Oral diseases are among the most prevalent non-communicable diseases globally, impacting approximately 3.5 billion individuals [26, 28, 21]. Tooth defect, often originating from caries trauma or gene, is a significant oral health issue [48], for which crown restoration is extensively utilized and rec-ognized as an effective treatment modality. In clinical dentistry, the pro-cedure for crown restoration typically commences with the preparation of the carious or root canal-treated tooth [11, 7, 29]. The affected tooth was 2Figure 2: The visualization of surface reconstruction for a certain dental crown. (a) The original crown mesh. (b) point cloud with normal vectors of the crown mesh. (c) Recon-structed surface of (b) by Poisson surface reconstruction. The bottom of the reconstructed surface is compulsorily sealed due to the intrinsic constraints of the reconstruction algo-rithm. 

shaped into an abutment to provide adequate retention and resistance for the final prosthesis. Subsequently, a personalized crown is meticulously designed based on the patient’s oral environment to achieve optimal restoration for both esthetic and occlusal function. The fabricated crown is then luted onto the prepared abutment, thereby reestablishing the geometry and function of the restored dentition. The advent of computer-aided design (CAD) systems has significantly simplified crown design [6, 17, 25, 2, 32]. As illustrated in Figure 1, the in-traoral scan (IOS) data after abutment preparation are first imported into the CAD system. The technician begins by delineating the cervical margin on the prepared abutment to ensure that the designed crown fits precisely with the intraoral geometry. Subsequently, an appropriate template for the target tooth is selected and adjusted to conform to the morphology and alignment of both the opposing and adjacent dentition, culminating in a customized dental crown. While CAD systems have significantly enhanced the efficiency of dental technicians, a critical challenge remains: the built-in dental crown templates are standardized. This inherent uniformity requires technicians to diligently modify these templates to accommodate the individual intraoral anatomy of each patient. In clinical practice, dental crown design still re-quires a considerable amount of time, typically ranging from 15 minutes to an hour for a single tooth [3, 18]. Therefore, the development of a frame-work for the automatic design of personalized crowns has substantial clinical value, as it significantly reduces the workload and time demands for dental technicians. 3With the development of artificial intelligence, deep learning has been in-creasingly adopted for medical image analysis. [34, 37]. Several studies have leveraged deep learning algorithms to assist in dental crown design. Some of these approaches project IOS data from the occlusal perspective onto 2D depth maps, which are then used with image generation algorithms to create the intricate occlusal surface details of the crown [36, 43, 16]. However, these methods suffer from an intrinsic limitation: information loss introduced by the projection. Some crucial anatomical regions, such as the cervical mar-gin, are obscured in 2D projections. The 2D depth projection is inherently incomplete, as it lacks data for regions obscured from the occlusal view. Post-processing is required to complete these areas. To address these issues, some recent studies have attempted to utilize point cloud completion net-works combined with surface reconstruction algorithms for crown generation [12, 13, 42]. Nonetheless, such approaches increase the learning complex-ity, and there is an inherent trade-off between minimizing output noise and enhancing the details of the generation results. Moreover, the surface re-construction algorithm in previous studies inherently produces watertight meshes [24, 27]. This process is fundamentally incompatible with a dental crown, which is an open genus-zero mesh. As illustrated in Figure 2, there is a noticeable overextension at the bottom of the reconstructed crown surface. These limitations constrain the clinical applicability of crown generation al-gorithms. In this work, we proposed a Margin Aware Dental Crown generation framework ( MADCrowner ) for personalized dental crown design, primarily composed of two modules: CrownSegger and CrownDeformR. The CrownSeg-ger combines both point cloud and volumetric information to segment the prepared abutment region from IOS data, thus accurately determining the cervical margin of the target abutment. In CrownDeformR, the output of CrownSegger and the IOS data are integrated as anatomical context fea-tures via a multiscale point cloud encoder. CrownDeformR utilizes these features to predict the deformation from a corresponding point cloud tem-plate to the target crown from coarse to fine. The surface of the target crown is generated from the deformed template using Differentiable Poisson Sur-face Reconstruction (DPSR). A postprocessing algorithm is applied to excise extraneous regions from the reconstructed surface, guided by the cervical margin line detected by CrownSegger. Our main contributions are summarized as follows: 4• We proposed MADCrowner, a novel cervical margin aware framework for dental crown design. The framework consists of two learning-based components, CrownSegger and CrownDeformR. MADCrowner improves the generated crowns significantly in both the accuracy and geometric details. • We designed CrownSegger, a compact network for point cloud segmen-tation, to detect the cervical margin of the target abutment and impose the location of the cervical margin into CrownDeformR. The detected cervical margin is also utilized by a tailored post-process to eliminate the superfluous area generated by surface reconstruction, as shown in Figure 2. • We introduced a concise network, CrownDeformR, for crown genera-tion. CrownDeformR produces the target crown by deforming and re-fining the template mesh from coarse to fine. The output of CrownSeg-ger is leveraged to enhance the performance. • We established a large-scale intraoral scan dataset from clinical cases and conducted extensive experiments to evaluate the robustness and effectiveness of the proposed method. 

2. Related Works 

In this section, we introduce previous studies on the application of arti-ficial intelligence in dental crown design, as well as research related to point cloud segmentation and mesh completion in general computer vision tasks, which can be applied to complete restoration design. 

2.1. Deep Learning Methods for Dental Crown Design 

CAD systems have become ubiquitous in restorative dental crown design, significantly boosting the efficiency of dental technicians. However, compared to other clinical applications, the level of automation and intelligence in current CAD systems for dental crown design remains relatively primitive. Driven by the rapid development of deep learning algorithms, several studies on dental crown generation have emerged in recent years [36, 51, 12, 13, 42]. [36] addressed dental crown generation by recasting it as a 2D image gen-eration task. They projected IOS data as 2D depth maps from the occlusal perspective and generated the occlusal surfaces of the target crown with a 5conditional GAN (cGAN) [16, 8]. A series of post-processing steps was sub-sequently employed to reconstruct the final crown mesh from the generated occlusal surfaces. [51] demonstrated the feasibility of dental crown generation using point cloud completion networks by masking a single tooth from IOS data and reconstructing it via a point cloud completion model. [42] proposed a crown generation method based on a Point Transformer architecture. Their model takes IOS point clouds as input and generates the corresponding crown point cloud, which is then converted into a mesh using a “Shape as Points” (SAP) module. However, this method exhibits limited capability in recon-structing fine-grained anatomical details of dental crowns, such as grooves and fossae. [12] utilized AdaPointr [46], an advanced point completion net-work, to generate the dental crown and further modified the loss function to better suit the specific requirements of crown generation. This method demonstrated superior performance compared to similar existing approaches, achieving state-of-the-art results in dental crown generation. 

2.2. Point Cloud Segmentation 

According to the approaches used to process point cloud data, point cloud segmentation algorithms can be categorized into point-wise and voxel-wise methods. PointNet [30] and PointNet++ [31] are seminal works of the point-wise approach. However, their pooling-based feature aggregation limits the ability to capture the spatial correlation among points. PointTransformer [49] addressed this issue by employing self-attention blocks for adaptive feature learning. However, it requires a large-scale training dataset to achieve sat-isfactory generalization performance. For the voxel-wise methods, such as MinkowskiNet [5], the point cloud is voxelized as a 3D volume. Networks designed for 3D image segmentation are applied to process this discrete 3D volume. The point cloud segmentation is obtained by reversing the vox-elization process to map the volume segmentation back to the point cloud. Voxel-wise methods primarily suffer from two main drawbacks: quantiza-tion loss caused by voxelization and substantial computational consumption required by 3D convolutions. Some voxel-wise methods utilize sparse convo-lutions [22] to reduce VRAM usage and improve computational efficiency. In recent years, several studies, such as PVCNN [23], have emerged that inte-grate point-wise and voxel-wise features for point cloud segmentation. These hybrid approaches combine the strengths of both methodologies, demonstrat-ing excellent performance on point cloud segmentation tasks. 6Figure 3: The workflow of MADCrowner. The input IOS and the cervical margin identified by CrownSegger are sent to CrownDeformR to generate a watertight crown by deforming and refining an initial template. The extraneous regions are excised, guided by the margin line, to obtain the result. 

2.3. Point Cloud Completion and Surface Reconstruction 

Due to their unique data structures, existing deep neural networks strug-gle to process mesh data directly. Consequently, the task of mesh completion is typically divided into two sub-tasks: point cloud completion and surface reconstruction. This decomposition enables the leveraging of deep neural networks for mesh completion. Previous research in point cloud completion has proposed many effective models, including PCN [47], FoldingNet [44], TopNet [35], and GRnet [41]. However, there is a critical limitation for these methods: the absence of normal vectors for their output points, which are an essential component for most classical mesh reconstruction algorithms. To bridge this gap between point cloud completion and mesh reconstruction, SAP [27] introduced a novel Differentiable Poisson Surface Reconstruction (DPSR) algorithm and integrated it with a point cloud completion network for the direct surface reconstruction from the point cloud. SAP has been proven to be a noise-robust mesh reconstruction approach, capable of re-constructing surface meshes from noisy point clouds. However, similar to traditional surface reconstruction algorithms, such as Poisson Surface Re-construction (PSR) [19], SAP generates watertight meshes. This inherent characteristic directly contradicts the desired open, genus-zero morphology of dental crown meshes. This critical discrepancy has received only limited attention in prior research. 7Figure 4: Architecture of CrownSegger. The CrownSegger fuses both the point-wise and voxel-wise features and predicts the segmentation of the prepared abutment. The margin line is obtained by extracting the boundary of the segmentation mask. 

3. Methods 

The overall pipeline of MADCrowner is illustrated in Figure 3. Given a target abutment, the cervical margin is first identified by CrownSegger to extract the cervical margin. Conditioned on this margin line and the IOS, CrownDeformR learns to model detailed dental anatomy via attention mech-anism. By attending to the spatial relationships of adjacent and antagonist teeth, the network adaptively deforms an initial template crown which serves as a geometric prior to facilitate stable training. This data-driven deforma-tion produces a crown point cloud that satisfies functional occlusion and proximal contact requirements. A watertight crown mesh is subsequently reconstructed using SAP. Due to the watertight constraint imposed by SAP, topological artifacts (e.g., spurious mesh extensions near the cervical bound-ary) may arise. A dedicated post-processing module is therefore applied to remove these reconstruction-induced artifacts, ensuring compliance with clinical requirements while preserving the learned anatomical morphology. 

3.1. CrownSegger 

The CrownSegger, illustrated in Figure 4, is a hybrid point-voxel frame-work for point cloud segmentation. The initial point-wise features are con-structed by concatenating the spatial coordinates and normal vectors. The input point cloud is voxelized into a volume, where each voxel may con-tain multiple points. Voxel-wise features are then generated by aggregating 8Figure 5: Overall architecture of CrownDeformR. CrownDeformR consists of three compo-nents: IOS feature extraction, Crown Template Deformation, and Coarse Crown Refine-ment. For each generated crown mesh, we utilize the margin line identified by CrownSeg-ger to excise the extraneous regions and solve the intrinsic watertightness issue introduced by DPSR. 

point-wise features within each voxel through cascaded voxel feature encod-ing (VFE) layers [50]. These sparse voxel-wise features are transformed into a dense 3D volume, as shown in Figure 4 (b), and processed by a VNet [1] backbone to capture multi-scale anatomical patterns. We concatenate the voxel-wise features from the output feature volume with their corresponding point-wise features, as illustrated in Figure 4 (c), and fuse them with an MLP to predict the segmentation results. The training of CrownSegger is supervised by cross-entropy loss and dice loss. Finally, the cervical margin of the target abutment is identified by extracting and smoothing the boundary of the prepared abutment. 

3.2. CrownDeformR 

The overall architecture of our CrownDeformR is illustrated in Figure 5. The IOS and the segmentation of the prepared abutment are first encoded to extract geometric and contextual features. Following a CAD-inspired crown design paradigm, CrownDeformR generates the target crown by deforming the corresponding tooth template conditioned on the extracted features. The template is progressively refined in a coarse-to-fine manner to produce the final crown geometry. 93.2.1. Network Primitives 

The proposed architecture consists of three specialized Transformer-based modules: the Geometry Aware Transformer (GAT), the Self Attention Trans-former (SAT), and the Cross Attention Transformer (CAT). The GAT per-forms hierarchical feature extraction with progressive downsampling while preserving local geometric structures, enabling robust representation of fine-grained dental details. Within each resolution scale, the SAT is employed to model long-range dependencies within feature tokens, enhancing inter-nal contextual interactions and enabling globally consistent representations across different stages of the framework. To guide crown generation con-ditioned on the IOS context, the CAT models the spatial correspondence between crown queries and IOS features, capturing their relative positional dependencies and geometric interactions. The detailed mathematical formu-lations and tensor operations of these modules are provided in Figure 18 and Figure 19 of the Appendix. 

3.2.2. Context-Aware Feature Extraction 

In the initial feature encoding stage, the IOS point cloud PIOS is aug-mented with the abutment segmentation label to provide explicit margin guidance. This hybrid input is processed through a sequence of GAT-SAT 

blocks, which yields a global context vector g ∈ R1×512 along with multi-scale intermediate features FIOS . This hierarchical encoding scheme ensures that the subsequent generative stages are informed by both the global dental alignment and localized margin details. 

3.2.3. Hierarchical Template Deformation and Refinement 

Inspired by clinical CAD workflows, CrownDeformR deforms an initial template T selected via the FDI notation system through a two-stage pro-cess. During the initial deformation stage, a CAT block captures the spatial dependencies between the template and the global IOS features, guiding the coarse template deformation. The resulting features are further processed by SAT blocks to predict the coarse crown point cloud PCoarse . Subsequently, in the multi-scale refinement stage, this coarse result is progressively up-sampled through two refinement modules. Each module leverages CAT to cross-reference localized IOS features, enabling the network to actively learn and reconstruct fine-grained anatomical details, such as occlusal grooves and proximal contact points. 10 3.3. Optimization Objectives 

The CrownDeformR is optimized using a hierarchical loss function that enforces geometric fidelity from a coarse-to-fine perspective. To ensure the generated crown captures both stable dental proportions and fine-grained anatomical details, we implement a deep supervision strategy across multiple resolutions. Specifically, for the initial deformation and the first refinement stages, we utilize standard Chamfer Distance (CD) to supervise the point cloud at different scales. The coarse loss (LCoarse ) is calculated between the coarse point cloud PCoarse and a 1/4 downsampled ground truth P 1/4  

> GT

to establish the basic spatial positioning and crown proportions. Subsequently, the first refinement loss (LRefine1 ) supervises the 1/2 downsampled ground truth P 1/2  

> GT

, ensuring structural consistency as the point density increases. While these global objectives provide a stable optimization trajectory, we utilize the Curvature and Margin Penalty Loss (CMPL, LRefine2 ) for the final refinement stage to capture high-frequency anatomical features such as occlusal fossae and ensure precise marginal fit. Unlike vanilla CD, CMPL explicitly prioritizes high-curvature regions and the cervical boundary, for-mulated as: 

LRefine2 = 1

| ˆPCrown |

∑ 

> p∈ˆPCrown

(e|κ(p)| + Iq∈M (PGT )

) min 

> q∈PGT

∥p − q∥2

+ 1

|PGT |

∑

> q∈PGT

(e|κ(q)| + Iq∈M (PGT )

) min  

> p∈ˆPCrown

∥p − q∥2,

(1) where ˆPCrown denotes the final predicted point cloud, κ(·) represents the nor-malized curvature, and M (PGT ) refers to the set of points on the ground-truth margin line. The exponential term e|κ(p)| adaptively increases the penalty in areas with complex anatomy, while the indicator function Iq∈M enforces strict alignment with the prepared abutment. Finally, the surface reconstruction is supervised by an MSE loss ( LDPSR ) on the DPSR grid. The total loss is the sum of all aforementioned components. We discuss detailed technical speci-fications, including the loss function formulations of LRefine1 , LCoarse , LDPSR 

and specific tensor shape transformations at each stage in the Appendix. 

3.4. Post-processing for Reconstructed Mesh 

Most of the surface reconstruction algorithms, including DPSR, produce meshes that are inherently watertight. However, the dental crown is an open 11 genus-zero mesh. It is necessary to eliminate the overextension from the re-constructed mesh to obtain the final result, a step that is rarely mentioned in previous research [12, 13, 42]. We design a tailored post-processing procedure to address this issue. The cervical margin is identified as the boundary of the prepared abutment, which is predicted by CrownSegger. The points on the margin line are smoothed with B-spline kernels. These smoothed points, along with their centroid, define a surface whose normal vectors align with the tooth growth direction. Faces within the reconstructed mesh that are below this surface are then removed. To ensure the mesh boundary precisely conforms to the margin line, points on the boundary of the processed mesh are projected onto the smoothed margin line. Following these post-processing steps, the reconstructed crown surface is transformed into an open genus-zero mesh, which can be manipulated within CAD systems for clinical applica-tion. 

4. Experiments and Results Algorithm 1 Cervical Margin Extraction 

Input: 

Mesh: M = ( V, F)

Point-wise labels for the target abutment: L : V → { 0, 1}

Output: 

Cervical margin vertex set: Vmargin 

Step 1: Abutment Extraction 

Extract faces from F, in which three vertices are labeled as abutment: F1 ←{f ∈ F | ∀ v ∈ f, L(v) = 1 }.

Step 2: Noise Exclusion 

Construct a sub-mesh M1 = ( V1, F1).Extract the largest connected component Ma from M1.

Step 3: Boundary Detection 

Extract the vertices Vb in the boundary of Ma.

Step 4: Cervical Margin Estimation 

Estimate the cervical margin by B-spline interpolation with Vb.Resample 1,000 vertices ( Vmargin ) uniformly on the cervical margin. 

return Vmargin 

12 4.1. Datasets 4.1.1. Dataset for prepared abutment segmentation 

We built a dataset for prepared abutment segmentation that consists of 576 IOS data. Each IOS is point-wise annotated, indicating whether indi-vidual points belong to the prepared abutment. Among these, 476 scans are allocated for training, and 100 for testing. The cervical margin, which is de-fined as the boundary of the prepared abutment, is extracted by Algorithm 1. 

4.1.2. Dataset for Dental Crown Design 

> Table 1: Data Distribution for Dental Crown Design

Jaw Side Tooth Position Number of Cases Upper 1st Premolar 543 2nd Premolar 412 1st Molar 1096 2nd Molar 270 Lower 1st Premolar 152 2nd Premolar 178 1st Molar 1452 2nd Molar 499 We collect raw IOS data acquired from 4,602 patients with single tooth defects, in which the target teeth are prepared as abutments. For each pa-tient, the corresponding dental crown designed by dental technicians is also collected. The target teeth in the dataset encompass all the premolars and molars. For each IOS data sample, we extract a 2 cm-sided cubic region centered at the centroid of its corresponding crown. The dataset is divided into training, validation, and testing sets with 8:1:1. We utilize stratified sampling among the types of target teeth, ensuring that the distribution of target teeth is consistent across both the training and test sets. To en-hance computational efficiency during training, we pre-extract the curvature for each vertex in the IOS data, as well as the boundaries of the IOS data, specifically within the test set. 

4.2. Implementation Details 

The CrownSegger was implemented with PyTorch and trained on a NVIDIA GTX 3080 Ti with a batch size of 16 for 300 epochs. We used the AdamW 13 optimizer with an initial learning rate of 10 −4 to update the network param-eters and applied a cosine learning rate scheduler during training. The CrownDeformR was also implemented with PyTorch and trained for 500 epochs on 4 NVIDIA RTX 4090 GPUs with a batch size of 8. Configura-tions of the optimizer and learning rate scheduler for CrownDeformR are the same as CrownSegger. The abutment mask used by CrownDeformR is the zero-shot prediction from CrownSegger. The employed transformer blocks (GAT, SAT, and CAT) leveraged multi-head attention with 4 heads and 512 hidden channels. The training of CrownDeformR is supervised by the combination of the aforementioned loss functions: 

Ltotal = LCoarse + LRefine1 + LRefine2 + LDPSR (2) The dental crown generation pipeline consists of two distinct models: CrownSegger and CrownDeformR. During the inference stage, these two models are combined as a unified network, MADCrowner, which comprises 37.3 M parameters. MADCrowner requires only 1.1 GB VRAM for the in-ference of a single sample. The single-inference latency is approximately 600 ms (Segmentation, Generation and Post-processing) on an NVIDIA L20 GPU. This resource frugality makes the MADCrowner an ideal candidate for on-site deployment. 

Table 2: Comparison experiment on cervical margin segmentation. The best results are highlighted in blue . The CrownSegger achieves the best performance on the test set. It also exhibits excellent performance under a zero-shot setting on crown-generated prepa-rations, achieving a Hausdorff Distance of 0.545 mm without additional finetuning.                      

> Methods Accuracy ↑IoU ↑Hausdorff Distance (mm) ↓
> PointNet [30] 0.935 0.858 2.450 PointNet++ [31] 0.956 0.901 1.720 PointTransformer [49] 0.963 0.939 1.238 CrownSegger 0.991 0.972 0.328
> CrownSegger(zero-shot on crown generation dataset) ––0.545

4.3. Abutment mask Segmentation 

In this section, we conducted a comparative analysis of CrownSegger with several widely adopted point cloud segmentation algorithms, evaluating their performance on both target abutment segmentation and cervical margin ex-traction. The cervical margin of the target abutment is extracted from its segmentation mask. 14 Figure 6: Visualization of the comparison experiment for abutment segmentation. The cervical margin identified by CrownSegger is much closer to the ground truth. 

15 Table 3: Performance comparison of different crown generation methods before mesh reconstruction. The best and second-best results are highlighted in blue and green , respectively.                                                                         

> Methods CD-L2 (mm 2)↓Fidelity Distance (mm 2)↓Hausdorff Distance (mm) ↓F-score ↑
> Premolar Molar Overall Premolar Molar Overall Premolar Molar Overall Premolar Molar Overall PCN[47] +SAP 0.271 0.318 0.305 0.118 0.148 0.140 1.400 1.458 1.441 0.850 0.889 0.878 TopNet[35] +SAP 0.354 0.409 0.394 0.164 0.200 0.190 1.752 1.869 1.836 0.770 0.812 0.800 GRnet[41] +SAP 0.230 0.254 0.247 0.110 0.132 0.126 1.118 1.139 1.134 0.874 0.901 0.894 DMCv2 [12] 0.227 0.264 0.254 0.107 0.132 0.125 1.227 1.252 1.245 0.868 0.897 0.888 MADCrowner 0.176 0.174 0.175 0.098 0.092 0.094 1.093 0.996 1.027 0.903 0.932 0.924

Table 4: Quantitative evaluation of the crown meshes generated by different methods. For a fair comparison, all the outputs of these methods were processed using our post-processing pipeline to remove superfluous areas resulting from surface reconstruction. The best results are highlighted in blue . To demonstrate the effect of the post-processing algorithm, the last row shows the performance of our method without the post-processing algorithm.                                                                                     

> Methods CD-L2 (mm 2)↓Fidelity Distance (mm 2)↓Hausdorff Distance (mm) ↓F-score ↑
> Premolar Molar Overall Premolar Molar Overall Premolar Molar Overall Premolar Molar Overall GRnet+SAP [41] 0.212 0.210 0.210 0.111 0.100 0.103 1.212 1.307 1.280 0.895 0.901 0.899 DMCv2 [12] 0.259 0.251 0.253 0.137 0.123 0.127 1.329 1.319 1.322 0.868 0.875 0.873 VBCD [40] 0.212 0.207 0.209 0.108 0.109 0.109 1.115 1.163 1.150 0.896 0.915 0.909 Diffusion SDF [4] 0.228 0.215 0.219 0.116 0.108 0.110 1.216 1.458 1.390 0.875 0.900 0.893 MADCrowner 0.198 0.180 0.185 0.083 0.087 0.086 1.096 1.026 1.046 0.907 0.920 0.917
> MADCrowner w/o Postprocessing 0.556 1.186 1.006 0.086 0.094 0.091 3.176 4.342 4.016 0.826 0.831 0.830

For the abutment segmentation, we employed accuracy and Intersection over Union (IoU) as quantitative metrics. The performance of cervical mar-gin extraction was evaluated using the Hausdorff Distance (HDF distance), calculated in the physical coordinate system. We compared CrownSegger with several prevalent point cloud segmen-tation models, including PointNet [30], PointNet++ [31], and PointTrans-former [49], on our dataset for abutment segmentation. CrownSegger consis-tently outperformed these methods across all the evaluated metrics. The im-provement in HDF distance is particularly significant, decreasing from 1.237 mm to 0.328 mm (Table 2). The performance of cervical margin extraction was also evaluated on the dataset for dental crown design. For this dataset, the ground truth of the cervical margin was defined as the boundary of the dental crown. The cervical margin derived from the zero-shot prediction of CrownSegger achieved remarkable performance with an average HDF dis-tance of 0.575 mm, indicating excellent robustness and generalization ability 16 of CrownSegger. Figure 6 visualizes an example of the prepared abutment segmentation and the extracted cervical margin. As shown in this figure, CrownSeg-ger demonstrated better segmentation performance, with notably fewer mis-classified points. Additionally, the cervical margin extracted from CrownSeg-ger’s prediction also exhibited better consistency with the ground truth. It should be noted that CrownSegger is constructed with a transformer-free backbone, which grants it distinct advantages in computational efficiency and memory usage. This makes the model particularly suitable for clinical deployment on edge computing devices, as it achieves high performance with minimal hardware resource demands. 

4.4. Dental Crown Generation 4.4.1. Evaluation Metric 

To validate the effectiveness of MADCrowner, we conducted extensive comparative experiments against existing dental crown generation methods and ablation studies. We used the L2-normed Chamfer Distance (CD-L2), fidelity distance [41], F-score [13], and HDF distance for quantitative as-sessment of experimental results from different perspectives. CD-L2, fidelity distance, and F-score measure the overall similarity between the generated crown and the ground truth. In contrast, the HDF distance quantifies the maximum deviation of the generated crown. HDF distance is a critical eval-uation metric for the generated crowns, as it provides an intuitive assessment of their compatibility with the corresponding IOS data. In this section, all distance-related metrics were calculated in the physical coordinate system measured in millimeters (mm). 

4.4.2. Experimental Result 

We compared the performance of MADCrowner with several advanced point cloud completion models, including PCN [47], TopNet [35], and GR-net [41], which were integrated with SAP [27] to reconstruct the correspond-ing mesh. Additionally, DMCv2 [12], the state-of-the-art dental crown gen-eration method, was also evaluated as a comparative experiment. Following the previous works [13, 12], quantitative metrics were evaluated on the gen-erated point clouds. The experimental results are listed in Table 3. MAD-Crowner achieved the best performance across all the metrics. Specifically, our method surpassed the second-highest performance in CD-L2, fidelity dis-tance, and F-score by 29.2%, 26.4%, and 3.36%, respectively. This demon-17 Figure 7: Comparison Result of the MADCrowner with other point cloud based methods. 

strates that MADCrowner significantly enhanced the consistency between the generated dental crowns and the ground truth. In terms of HDF dis-tance, our method achieved a significant improvement by reducing the best performance from 1.139 mm to 1.027 mm. This notable reduction in HDF distance indicates that our approach generated dental crowns with less noise and lower deviation from the ground truth. We further conducted a quanti-tative evaluation for the reconstructed dental crown mesh and incorporated several voxel-based methods [40, 4] for comparison. The evaluation results are shown in Table 4, where MADCrowner consistently achieved the best performance across all metrics. Compared to Table 3, there are slight dis-crepancies in the quantitative metrics of a single method when measured on the generated point cloud versus the reconstructed mesh. These gaps are induced by the inherent perturbations of the mesh reconstruction algorithm and the effect of the postprocessing. We exhibited visual comparison of MADCrowner to point cloud-based methods and voxel-based methods in Figure 7 and Figure 8, respectively. The surface distance error of these experimental results is visualized using a colormap. It is obvious that MADCrowner yields the highest consistency 18 Figure 8: Comparison Result of the MADCrowner with voxel based methods. 

between the generated crowns and the ground truth. Additionally, it can be observed that the crowns generated by our method exhibit remarkable improvement in intricate details, such as grooves and fossae. 

4.5. Ablation Study and Cost-Benefit Discussion 

Table 5: Ablation study results of different components in CrownDeformR. The best results are highlighted in blue .                                                                                                           

> Components CD-L2 (mm 2)↓Fidelity Distance (mm 2)↓Hausdorff Distance (mm) ↓F-Score ↑Efficiency Cervical Margin Constraints Initial Crown Template Crown Template Deformation Premolar Molar Overall Premolar Molar Overall Premolar Molar Overall Premolar Molar Overall VRAM (MB) ↓Inference Time (ms) ↓
> %%%0.214 0.222 0.220 0.106 0.114 0.112 1.419 1.347 1.367 0.866 0.905 0.895 1229 87
> %!%0.204 0.217 0.213 0.102 0.110 0.107 1.372 1.291 1.314 0.878 0.910 0.901 1229 90
> %%!0.215 0.211 0.212 0.115 0.106 0.108 1.365 1.280 1.301 0.882 0.911 0.903 1305 100
> %!!0.188 0.195 0.193 0.099 0.102 0.101 1.182 1.152 1.160 0.886 0.921 0.911 1305 103
> !!!0.176 0.174 0.175 0.098 0.092 0.094 1.093 0.996 1.027 0.903 0.932 0.924 1305 105

The efficacy of CrownDeformR hinges upon three critical components: the initial crown template, the template deformation module, and the cer-vical margin constraints. In this section, we demonstrate the contribution 19 Figure 9: Visualization of the ablation study. (a) to (e) are corresponding to the results in Table 5, which are models using: (a) a hemisphere template without the template deformation module; (b) a hemisphere template with the deformation module; (c) the initial crown template without the template deformation module; (d) no cervical margin constraint; and (e) CrownDeformR, our full model. (f) represents the ground truth. 

of these components with a series of ablation studies. The results of the ablation studies are listed in Table 5. We visualized the results of the ab-lation studies with an example in Figure 9. The dental crown generated by the full CrownDeformR demonstrated superior performance in both overall similarity and intricate details compared to the control groups. Beyond the quantitative performance improvements, we further perform a cost-benefit analysis to evaluate the practical necessity of each component. Although the numerical gains introduced by the additional modules may appear mod-est, such improvements are clinically meaningful in dental crown restoration. Given the high precision requirements of occlusal fitting, even sub-millimeter reductions in geometric deviation can substantially improve patient comfort and reduce the need for chairside adjustments. Meanwhile, the added com-putational overhead remains marginal. The incorporation of the template deformation module and cervical margin constraints increases GPU mem-ory consumption (VRAM) by less than 100 MB and inference time by less than 30 milliseconds. Considering this negligible efficiency cost relative to the clinically significant accuracy gains, the complete CrownDeformR frame-work is both practically justified and necessary for high-fidelity dental crown generation. 

4.5.1. Initial crown template 

Inspired by the CAD workflow of dental crown design by technicians, CrownDeformR selects an appropriate initial template based on the FDI label of the target tooth. This template is then deformed and refined by 20 Figure 10: point cloud visualization of the ablation study for cervical margin constraint. The red point cloud denotes the ground truth, and the blue one denotes the generation result. (a) MADCrowner without Cervical Margin Constraint. (b) MADCrowner. 

21 CrownDeformR to generate the final crown. To evaluate the impact of the specified initial crown template, we conducted an ablation study in which the initial crown template was replaced with a hemisphere of 7.5 mm radius. The results presented in the first and second rows of Table 5 demonstrate that an appropriate initial crown template can improve the generation results across all the metrics. 

4.5.2. Crown Template Deformation 

In CrownDeformR, the initial crown template is processed by a template deformation module to create a coarse crown. This coarse representation is then refined to produce the final dental crown. As demonstrated by a comparison of the first and third rows in Table 5, the integration of the template deformation module significantly enhances overall crown generation performance compared to the direct utilization of the initial template as an input for the refinement module. 

4.5.3. Cervical Margin Constraints 

The cervical margin serves as a critical reference in dental crown design. In clinical practice, dental technicians begin the crown design by annotating the cervical margin on the prepared abutment. This delineation then guides the subsequent design process, ultimately defining the boundary of the den-tal crown. CrownDeformR also incorporates cervical margin constraints. To enhance awareness of the cervical margin, CrownDeformR leverages the pre-diction of CrownSegger as part of the input, in addition to the IOS data. A comparison of the last two rows in Table 5 reveals that incorporating the cervical margin constraint significantly enhances all evaluated metrics. No-tably, the improvement in HDF distance is particularly pronounced. This is consistent with the fact that the maximum deviation in generated crowns often occurs in the margin region. It suggests that the cervical margin con-straint enhances the quality of the generated crown in the critical cervical region. As shown in Figure 10, the application of cervical margin constraints improves the consistency between the generated point cloud and the ground truth. This enhancement is especially notable near the cervical margin. 

4.5.4. Hyper-parameters for CMPL 

As described in the section CrownDeformR, CrownDeformR was trained with CMPL to enhance the fidelity of crown details and the peri-cervical 22 regions. CMPL is composed of two distinct parts: Curvature Penalty Loss (CPL) and Margin Penalty Loss (MPL): 

CPL = 1

| ˆPCrown |

∑

p∈ ˆPCrown 

eλ·| κ(p)| · min 

q∈PGT 

∥p − q∥2

+ 1

|PGT |

∑

q∈PGT 

eλ·| κ(q)| · min 

p∈ ˆPCrown 

∥p − q∥2

MPL = 1

| ˆPCrown |

∑

p∈ ˆPCrown 

Iq∈M (PGT ) · min 

q∈PGT 

∥p − q∥2

+ 1

|PGT |

∑

q∈PGT 

Iq∈M (PGT ) · min 

p∈ ˆPCrown 

∥p − q∥2

CMPL = CPL + MPL 

λ is the scale factor of curvature weights. We conducted an ablation study to find the optimal λ for dental crown generation. As shown in Figure 11, both CD-L2 and Hausdorff Distance achieved the best performance when λ

is set to 1. It was adopted as the experimental setting in this work. 

4.5.5. Mesh Reconstruct Methods 

In this section, we evaluate the effects of different mesh reconstruction algorithms. For comparative analysis, we utilized Neural Kernel Surface Reconstruction (NKSR) [14] and Point2Mesh [9] to reconstruct surfaces from the point clouds generated by MADCrowner. The comparison results are exhibited both visually and quantitatively, in Figure 13 and Table 6. It is evident that the performance of our reconstruction method surpassed other approaches. 

Table 6: Ablation study on postprocessing and performance comparison of different crown generation methods in mesh . The best results are highlighted in blue .                                                

> Methods CD-L2 (mm 2)↓Fidelity Distance (mm 2)↓Hausdorff Distance (mm) ↓F-score ↑
> Premolar Molar Overall Premolar Molar Overall Premolar Molar Overall Premolar Molar Overall MADCrowner (Point2Mesh) 0.247 0.238 0.240 0.129 0.145 0.140 1.841 1.832 1.834 0.842 0.849 0.847 MADCrowner (NKSR) 0.235 0.227 0.229 0.132 0.126 0.128 1.568 1.485 1.508 0.857 0.863 0.861 Ours 0.198 0.180 0.185 0.083 0.087 0.086 1.096 1.026 1.046 0.907 0.920 0.917

23 Figure 11: Ablation Study on Curvature Weight. 

Figure 12: Proximal Contact Visualization. The color map represents the nearest dis-tance to the adjacent teeth. (a) The generation result of a premolar of VBCD. (b) The generation result of a premolar of MADCrowner. (c) Ground truth of the premolar case. (d) The generation result of a molar of VBCD. (e) The generation result of a molar of MADCrowner. (f) Ground truth of the molar case. 

24 Figure 13: Visualization of different mesh reconstruction method results Table 7: Proximal Contact Area deviation of different methods. The best and the second-best results are highlighted in blue and green , respectively.                   

> Methods Medial Area Difference (mm 2)↓Lateral Area Difference (mm 2)↓
> PCN+SAP [47] 6.51 7.30 TopNet+SAP [35] 15.97 16.50 GRnet+SAP [41] 5.06 4.90 DMCv2 [12] 5.18 4.72 VBCD [40] 5.00 5.04 Diffusion SDF[4] 5.37 5.18 MADCrowner 4.37 4.07

4.6. Proximal Contact Analysis 

Appropriate proximal contacts with adjacent teeth are a critical consid-eration in dental crown design. Excessive contact can lead to periodontal ligament damage, while overly loose contacts may result in food impaction. To address these concerns, dental technicians commonly incorporate appro-priate intersection regions between the crown and adjacent teeth. This inten-tional design provides clinicians with the necessary flexibility to make precise adjustments during crown restoration, ensuring optimal proximal contacts of the target crown. To quantitatively assess the fidelity of proximal contacts, we calculated the proximal intersection area (PIA) between the dental crown and its adjacent teeth. The deviation in PIA between the generated crown and the ground truth then served as the metric for evaluating the accuracy of the proximal contacts for the generated results. Table 7 shows that the re-sults of MADCrowner exhibit the lowest error, which indicates that the den-tal crowns produced by MADCrowner maintain excellent consistency with the ground truth in proximal contacts. As depicted in Figure 12, the prox-imal contact regions of the generated crowns exhibit excellent fidelity with the ground truth in both premolars and molars. Compared with VBCD, the model with the strong geometric performance in Table 4, our method 25 Figure 14: Failure Cases Demonstration 

produces proximal contact distributions that are more consistent with the ground truth in terms of spatial localization and contact extent. 

4.7. Failure Case Analysis 

The MADCrowner demonstrated strong generalization ability and pro-duced high-quality crown meshes for the majority of cases in the test set. However, beyond isolated extreme outliers, we observed several recurring fail-ure patterns associated with specific clinical conditions. Figure 14 presents representative failure cases generated by MADCrowner. Our analysis re-veals that crown generation is more prone to failure under the following conditions: (1) inadequate tooth preparation, where irregular or insufficient reduction compromises geometric inference; (2) incomplete intraoral scans, particularly holes or missing regions in adjacent teeth; and (3) absence of adjacent or antagonist teeth, which limits accurate reconstruction of oc-clusal relationships. In these scenarios, the generated crowns may exhibit improper occlusal contacts or suboptimal morphological adaptation. The identified patterns are consistent with clinical experience, highlighting the importance of standardized tooth preparation and complete adjacent and antagonist tooth information for reliable automated crown design. 26 Figure 15: The point cloud result from three models: DMCv2,GRnet+SAP,MADCrowner. To facilitate clearer visualization of the noisy point cloud, the predicted point cloud is downsampled to 2048 points using the farthest point sampler. 

Figure 16: Side view of dental crowns. (a) The generated crown of the previous method, such as DMC. (b) The generated crown of MADCrowner without post-processing. (c) The generated crown of MADCrowner. (d) Ground Truth. The inherent watertight issue introduced by DPSR is addressed by our post-processing method. 

27 Figure 17: Occlusal analysis. (a) Input IOS, (b) Generated crown of VBCD (c) Generated crown of MADCrowner, (d) Ground truth. For each vertex in the crown, the signed nearest distance to the IOS is visualized with a color map. 

5. Discussion and Conclusion 

In this work, we propose a novel dental crown generation framework, MADCrowner, which primarily consists of CrownSegger and CrownDeformR. The IOS data is first processed using CrownSegger to generate a segmen-tation mask of the prepared abutment, from which the cervical margin is subsequently extracted. CrownDeformR integrates the IOS data and the abutment mask to generate the dental crown for the target tooth. Our approach achieved superior performance across all the evaluated metrics, in-cluding CD-L2, Fidelity Distance, HDF Distance, and F-score. Compared to the approximately 15 minutes required for a dental technician to manu-ally design a crown using a CAD system, MADCrowner generates a dental 28 crown within 500 ms. This dramatic acceleration significantly enhances the efficiency of dental technicians. For dental crown generation methods based on point cloud completion networks, a uniform spatial distribution and sufficient density of the output point cloud are crucial for accurate dental crown generation. Figure 15 com-pares the point clouds generated by DMC v2, GRnet, and MADCrowner. Both DMC v2 and GRnet fail to generate the anatomical details of the oc-clusal surface, such as grooves and fossae. GRnet voxelizes the point cloud, which inherently limits the output point cloud density due to the spatial resolution constraints of the input volume. DMC v2 addresses this insuf-ficient point cloud density by directly generating point proxies from IOS data using a point transformer encoder. However, the encoder of DMC v2 and similar methods [38, 45, 46] is built upon self-attention blocks. All the features are derived exclusively from the IOS data. This often leads to an inhomogeneous spatial distribution of the generated point cloud. To solve this limitation, CrownDeformR employed cross-attention blocks to generate point proxies, which integrate features from the IOS data with the spatial information from the specific initial crown template. As shown in Figure 15, CrownDeformR generates point clouds with a uniform spatial distribution and excellent occlusal surface details. It should be noted that meshes produced by most of surface reconstruction algorithms are inherently watertight. This property introduces overextension in the reconstructed crown, a challenge that has rarely been discussed in previous studies. As illustrated in Figure 16, MADCrowner addresses this issue by incorporating a post-processing method that trims these extraneous areas with reference to the cervical margin. In addition, the post-processing algorithm also guarantees accurate consistency between the margins of the generated crown and the ground truth. Besides proximal contacts, appropriate occlusal contacts are also crucial for dental crown design. MADCrowner produces dental crowns with favor-able occlusal contacts. As depicted in Figure 17, which visualizes the occlusal contacts for two typical crowns, the distribution of occlusal contact regions on the generated crowns reveals great similarity with the ground truth. Com-pared with VBCD, a method that achieves the best performance in Table 4, our method produces occlusal contact regions whose spatial distribution and contact intensity patterns more closely resemble those of the ground truth. While our experimental results demonstrate that MADCrowner outper-forms existing methods, certain limitations persist. Dental crown generation 29 is an inherently open-ended task. Dental technicians often design notice-ably different crowns for the same target tooth, reflecting the diverse range of clinically acceptable solutions. However, current methodologies, includ-ing ours, typically constrain the predicted crown shape through regression-based losses, such as the Chamfer Distance. This approach inadvertently encourages the network to produce a “smoothed average” of plausible out-puts rather than capturing the true “mode” of the underlying distribution. Consequently, the generated crowns may lack critical anatomical details, such as grooves and fossae, which are essential for optimal function and aesthetics. Future work should explore the incorporation of advanced generative models, such as diffusion models [10], within 3D crown generation to produce high-quality crowns with richer morphological details. Moreover, expansion of the IOS dataset is also crucial to further enhance and validate the gener-alization capability of crown generation algorithms. This expansion should particularly focus on cases in which the incisor or canine is the target tooth. 

CRediT authorship contribution statement Linda Wei: Methodology, Validation, Visualization, Writing − original draft. Chang Liu: Methodology, Writing − original draft. Wenran Zhang: Writing 

− original draft, Visualization. Yuxuan Hu: Writing − original draft. Ruiyang Li: Writing − original draft. Feng Qi: Writing − original draft. Changyao Tian: Writing − original draft. Ke Wang: Writing − original draft. Yuanyuan Wang: Project administration, Supervision, Writing − review & editing. 

Shaoting Zhang: Project administration, Supervision, Writing − review & editing. Dimitris Metaxas: Project administration, Supervision Hong-sheng Li: Project administration, Supervision, Writing − review & editing, Funding Acquisition 

Data availability 

Due to privacy issues, the data used in this study is confidential. 

Declaration of generative AI and AI-assisted technologies in the writing process. 

During the preparation of this work, the authors used ChatGPT in order to correct grammatical errors. After using this tool, the authors reviewed 30 and edited the content as needed and take full responsibility for the content of the published article. 

Declaration of competing interest 

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial inter-ests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. 

Acknowledgement 

The authors would like to thank The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Fudan University, SenseTime, and Rutgers University for providing compu-tational resources and methodology guidance. They also wish to express their appreciation to the Department of Second Dental Center at Shanghai Ninth People’s Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, and Shanghai Stomatological Hospital for their professional insights and sup-port throughout the project. Finally, the authors are grateful to the Centre for Perceptual and Interactive Intelligence (CPII) under InnoHK and the Natural Science Foundation of Sichuan Province for their funding support. 

Funding 

This project was funded in part by the Centre for Perceptual and Inter-active Intelligence (CPII) Ltd under the Innovation and Technology Com-mission (ITC)’s InnoHK initiative, and in part by the Guangdong Basic and Applied Basic Research Foundation (Grant No. 2023B1515130008, XW). This work was also supported in part by the National Natural Science Foun-dation of China (Grant No. 62271115), and in part by the Natural Science Foundation of Sichuan Province (Grant No. 2025ZNSFSC0455). 

References 

[1] Abdollahi, A., Pradhan, B., Alamri, A., 2020. Vnet: An end-to-end fully convolutional neural network for road extraction from high-resolution remote sensing data. Ieee Access 8, 179424–179436. [2] Ardila, C.M., González-Arroyave, D., 2023. Efficacy of cad/cam technol-ogy in dental procedures performed by students: a systematic scoping review of randomized clinical trials. Heliyon 9. 31 [3] Bessadet, M., Drancourt, N., El Osta, N., 2025. Time efficiency and cost analysis between digital and conventional workflows for the fabrication of fixed dental prostheses: A systematic review. The Journal of Prosthetic Dentistry 133, 71–84. [4] Chou, G., Bahat, Y., Heide, F., 2023. Diffusion-sdf: Conditional gen-erative modeling of signed distance functions, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision, pp. 2262–2272. [5] Choy, C., Gwak, J., Savarese, S., 2019. 4d spatio-temporal con-vnets: Minkowski convolutional neural networks, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 3075–3084. [6] Davidowitz, G., Kotick, P.G., 2011. The use of cad/cam in dentistry. Dental Clinics of North America 55, 559–ix. [7] Goodacre, C.J., Campagni, W.V., Aquilino, S.A., 2001. Tooth prepa-rations for complete crowns: an art form based on scientific principles. The Journal of prosthetic dentistry 85, 363–376. [8] Goodfellow, I., Pouget-Abadie, J., Mirza, M., Xu, B., Warde-Farley, D., Ozair, S., Courville, A., Bengio, Y., 2020. Generative adversarial networks. Communications of the ACM 63, 139–144. [9] Hanocka, R., Metzer, G., Giryes, R., Cohen-Or, D., 2020. Point2mesh: A self-prior for deformable meshes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.11084 . [10] Ho, J., Jain, A., Abbeel, P., 2020. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in neural information processing systems 33, 6840– 6851. [11] Hollins, C., 2024. Basic guide to dental procedures. John Wiley & Sons. [12] Hosseinimanesh, G., Alsheghri, A., Keren, J., Cheriet, F., Guibault, F., 2025. Personalized dental crown design: A point-to-mesh completion network. Medical Image Analysis 101, 103439. [13] Hosseinimanesh, G., Ghadiri, F., Guibault, F., Cheriet, F., Keren, J., 2023. From mesh completion to ai-designed crown, in: International Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted In-tervention, Springer. pp. 555–565. 32 [14] Huang, J., Gojcic, Z., Atzmon, M., Litany, O., Fidler, S., Williams, F., 2023. Neural kernel surface reconstruction, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 4369–4379. [15] ISO, 1984. Dentistry—designation system for teeth and areas of the oral cavity. [16] Isola, P., Zhu, J.Y., Zhou, T., Efros, A.A., 2017. Image-to-image transla-tion with conditional adversarial networks, in: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 1125–1134. [17] Jain, R., Takkar, R., Jain, G., Takkar, R., Deora, N., Jain, R., 2016. Cad-cam the future of digital dentistry: a review. IP Ann Prosthodont Restor Dent 2, 33–6. [18] Joda, T., Brägger, U., 2016. Time-efficiency analysis of the treatment with monolithic implant crowns in a digital workflow: A randomized controlled trial. Clinical oral implants research 27, 1401–1406. [19] Kazhdan, M., Hoppe, H., 2013. Screened poisson surface reconstruction. ACM Transactions on Graphics (ToG) 32, 1–13. [20] Kunwar, D., Manandhar, A., Gurung, G., Khadka, J., Nepal, M., 2021. Endodontic indications among patients visiting a tertiary care center: A descriptive cross-sectional study. JNMA: Journal of the Nepal Medical Association 59, 741. [21] Leo, G., Nyamuryekung’e, K., Kahabuka, F.K., 2025. Impact of trau-matic dental injuries on oral health-related quality of life among primary school children in dar es salaam. Clinical and Experimental Dental Re-search 11, e70105. [22] Liu, B., Wang, M., Foroosh, H., Tappen, M., Pensky, M., 2015. Sparse convolutional neural networks, in: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 806–814. [23] Liu, Z., Tang, H., Lin, Y., Han, S., 2019. Point-voxel cnn for efficient 3d deep learning. Advances in neural information processing systems 32. 33 [24] Lorensen, W.E., Cline, H.E., 1998. Marching cubes: A high resolution 3d surface construction algorithm, in: Seminal graphics: pioneering efforts that shaped the field, pp. 347–353. [25] Miyazaki, T., Hotta, Y., Kunii, J., Kuriyama, S., Tamaki, Y., 2009. A review of dental cad/cam: current status and future perspectives from 20 years of experience. Dental materials journal 28, 44–56. [26] Organization, W.H., 2022. Global oral health status report: towards universal health coverage for oral health by 2030. World Health Orga-nization. [27] Peng, S., Jiang, C., Liao, Y., Niemeyer, M., Pollefeys, M., Geiger, A., 2021. Shape as points: A differentiable poisson solver. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 34, 13032–13044. [28] Peres, M.A., Macpherson, L.M., Weyant, R.J., Daly, B., Venturelli, R., Mathur, M.R., Listl, S., Celeste, R.K., Guarnizo-Herreño, C.C., Kearns, C., et al., 2019. Oral diseases: a global public health challenge. The Lancet 394, 249–260. [29] Podhorsky, A., Rehmann, P., Wöstmann, B., 2015. Tooth preparation for full-coverage restorations—a literature review. Clinical oral investi-gations 19, 959–968. [30] Qi, C.R., Su, H., Mo, K., Guibas, L.J., 2017a. Pointnet: Deep learning on point sets for 3d classification and segmentation, in: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 652–660. [31] Qi, C.R., Yi, L., Su, H., Guibas, L.J., 2017b. Pointnet++: Deep hier-archical feature learning on point sets in a metric space. Advances in neural information processing systems 30. [32] Rexhepi, I., Santilli, M., D’Addazio, G., Tafuri, G., Manciocchi, E., Caputi, S., Sinjari, B., 2023. Clinical applications and mechanical prop-erties of cad-cam materials in restorative and prosthetic dentistry: Asystematic review. Journal of functional biomaterials 14, 431. [33] Scavo, R., Lalis, R.M., Zmener, O., DiPietro, S., Grana, D., Pameijer, C.H., 2011. Frequency and distribution of teeth requiring endodontic 34 therapy in an argentine population attending a specialty clinic in en-dodontics. International dental journal 61, 257–260. [34] Shen, D., Wu, G., Suk, H.I., 2017. Deep learning in medical image analysis. Annual review of biomedical engineering 19, 221–248. [35] Tchapmi, L.P., Kosaraju, V., Rezatofighi, H., Reid, I., Savarese, S., 2019. Topnet: Structural point cloud decoder, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 383–392. [36] Tian, S., Wang, M., Dai, N., Ma, H., Li, L., Fiorenza, L., Sun, Y., Li, Y., 2021. Dcpr-gan: dental crown prosthesis restoration using two-stage generative adversarial networks. IEEE Journal of Biomedical and Health Informatics 26, 151–160. [37] Wang, G., Duan, Q., Shen, T., Zhang, S., 2024a. Sensecare: a research platform for medical image informatics and interactive 3d visualization. Frontiers in Radiology 4, 1460889. [38] Wang, J., Cui, Y., Guo, D., Li, J., Liu, Q., Shen, C., 2024b. Pointattn: You only need attention for point cloud completion, in: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on artificial intelligence, pp. 5472–5480. [39] Wayman, B.E., Patten, J.A., Dazey, S.E., 1994. Relative frequency of teeth needing endodontic treatment in 3350 consecutive endodontic patients. Journal of Endodontics 20, 399–401. [40] Wei, L., Liu, C., Zhang, W., Zhang, Z., Zhang, S., Li, H., 2025. Vbcd: A voxel-based framework for personalized dental crown design. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.17205 . [41] Xie, H., Yao, H., Zhou, S., Mao, J., Zhang, S., Sun, W., 2020. Gr-net: Gridding residual network for dense point cloud completion, in: European conference on computer vision, Springer. pp. 365–381. [42] Yang, S., Han, J., Lim, S.H., Yoo, J.Y., Kim, S., Song, D., Kim, S., Kim, J.M., Yi, W.J., 2024. Dcrownformer: Morphology-aware point-to-mesh generation transformer for dental crown prosthesis from 3d scan data of 35 antagonist and preparation teeth, in: International Conference on Med-ical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention, Springer. pp. 109–119. [43] Yang, X., Deng, Q., Huang, M., Jiang, L., Zhang, D., 2025. Mvdc: A multi-view dental completion model based on contrastive learning, in: ICASSP 2025-2025 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), IEEE. pp. 1–5. [44] Yang, Y., Feng, C., Shen, Y., Tian, D., 2018. Foldingnet: Point cloud auto-encoder via deep grid deformation, in: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 206–215. [45] Yu, X., Rao, Y., Wang, Z., Liu, Z., Lu, J., Zhou, J., 2021. Pointr: Diverse point cloud completion with geometry-aware transformers, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision, pp. 12498–12507. [46] Yu, X., Rao, Y., Wang, Z., Lu, J., Zhou, J., 2023. Adapointr: Diverse point cloud completion with adaptive geometry-aware trans-formers. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2301.04545 , doi: 10.48550/ arXiv.2301.04545 , arXiv:2301.04545 .[47] Yuan, W., Khot, T., Held, D., Mertz, C., Hebert, M., 2018. Pcn: Point completion network, in: 2018 international conference on 3D vision (3DV), IEEE. pp. 728–737. [48] Zaleckiene, V., Peciuliene, V., Brukiene, V., Drukteinis, S., 2014. Trau-matic dental injuries: etiology, prevalence and possible outcomes. Stom-atologija 16, 7–14. [49] Zhao, H., Jiang, L., Jia, J., Torr, P.H., Koltun, V., 2021. Point trans-former, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision, pp. 16259–16268. [50] Zhou, Y., Tuzel, O., 2018. Voxelnet: End-to-end learning for point cloud based 3d object detection, in: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 4490–4499. [51] Zhu, H., Jia, X., Zhang, C., Liu, T., 2022. Toothcr: a two-stage comple-tion and reconstruction approach on 3d dental model, in: Pacific-Asia 36 Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, Springer. pp. 161–172. 37 Appendix 

A. Details of The Network Design A.a Three Transformers 

> Figure 18: Detailed structures of a Geometry Aware Transformer (GAT), a Self Attention Transformer (SAT), and a Cross Attention Transformer (CAT)

There are three attention blocks mentioned in the section CrownDeformR. The detailed structures of these blocks are illustrated in Figure 18. The key and value of GAT are generated from IOS feature vectors denoted as FIOS , while the query is generated from F 14

> IOS

, which is obtained by applying farthest point sampling to FIOS , reducing the number of feature vectors to 1/4 

based on their spatial distribution. Both global and local geometric details of the point-wise feature can be captured by GAT. 

A.b Detail of CrownDeformeR 

IOS Feature Extraction and Cervical Margin Constraints. In per-sonalized dental crown design, the position and morphology of the adjacent and opposing teeth are crucial references to ensure proper functional restora-tion and aesthetics. Additionally, the cervical margin of the target abutment 38 Figure 19: Details of the Coarse Crown Refinement module. The number of points in the generated crown doubled after the processing. 

serves as an essential guideline for crown design. For a successful restoration, the crown boundary must accurately conform to the cervical margin. There-fore, we merge the segmentation of the prepared abutment into the input of CrownDeformR to enhance the cervical margin constraint. The input of CrownDeformR is denoted as PIOS ∈ Rn×4, where the first three dimensions represent the 3D coordinates of the IOS point cloud and the fourth dimension represents the segmentation label. We first encode PIOS to feature vectors 

F 0 

> IOS

∈ Rn×64 using an MLP. F 0 

> IOS

is then processed by a sequence of Geom-etry Aware Transformer (GAT) and Self Attention Transformer (SAT) [38]. GAT is a variant of SAT, in which the number of output feature vectors is reduced to 14 of the input. The output of the GAT-SAT sequence is aggre-gated as the global IOS feature g ∈ R1×512 by an MLP and a max pooling layer. F 0 

> IOS

and the intermediate features F 1 

> IOS

∈ Rn  

> 4×128

after the first GAT-SAT block are utilized to provide context features at different scales for the refinement of the coarse crown in the subsequent stage. 

Crown Template Deformation. Inspired by the procedure of CAD den-tal crown design, CrownDeformR deforms a template crown to generate the personalized crown. In a typical adult dentition, there are 28 teeth, each annotated with a unique label according to the Fédération Dentaire Interna-tionale (FDI) notation system [15]. In MADCrowner, we assign a point cloud crown template for each tooth. The appropriate template based on the tar-get tooth is selected as the initial crown T ∈ Rm×3. CrownDeformR deforms the initial crown T by incorporating the global feature g through a Cross Attention Transformer (CAT) block. We use an MLP to encode T as feature vectors Ftemplate ∈ Rm×128 , which is utilized to generate the query of the CAT block, while the key and value are obtained from the global IOS feature g.The output of CAT is further processed by two SAT blocks to generate the 39 coarse point cloud of the personalized crown, denoted as P 0

> Coarse

. Instead of directly utilizing the global IOS feature to generate all the points [42], the CAT block facilitates interaction between the global IOS feature and the initial point cloud, leading to more effective and specific generation results. The deformation of the crown template is supervised by the chamfer distance loss formulated as: 

LCoarse = 1

|PCoarse |

∑

> p∈PCoarse

min  

> q∈P14
> GT

∥p − q∥22

+ 1

|P 14

> GT

|

∑ 

> q∈P14
> GT

min 

> p∈PCoarse

∥p − q∥22 ,

where P 14 

> GT

refers to a downsampled point cloud of the ground truth crown 

PGT , in which the number of points decreases to 14 .

Coarse Crown Refinement. The CrownDeformR further refines the coarse crown to generate the fine-grained result with a multi-scale paradigm. For each scale, the number of points in the crown point cloud increased by twice after the processing of the crown refinement module, which consists of a se-quence of CAT and SAT. We use the CAT block to fuse the IOS feature with the coarse crown. The query of the CAT is derived from the feature vectors FCrown ∈ RB×N ×C , which is obtained from the coarse crown with an MLP. The corresponding IOS features FIOS are utilized to generate the key and value. The output of the CAT is further processed by two SAT blocks to generate Frefine ∈ RB×2C×N . It is then reshaped as RB×C×2N to generate the refined point cloud. The detailed structure of the coarse crown refine-ment module is demonstrated in Figure 19. There are two crown refinement modules in CrownDeformR. We perform a deep supervision strategy to op-timize these modules. For the first module, we use the chamfer distance loss formulated as: 

LRefine1 = 1

|PRefine1 |

∑

> p∈PRefine1

min  

> q∈P12
> GT

∥p − q∥22

+ 1

|P 12

> GT

|

∑ 

> q∈P12
> GT

min 

> p∈PRefine1

∥p − q∥22 ,

in which P 12 

> GT

refers to a 12 down-sample of the PGT , PRefine1 is the refined point cloud. For the second crown refinement module, we employ Curvature 40 and Margin Penalty Loss (CMPL) to provide enhanced supervision for the crown details and the peri-cervical margin regions. CMPL ensures the crown refinement with adequate details and improved alignment to the cervical margin. CMPL is defined as LRefine2 in the following formula: 

LRefine2 = 1

| ˆPCrown |

∑ 

> p∈ˆPCrown

(e|κ(p)| + Iq∈M (PGT )

) min 

> q∈PGT

∥p − q∥2

+ 1

|PGT |

∑

> q∈PGT

(e|κ(q)| + Iq∈M (PGT )

) min  

> p∈ˆPCrown

∥p − q∥2 ,

where ˆPCrown is the predicted point cloud after the second refinement module. 

κ(·) is the normalized curvature. M (PGT ) is the set of margin line points in the ground truth. The ˆPCrown is sent to a SAP block to predict the DPSR grid for surface reconstruction. The prediction of the DPSR grid Gpred is supervised by an MSE loss with the ground truth GGT :

LDPSR = || Gpred − GGT || 2

B. Generalization on Incisors and Canines 

Molars and premolars serve as the primary teeth during mastication. In clinical cases, damage to molars and premolars occurs much more frequently than to canines and incisors [39, 33, 20]. Accordingly, previous studies on dental crown generation algorithms also primarily focused on these posterior teeth [42, 13, 12]. In our collected dataset, the number of damaged canines and incisors is substantially lower than that of molars and premolars. The distribution of the raw dataset is shown in Table 8. Given this imbalance, the experiments in the manuscript restricted target teeth to molars and pre-molars. To demonstrate the generalization capability of the proposed method, we incorporated data samples with canines and incisors as target teeth from the raw dataset into the training and testing sets and retrained our model. Figure 20 visualizes two typical results generated by the retrained model. These results confirm that our method is effective in generating dental crowns for both canines and incisors. For a more comprehensive assessment of the retrained model, we conducted a quantitative evaluation of the generated crowns across different tooth types, and summarized these results in Table 9. Due to the pronounced data imbalance, the generation quality for incisors and canines still exhibits a measurable performance gap when compared to 41 Figure 20: Visualization for the generated dental crown on incisors and canines. (a) Input IOS mesh. (b) Generation results of the retrained model. (c) Ground truth. 

the molars and premolars. In future work, we plan to mitigate this disparity by collecting additional clinical data from patients with damaged canines and incisors. 

> Table 8: Data distribution of the raw dataset for dental crown design.

Tooth Position Number of Cases Maxillary Mandible Total Incisor 217 33 250 Canine 115 13 128 Premolar 955 330 1285 Molar 1366 1951 3317 42 Table 9: Quantitative evaluation for dental crown generation across different tooth types. 

Tooth Type CD-L2 ↓ Fidelity Distance ↑ F-value ↑ Hausdorff Distance (mm) ↓

Incisor 0.285 0.143 0.766 1.589 Canine 0.406 0.174 0.731 1.820 Premolar 0.199 0.112 0.881 1.243 Molar 0.204 0.106 0.915 1.112 

43