Title: Wherefore Art Thou? Provenance-Guided Automatic Online Debugging with Lumos

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.29013v2

Published Time: Wed, 08 Apr 2026 00:16:01 GMT

Number of Pages: 13

Markdown Content:
Wherefore Art Thou? 

# Provenance-Guided Automatic Online Debugging with Lumos 

Jingyuan Chen  § Lei Zhang  † Leon Schuermann  § Gongqi Huang  § Ravi Netravali  § Amit Levy  §

§ Princeton University  † ByteDance 

## Abstract 

Debugging distributed systems in-production is inevitable 

and hard. Myriad interactions between concurrent compo -

nents in modern, complex and large-scale systems cause 

non-deterministic bugs that offline testing and verification 

fail to capture. When bugs surface at runtime, their root 

causes may be far removed from their symptoms. To identify 

a root cause, developers often need evidence scattered across 

multiple components and traces. Unfortunately, existing 

tools fail to quickly and automatically record useful prove -

nance information at low overheads, leaving developers to 

manually perform the onerous evidence collection task. 

Lumos is an online debugging framework that exposes ap -

plication-level bug provenances—the computational history 

linking symptoms of an incident to their root causes. Lumos 

leverages dependency-guided instrumentation powered by 

static analysis to identify program state related to a bug’s 

provenance, and exposes them via lightweight on-demand 

recording. Lumos provides developers with enough evidence 

to identify a bug’s root cause, while incurring low runtime 

overhead, and given only a few occurrences of a bug. 

## 1 Introduction 

The growing complexity of modern cloud systems makes 

debugging more challenging than ever. While testing and 

verification  [14 ] can catch large classes of bugs ahead of 

deployment, many bugs remain undetected until deploy -

ment. Bugs can result from intricate combinations of runtime 

conditions, including user inputs, ordering of concurrent 

events  [23 ], and cross-component interactions  [33 ]. Worse, a 

bug’s root cause can be far from its manifestation, may span 

multiple components, multiple executions, and may only 

be reflected in state not captured in log outputs. To gather 

evidence that explains how a previous execution led to a 

bug, developers need to perform backward reasoning from 

the bug’s manifestation, in the production system itself. We 

term this process  provenance-guided online debugging .

Automated solutions should be able to resolve these issues, 

however current approaches fail to do so in one of three 

ways: (1) They incur impractically high runtime overhead 

by recording too much information  [28 , 29 ]. (2) They collect 

insufficient information to reliably identify root causes in 

many cases  [21 ]. (3) They require too many iterations to 

collect the  right  information  [1, 18 , 31 , 40 ].

In order for an automatic online debugging tool to be 

practical , it must satisfy three criteria concurrently: 

RR  Sampling  Static Log  Lumos 

Low Overhead  ✓ ✓ ✓

Diag. Latency  ✓ ✓ ✓

Soundness  ✓ Eventually  ✓

Table 1: Existing approaches to online debugging, including 

record-replay (RR), sampling, and static logging each fail 

to be practical in at least one of three ways: low runtime-

overhead, low diagnostic latency, or soundness. 

1.  Low Runtime Overhead : Since online debugging in -

struments a system in-production, it should impose low 

performance overhead. 

2.  Low Diagnosis Latency : It should take few occurrences 

of the bug to collect enough evidence to start performing 

root cause reasoning. 

3.  Soundness : Developers should be able to trust that the 

results of a debugger contain enough evidence to correctly 

identify the root cause. 

We propose Lumos, an online debugging tool for automated 

evidence collection in distributed systems that achieves all 

three. With Lumos, a developer specifies the  manifestation  of 

an issue to investigate—such as a panicking line of code—and 

Lumos  dynamically  instruments tracepoints that capture and 

correlate evidence for recovering the provenances of bugs. 

Unlike prior approaches, Lumos achieves all three critical 

properties ( Table 1 ) using two key techniques:  dependency-

guided instrumentation  and  lightweight data flow tracing .

Dependency-guided instrumentation  allows Lumos to au -

tomatically choose provenance-relevant tracepoints to be 

instrumented, powered by a scalable static analysis that 

estimates potential data and control dependencies among 

complex system components. Under this strategy, Lumos is 

able to adjust its instrumentation based on the bugs under 

investigation, and avoids overheads introduced by collecting 

irrelevant information. 

With the tracepoints identified, Lumos’  lightweight data 

flow tracing  makes use of a set of inexpensive tracing tech -

niques for correlating data flows caused by accesses to shared 

state. This allows Lumos to associate evidence scattered 

in multiple traces to piece together complex provenances 

of bugs. 

We evaluate Lumos on two representative real-world bugs 

found in the large, complex, and widely-deployed Hadoop 

Distributed File System. Our evaluation focuses on particu -

1replicaMap toReplicate priQueue    

> DataNode_1 NameNode
> 2.a
> 2.b 2.c
> 1.a 1.b
> 1.c
> 1.d
> 1.e
> 1.f
> panic( )

## ≠Figure 1: Development Process of HDFS-4022 

larly intricate bugs that complicate root-cause reasoning. 

Our experiments demonstrate that Lumos incurs practical 

runtime overheads (approx.  10% reduction in throughput at 

high loads on average) during an active debugging session, 

and identifies root causes within  5 occurrences. 

## 2 Motivation 

Bugs in large-scale distributed systems can be complicated. 

Recent works have observed that many distributed system 

bugs are non-deterministic and environment-dependent, 

such as configuration errors  [16 ], failure-induced bugs  [17 ],

concurrency-related bugs  [23 , 25 ], or cross-component 

interactions bugs  [33 ]. As it is infeasible to model the entire 

space of possible runtime states and environments ahead 

of time, simple pre-production testing will inevitably fail to 

uncover some of these bugs  [14 ]. Therefore, developers have 

to troubleshoot them after they manifest during deployment. 

Yet the multi-component and stateful nature of distrib -

uted systems make this process challenging. The pieces of 

evidence for reasoning about their root cause may be  latent ,

meaning they can be far from a bug’s manifestation (both 

in time, and in distance between the code fragments), and 

the evidence linking them may be scattered across multiple 

components and traces. To locate the root cause, debuggers 

need to perform backward reasoning to uncover the previous 

computational steps leading to the bug, beyond the infor -

mation available at the point where a bug manifests (e.g., 

a panic() ). We refer to this process as  provenance-guided 

debugging . We next illustrate the necessity of such a process 

through a real-world bug HDFS-4022  [2].

2.1  Troubleshooting a Latent and Non-Determin -

istic Bug in HDFS 

The Hadoop Distributed File System (HDFS) is a produc -

tion-scale distributed filesystem, consisting of two types 

of components: one main  NameNode  responsible for manag -

ing file metadata, and multiple  DataNode s responsible for 

persisting and replicating the actual file blocks.  Client s

may communicate with the  NameNode  to obtain or update 

metadata of files, with which they can communicate with 

> DataNode

s to transfer the file contents. The  DataNode s

communicate with the  NameNode  by periodically sending 

heartbeats and reports to indicate their liveness and work 

progress. Each  DataNode  may also transfer blocks to other 

> DataNode

s for replication. 

Figure 1  illustrates how the HDFS-4022  [2] bug manifests 

in this system. For this bug to occur, a  Client  first writes 

to a file and update the last block’s metadata by calling  

> NameNode:completeFile()

(1.a). This results in a  Block  (red) 

to be added to the  priQueue  data structure at the  NameNode 

(1.b). Later, a background thread retrieves it (1.c) and add it to 

the  toReplicate  queue (1.d). Next, the client calls  append() 

on the file, which results in a new version of the  Block  (blue) 

being generated. This  Block  is sent to  DataNode_1  (2.a) and 

stored in its  replicaMap  (2.b). Later,  DataNode_2  joins the 

system, which triggers the  NameNode  to ask  DataNode_1  to 

replicate the block (1.f). However, the  NameNode  retrieves the 

outdated  Block  when sending its metadata to the  DataNode_1 

(1.e).  DataNode_1  then compares the received  Block  with 

the matching  Block  from  replicaMap  (2.c), and reports an 

error due to mismatches in their versions. 

The root cause was a missing delete of the outdated  Block 

(red) from  toReplicate  after  append()  takes place. Tracking 

it down requires developers to backtrack the provenance of 

the two blocks all the way to Step 1.a and 2.a to conclude that  

> Block

(red) is indeed outdated. The entire chain of evidence 

spans two components, four traces and three shared data 

structures, which poses great challenges for developers to 

capture it in its entirety. Even worse, the bug only happens 

under rare interleavings of events, such as the late joining 

of  DataNode_2 .

This example illustrates key challenges in debugging 

distributed system incidents, whose manifestation and root 

causes can be fairly simple, but the chains of propagation 

are complex. Such complexities are common in real-world 

incidents  [3, 4].

2.2  Provenance-Guided Debugging Today 

Next, we briefly review how developers collect provenances 

of in-production bugs today. One of the simplest and most 

common techniques is logging. However, placement of 

logging statements are usually pre-determined and only 

record a limited amount of information. This is insufficient 

and brings difficulty for root cause reasoning when additional 

bug-specific evidence is needed. 

Another option is to record everything at runtime (similar 

to record-and-replay tools  [28 ]). This option can recover 

arbitrary information developers may need, but at the cost 

of prohibitive runtime overheads. 

Finally, recent advances in failure reproduction tools allow 

developers to debug in a synthesized offline environment 

produced by symbolic execution  [41 , 42 ]. However, such 

tools suffer from scalability and cost issues when handling 

complex bugs. Moreover, these tools only guarantee to 

2reproduce the failure manifestation with no promises to 

faithfully recover the original root causes. 

All of the aforementioned practices fail to strike a good 

balance between runtime overheads and universal bug-spe -

cific evidence collection. To resolve this tension, sampling-

based recording may be used, where each execution trace 

is selected at random to be recorded according to predeter -

mined sampling rates. Yet the sampling rates are usually 

kept very low (around 1%) to meet the goal of low overheads, 

resulting in collected evidence being fragmented and sparse. 

Debuggers may need to wait until they are lucky where 

a complete chain of evidence is sampled, leading to slow 

diagnosis. 

2.3  The Need for Automatic, Efficient, and Flexi -

ble Online Debugging 

In order to pinpoint root causes in a timely fashion, devel -

opers must reason backward from where the bug manifests 

and add logs or tracepoints to observe the values of relevant 

variables that explain the bug’s provenance. Unfortunately, 

all of the previous techniques either incur high overheads 

that are intolerable for production systems, or capture insuf -

ficient information, making provenance-guided debugging 

a time-consuming and manual process. And worse, for any 

practical systems of significant size, performing this process 

manually  is implausible, since the number of potentially 

relevant variables grow exponentially as the chain of evi -

dence deepens. Therefore, we need a debugging tool that 

automates the process of bug-specific provenance recording, 

with as few manual steps and as little overhead as possible. 

## 3 Lumos to the Rescue 

To enable fast provenance-guided debugging at low run -

time overheads, we present Lumos, a debugging tool that 

automatically instrument logs and tracepoints to collect 

provenance-related evidence for runtime bugs. When a bug 

occurs, developers simply specify how the bug manifests 

(e.g., through a particular value of  x in a  panic(x) ) to Lumos. 

Lumos then performs  dependency-guided instrumentation ,

under which values of variables that the bug manifestation 

has data/control dependency on are selected to be recorded. 

Such a  systematic  selection process avoids overheads in -

curred by recording provenance-irrelevant information and 

ensures sufficient necessary evidence is recorded. Compared 

with sampling, it can recover provenances with much fewer 

occurrences of the bug, leading to significantly lower diag -

nosis latencies. 

Lumos’ automatic instrumentation is powered by a scal -

able static analyzer that models all  application-space  control 

and data dependencies, including heap data dependencies 

and dependencies across multiple functions and threads. 

This empowers Lumos to select any provenance-relevant 

computation steps in complex code bases. Lumos assumes Provenances      

> Developer
> Collector Analyzer
> Agent
> Controller
> SDG
> Component
> Agent Component
> Instrument
> Logs Instrument Traces
> Manifestation
> Offline Phase Query Phase Recording Phase
> Query
> Source
> Codes

Figure 2: Lumos Architecture. 

that library functions are correct and therefore only collects 

application-space information. We argue that this design 

is reasonable under the observation that most real-world 

application bugs can be troubleshooted through application-

space evidence. However, we stress that Lumos is  capable  of 

modeling application-space dependencies  induced  by library 

functions. We discuss this distinction in detail in Section  §3.2 .

3.1  The Lumos System Architecture 

Figure 2  illustrates Lumos’ architecture and workflows. 

At the  offline phase  (Section  §3.2 ), Lumos performs static 

analysis to build an application-space  system dependency 

graph  (SDG). In an SDG, each node represents an access to a 

memory location (local variable or heap location), and each 

edge stands for a static dependency between two accesses. 

The SDG is loaded into a centralized  controller . When a bug 

occurs, Lumos enters the  query phase  (Section  §3.3 ). The 

developers first collect their current knowledge about the 

bug. When the bug occurs for the first time, this includes the 

manifestation point (e.g., where a  panic()  happens). When 

a bug reoccurs, this information may be augmented with 

traces and partial provenances exposed by logs instrumented 

by Lumos from previous occurrences. 

This knowledge is then submitted as  debugging queries  to 

the controller, which generates an  instrumentation plan  based 

on the queries and the SDG. The plan specifies recording 

operations that capture runtime values of nodes potentially 

relevant to the provenance of the bug (up to a tunable 

overhead limit). These operations are sent to the Lumos 

agents running alongside each system component and are 

then instrumented by the agents at runtime. Lumos then 

transitions to the  recording phase  (Section  §3.4 ) where the 

agents continuously generate traces. When the bug reoccurs, 

the agents collect and send the traces to a centralized 

collector. Developers then assemble the provenances for 

root-cause-reasoning and potentially formulate queries for 

futher rounds  to collect additional evidence if the root cause 

cannot be deduced. 

Challenges.  Achieving low diagnosis latencies and run -

time overheads with the above architecture comes with the 

following challenges. First, Lumos’ analyzer must strike 

a good trade-off between precision and scalability when 

identifying dependencies. This is crucial for Lumos to avoid 

recording excessive amounts of data. Past works on static 

31 void rpc(int msg){ 2 panic(msg > 0); } 3 void thread_1(){ 4 MAP.put(key, val); } 5 void thread_2(){ 6 Object obj = new Object(); 7 Bool val = MAP.get(key); 8 if(val) 9 obj.f = data; 10 rpc(obj.f); }    

> 1
> 2
> 34
> 45
> 3
> 6
> 3
> L2,W,msg
> L10,R,obj.f
> L9,W,obj.f
> L9,R,data L8,R,val
> L7,W,val
> L7,R,MAP.*
> L4,W,MAP.*
> L9,R,obj

# ⇒Figure 3: An example of SDG. Accesses to reference  (s,f) 

is abbriviated as  s.f .

analysis  [21 , 22 ] have identified this to be difficult on large 

code bases. 

Second, given the selected nodes that are considered 

bug-provenance-relevant, Lumos’ controller must generate 

a recording plan that traces the values of and data flows 

between the nodes with as few logs as possible while 

avoiding expensive recording operations. 

And third, Lumos’ agents must carry out the recording 

plan efficiently with lightweight recording operations, while 

maintaining negligible overheads when no debugging is in-

progress. We specify how Lumos addresses the challenges 

throughout the remainder of this section. 

3.2  Offline Phase: Static Analysis 

To enable fast diagnosis with low runtime overheads, 

Lumos must respond swiftly to developers’ queries and 

automatically identify as small a set of bug-provenance-

relevant recording operations as possible. To this end, 

Lumos performs offline static analysis that outputs data and 

control dependencies between accesses to variables and heap 

locations, such that dependent accesses can be extracted 

efficiently at runtime. 

3.2.1  Definitions 

Statement and AML.  Lumos models program execution 

as atomic transitions between  Stmt s. Each  Stmt  may access 

(read or write) a set of abstract memory locations ( AML s). 

Lumos models two types of  AML s: local variables ( Local ,

e.g.,  val  at Line 7 in Figure  Figure 3 ) and heap references 

(Reference , e.g.,  obj.f  at Line 9). 

System Dependency Graph.  Lumos’ analyzer outputs 

dependency relations between any variables and heap loca -

tions accessed, captured in a so-called system dependency 

graph (SDG). In this graph, each  Node  corresponds to an 

access, defined as a tuple ( Stmt , Type , AML ) that specify 

the statement and the type ( R/W) of the access, as well as 

the accessed  AML . For example, at  L9  in Figure  Figure 3 ,

three nodes are constructed:  (L9,R,obj) ,(L9,W,obj.f)  and 

> (L9,R,data)

. Each edge represents a control/data depen -

dency relation between a pair of access nodes. We next 

specifies the different types of dependencies Lumos models 

and elaborate on how they are derived. An example code 1 void caller1(int y){ 2 o1.f=y; 3 print(foo(o1)); 4 bar(o1); } 5 foo(o){return o.f;} 6 bar(o){return o;}      

> 7void caller2(int z){ 8o2.f=z; 9print(foo(o2)); 10 o3=bar(o2); 11 print(o3.f); }

Figure 4: Examples of drops in analysis precision caused by 

the calling-context problem. 

snippet and part of its SDG are illustrated in Figure  Figure 3 .

Throughout the next sections we use  𝑛  to represent an SDG 

> Node

, and  𝑠 𝑛  to represent its  Stmt , 𝑙 𝑛  for its  AML , and  𝑡 𝑛  for 

its  Type .

3.2.2  Control Dependency 

A control dependency  𝑛 1 → 𝑛 2 (such as  4 in  Figure 3 )

exists if  𝑙 𝑛 2 is a control variable at a branching statement 

𝑠 𝑛 2 , and the reachability of  𝑠 𝑛 1 depends the branch taken. 

Lumos performs post-dominator analysis  [9] to identify 

control dependencies between statements. We curently do 

not support exceptional control dependencies. In addition, 

Lumos also resolves inter-procedural control dependencies 

via  call graph analysis  [8].

3.2.3  Data Dependency 

A data dependency  𝑛 1 → 𝑛 2 exists if changing the value of 

𝑙 𝑛 2 may affect that of  𝑙 𝑛 1 according to the data flow semantics 

of the programming language under analysis. There are 

multiple types of data dependencies: an intra-statement 

data dependency  3 exists when  𝑠 𝑛 1 = 𝑠 𝑛 1 , 𝑡 𝑛 1 = 𝑊  , 𝑡 𝑛 2 =

𝑅 . The relation captures the fact that the computational 

effects of each statement depend on the inputs. Meanwhile, 

an inter-statement data dependency (  2 3 5 6) exists when 

𝑠 𝑛 1 ≠ 𝑠 𝑛 2 , 𝑡 𝑛 1 = 𝑊  , 𝑡 𝑛 2 = 𝑅  and  𝑙 𝑛 1 and  𝑙 𝑛 2 may refer to 

the same memory location, which captures the fact that a 

read from a  AML  depends on a write to it. This can be further 

catagorized as follows: 

Local Data Dep.  When  𝑙 𝑛 1 = 𝑙 𝑛 2 = 𝑉  , where  𝑉  is a 

> Local

, a local data dependency like  5 arises. 

Inter-Proc Dep.  An interprocedural data dependency  1

arises due to passing data via parameters or return values. 

This happens when  𝑛 1 represents a read from a formal 

parameter of a method  𝑚 , and  𝑛 2 represents the write to the 

actual argument passed at a callsite of  𝑚 . The case for return 

values is similar. To obtain these facts, Lumos relies on the 

result of the call graph analysis that outputs pairs of callsites 

and target methods. An inter-procedural dependency may 

span multiple components, such as the dependency  1 caused 

by an RPC in the example of Figure  Figure 3 . To add such 

dependencies edges, we first annotate the communication 

endpoints (call site or entrypoint of RPCs), then add depen -

dency edges between the matching nodes at each side of the 

41 List l1.add(o1); 2 List l2 = l1; 3 o2 = l2.get(i);    

> 4URI u1 = new URI(..); 5URI u2 = u1.resolve(..); 6File f = new File(u2);

Figure 5: Examples illustrating the analysis of library-

induced dependencies. 

communication channel, including pairs of formal parame -

ters and arguments, return values and corresponding data 

structures in the serialization and deserialization functions. 

Heap Data Dep.  A heap data dependency arises when 

𝑙 𝑛 1 = 𝐴 1, 𝑙 𝑛 2 = 𝐴 2, and  𝐴 1 and  𝐴 2 are  Reference s that 

may refer to the same heap location. Lumos handle appli -

cation  2 and library  6 heap data dependencies separately. 

Each  Reference  is modeled as a pair of ( AML , Field ), where  

> AML

describes the reference’s base (which can be another  

> Reference

or a  Local ), and  Field  describes the field accessed 

relative to its base. For example, for an access to  s.f , the  

> Reference

is  (Local s, f) .

A pair of application  Reference s 𝐴 1 = (𝑏 1, 𝑓 1) and  𝐴 2 =

(𝑏 2, 𝑓 2) may refer to the same location if  𝑓 1 = 𝑓 2 and  𝑏 1

may alias  with  𝑏 2. Lumos obtains this information through 

Anderson-style points-to analysis  [26 ]. When a heap depen -

dency involves a  Reference  to a data structure shared 

between threads (e.g.,  6), Lumos additionally refers to it 

as a shared state dependency. Shared data structures are 

identified via thread escape analysis  [30 ].

3.2.4  Challenges in Precision vs. Scalabililty 

Lumos requires precise heap dependency analysis to avoid 

large amounts of spurious dependency edges in its SDGs, 

which would lead to excessive amounts of data logged in the 

query phase. Unfortunately, traditional heap dependency 

analysis can be imprecise  [21 , 22 ] for complex code bases. 

This is due to the effect of calling contexts as illustrated in 

Figure 4 : foo()  has two  calling contexts  (call sites)  L3  and  L9 .

To distinguish between dataflow facts involving the effect of  

> foo

under different contexts, such as whether  (L3,foo(o1)) 

depends on  (L2,y) , a  context-sensitive  analysis may be used 

with which different copies of  foo  under each context are 

created and analyzed separately. Yet such context-sensitive 

analysis is hard to scale due to the exponential growth in 

the number of contexts as the call chains deepen  [24 , 32 ].

Hence, practical analysis must sacrifice precision by adopt -

ing  context-insensitivity  that does not distinguish between 

contexts. This results in two types of imprecision. 

Type 1.  False-positive heap dependency edges may arise 

due to noisy aliasing pairs. In the above example, a noisy 

aliasing pair  (o1,o3)  will be generated due to the two 

contexts of  bar()  at  L4  and  L10 , resulting in a spurious edge 

> (L11,R,(o3,f))

→(L2,W,(o1,f)) .

Type 2.  False-positive  paths  may occur when callees with 

multiple callsites are involved, like the path  (L3,R,foo(o1)) 

→(L5,R,(o,f)) →(L8,W,(o2,f)) .

Lumos resolves this fundamental tension between the 

analysis’ scalability and precision with the following design: 

for Type 1 imprecision, Lumos uses a state-of-the-art points-

to analysis  [26 ] that avoids a large portion of context-induced 

precision drops when analyzing aliasing relationships. The 

algorithm “short-cuts" the analysis of points-to relations 

for heap-manipulating functions whenever possible without 

incurring the complexity of context-sensitive algorithms. 

For Type 2 imprecision, Lumos avoids constructing edges 

from/to nodes within functions with many calling contexts 

as much as possible. Two sub-designs enable this. First, 

Lumos inlines short functions that solely perform heap 

accesses. This helps to avoid noisy paths caused by short 

but frequently-called functions (e.g., getters and setters like  

> foo

above). As the functions are short, copying them at each 

callsite only increases the graph size by a small amount. 

Second, Lumos utilizes an observation from recent work  [10 ,

19 ] that the imprecision in heap dataflow analysis is mostly 

caused by library functions with complex internal dynamics. 

However, the externally observable semantics of these library 

functions can be much simpler. Since Lumos only tracks 

application-space provenances, it is possible to bypass the 

internals of complex library functions and derive the effects 

of library calls to them based on their externally-visible 

semantics. Below we elaborate on this. 

Library-Bypassed Analysis.  Lumos employing ideas 

from recent works in static analysis  [10 , 11 ] on bypassing the 

internals of library functions. At each library callsite, Lumos 

generates  specifications  that summarize the  side effects  of 

the calls. For each  s:Local  of non-premitive types used at a 

callsite (arguments or return values), the specifications tell 

whether  (s,*)  is read or written. where  * is a  pseudo field 

that represents the set of all  reachable heap locations  from 

the base reference. Lumos then generates the access nodes 

based on the specifications. For example, for callsite  L4  in 

Figure  Figure 3 , (L4,W,(MAP,*))  is generated. 

To determine whether  (L1,R,(s1,*))  depends on  (L2,W, 

> (s2,*))

, one must check whether  (s1,*)  and  (s2,*)  may 

overlap . If  s1  may-alias with  s2 , then they  directly  may-

overlap. For instance,  (L3,R,(l2,*))  depends on  (L1,W,  

> (l1,*))

in  Figure 5  as  l1  may-alias with  l2 . Otherwise, 

Lumos performs additional analysis to determine potential 

indirect  may-overlap relations. Lumos conservatively deems  

> (s1,*)

and  (s2,*)  to overlap indirectly if 1)  s1  and  s2 

appears at a common callsite, and at least one of  (s1,*) 

and  (s2,*)  is written; 2) there is an  s3  that both  s1  and  

> s2

overlap with. For example, in Figure  Figure 5 , (u1,*) ,

> (u2,*)

and  (f,*)  pair-wise may-overlap. To prevent signif -

icant precision drops, Lumos only tracks indirect overlapping 

between library objects within the same function and ignores 

inter-procedural cases. While this may cause missed depen -

dencies in edge cases, we argue that these cases are rare; 

in all our case studies, we did not encounter crucial library 

dependencies to be absent. 

5Lumos uses templates to efficiently generate the speficia -

tions from a small set of developer provided annotations that 

specify the rules for the generation, which only involves 517 

LoC in Datalog, plus a short list of 112 functions to be treated 

by special rules. Automatically generating such semantics 

an active area of research  [11 , 19 , 35 ]; we leave this extension 

to future work. 

3.3  Query Phase: Inst-Plan Generation 

When a bug occurs, a developer collects their current 

knowledge about the bug and presents it as a set of  debugging 

queries  to the Lumos controller. For example, as the bug of 

Figure  Figure 3  manifests at  L2: panic(msg>0) , the query 

would be the node  (L2,R,msg) . Given these queries, the 

Lumos controller is responsible for generating an instru -

mentation plan that specifies the recording operations to 

instrument. The plan must achieve two goals: first, it should 

ensure coverage of key values and data flows to enable 

reasoning about bug provenances. Second, it should avoid 

recording excessive amounts of information and using 

expensive recording operations. 

To meet these goals, the controller selects nodes that the 

queried nodes depend on by performing a depth-limited 

traversal over the SDG, starting from the nodes in the queries. 

This algorithm works similar to program slicing  [36 ]. The 

depth limit is set to avoid high recording overheads, as 

unbounded depth may result in all nodes selected. A larger 

depth could result in reduced diagnosis latency (the number 

of debugging rounds) as more nodes’ values are recorded, at 

the cost of higher runtime overheads. Next, the controller 

identifies the necessary operations to be instrumented, 

namely ones responsible for recovering the values of nodes 

in  𝑅 .

A brutal-force strategy could decide to record all values 

of nodes in  𝑅  and an ordering of all runtime events, 

which results in prohibitive overheads. Therefore, Lumos 

adopts  non-determinism-based recording  commonly used in 

record-and-replay frameworks  [15 , 37 ], under which only 

the sources of non-determinism are recorded such that the 

remaining values can be deduced from them. This includes 

the common environmental and input non-determinism: 

when  𝑙 𝑛  is the return value of a non-deterministic library 

call, such as  System.nanoTime() , the value is logged as the 

effect of the calls are not reproducible; when a node reads 

from an external input at the system boundary (such as 

an RPC entrypoint), the value is input-nondeterministic 

and logged. We currently annotate sources of environmen -

tal non-determinism, which involves 96 lines of codes in 

Datalog. In addition, we apply an optimization where only 

environmental/input non-determinism affecting nodes in  𝑅 

is logged. 

However, adopting the above strategy results two sub-

challenges in the precense of thread-shared state. First, 

traditional RR frameworks record a  fixed  set of non-deter -

Figure 6: Example of using timestamps to approximate 

shared state accesses’ orderings 

minism at system boundaries, such as inputs and system 

calls, since they are  always-on . This is insufficient for Lumos 

since recording in Lumos is enabled  on-demand . As a result, 

the state of shared data structures when recording is enabled 

is an additional source of non-determinism from Lumos’ 

perspective, as their values may be determined before 

recording was enabled. A naive solution is to take a heap 

snapshot when enabling recording, which may introduce 

long pauses in system execution that are impractical for in-

production systems. To resolve this issue, Lumos  lazily  logs 

values read for each node in  𝑅  reading a shared  AML .

Second, to recover bug provenances involving shared state, 

Lumos must resolve inter-thread dataflows (i.e., identifying 

the corresponding write event for each read event). This 

requires ordering information of shared state accesses. Yet 

traditional mechanism for recording ordering information 

use expensive mechanisms such as Lamport clocks [13 ] that 

result in high overheads. To tackle this problem, Lumos 

adopts the following technique. 

3.3.1  Lightweight Shared-State Dataflow Tracing 

To address the second challenge, Lumos applies the  cross-

interleave hypothesis  (CIH) from  [20 ], which argued that 

when accesses to shared state are coarsely-interleaved, one 

may use the timestamps from shared hardware clocks to 

establish an approximation of their orderings. By assuming 

the validity of CIH, Lumos uses a set of  lightweight dataflow 

tracing operations  for shared state accesses. First, for each 

shared-state accessing node, Lumos logs the variables at the 

node whose values help to disambiguate the effect of the 

access at runtime. This includes the address of the base of 

the accessed  AML , plus additional  witnesses  for arrays and 

collections. For instance, the index of the array element is 

logged as the witness for array accesses. For collections, the 

value of the added/retrieved element is logged as witnesses. 

Second, the starting and ending timestamps of an interval 

containing the operations are logged. These intervals serve 

as an approximation of the orderings of the accesses.  Figure 6 

shows an example. A read and a write to  x.f  are from 

two threads. A pair of timestamps in each thread marks a 

temporal interval during which the access happened. When 

the intervals are disjoint and no other intervals overlap with 

them, the ordering of the accesses can be derived. Therefore, 

the inter-thread dataflow can be identified, as illustrated by 

the red dashed arrow. 

6This design does not guarantee to recover the exact 

ordering information, which may cause ambiguities when 

identifying inter-thread dataflows. When the intervals over -

lap, developers need to consider more than one ordering 

possibilities. However, we argue that CIH holds for most 

real-world distributed systems that do not perform frequent 

and highly concurrent accesses to  the same  shared variables. 

Therefore, the frequency of overlapping intervals should 

be low. In addition, we argue that developers can tolerate 

a small amount of ambiguities when debugging, and can 

further reduce the ambiguities via thread schedule synthesis 

tools like  [39 ] to find a valid bug-triggering order of accesses. 

Furthermore, while the lack of exact ordering may introduce 

ambiguities, it is still sound and  does not  miss potential read-

write pairs. 

3.4  Recording Phase: Agent Operations 

The Lumos agents are responsible for realizing the instru -

mentation plan while meeting two goals: first, they must 

ensure negligible overheads when recording phase is  dis -

abled . Second, they must achieve low-overhead recording 

when the phase is active. 

To meet the first goal, the agents employ  dynamic instru -

mentation . When recording is enabled, the agents insert 

logs at the corresponding statements, then compile and hot-

reload the instrumented code. These operations are removed 

when exiting the recording phase, which incurs virtually 

zero overheads. 

To achieve the second goal, Lumos utilizes a lightweight 

asynchronous tracing runtime. Each  log()  copies the 

payload to  thread-local  shared-memory buffers and returns 

immediately. The buffers’ contents are asynchronously 

flushed to the centralized collector. 

At the beginning of an entry point function, the agents 

insert a call to  startTrace() , which obtains the thread-local 

buffers from a background buffer manager. Similarly, a call 

to  endTrace()  is inserted at the end that returns the buffers. 

Both calls also record timestamps marking the duration of 

the trace. 

Distributed Tracing.  In the presence of an RPC call, Lumos 

must link the caller’s thread-local trace and the callee’s 

trace into one coherent end-to-end trace, as dataflow may 

span both components. Lumos employs distributed tracing 

techniques to achieve this. Specifically, Lumos inserts a  

> setCaller()

right before each RPC call, which generates 

and logs a unique identifier for the call. The identifier is 

then embedded in the RPC’s metadata and propagated to 

the callee’s side, where the callee retrives and logs it via 

an inserted  getCaller()  at the beginning of the RPC entry 

function. 

## 4 Implementation 

We implement the Lumos analyzer with Doop, a Datalog-

based static analysis framework, consisting of 2753 LoC in 

Datalog. The SDG construction and traversal algorithms are 

implemented in Neo4j with 343 lines of Cypher scripts and 

115 lines of Datalog. For distributed tracing, Lumos uses the 

XTrace  [12 ] framework. We developed the agent’s instru -

mentation framework on top of Java Soot  [34 ] with 7198 lines 

of Java. The framework uses the JVM’s runtime bytecode 

reloading facility to achieve dynamic instrumentation, and 

employs Java’s  System.nanoTime()  to record timestamps. 

For the asynchronous tracing runtime, we use the HindSight 

framework’s tracing library  [40 ] by wrapping it inside a JNI 

interface with 132 lines of Java and 126 lines of C. 

## 5 Case Studies 

In this section, we present case studies that illustrate how 

well Lumos enables provenance-guided debugging of com -

plex issues. We use Lumos to debug two bugs from HDFS, 

a widely used distributed system. We chose the bugs based 

on the following criteria: first, these bugs demonstrates the 

complexity of  latent  root causes, where the evidence for root-

cause reasoning are from multiple traces and components. 

Second, the bugs are  non-deterministic , which only occur 

under specific runtime conditions (e.g., concurrency, inputs, 

failures, etc.). 

Third, we choose bugs with  reported  root causes, manifes -

tations and backward reasoning processes. This provides us 

an  objective  standard to evaluate whether Lumos can record 

key evidence in online debugging scenearios. 

Methodology.  For each case study, we first reproduce 

the fault through a triggering workload. We then  simulate 

a multi-round online debugging process that is  close  to 

the one from the original reports  [38 ]. In each round, we 

formulate the debugging queries according to the report and 

the evidence collected so far to obtain the instrumentation 

plan. We tune the depth limit to keep the per-round overhead 

moderate. Our goal is to show that even with a depth limit 

that incurs only low and tolerable overheads in the range 

of 10%, Lumos can resolve complex, latent bugs in only a 

few, iterative, and highly automated debugging rounds. In 

reality, developers may choose a higher depth limit to reduce 

the number of rounds, at the cost of higher overhead. In 

addition, we keep the set of root-cause-relevant logs from 

previous rounds in the plan. We then inspect the traces to 

verify whether the key values and their provenances can be 

constructed, and visualize them as provenance graphs. We 

also qualitatively discuss why the  pre-determined logs  in the 

original code base failed to capture the key provenances. 

As discussed in Section  §3.3 , Lumos only records sources of 

non-determinism. Therefore, to obtain the value of a specific 

variable, one may need to infer it from the other logged 

values. We currently perform this reconstruction process 

manually, and leave building an automatic replayer for the 

process as future work. 

71 void offerService(){ // DN 2 List<Block> resp = sendHeartbeat(); 3 for(Block b : resp){ 4 ReplicaInfo ri = volumeMap.get(b.id); 5 error(ri == null || b.GS != ri.GS); }} 6 List<Block> sendHeartbeat(){ // NN 7 while(...){pendingList.add(replicateBlocks.poll());} 8 return pendingList; } 9 void writeBlock(ReplicaInfo newRep){ // DN 10 volumeMap.put(newRep.id,newRep); } 11 int computeReplicationWork(){ // NN 12 while(...){ 13 Block b = priQs.get(i).next(); 14 replicateBlocks.offer(b); }} 15 void completeFile(INodeFile f){ // NN 16 for(Block b : f.getBlocks(){priQs.get(i).add(b); }} 

> 1
> 2
> 3
> 4

Figure 7: HDFS-4022 relevant code fragments 

Figure 8: HDFS-4022 provenance graph 

HDFS-4022.  This is the motivational example from Sec -

tion  §2.1 . Figure  Figure 7  shows the simplified root-cause 

relevant code fragments, with the provenance graph shown 

in  Figure 8 . We annotate the  trace  that each statement or log 

belongs to in both figures. Each trace represents an end-to-

end execution initiated by an external event. For example, 

the  -append  trace is initiated by user’s request to append to 

a file. In addition, we annotate the component where each 

function executed. For this bug, the error manifests at  L5 

reporting that for the incoming block to be replicated, either 

no replica information is found, or its timestamp does not 

match. Thus, the initial query is set to  (L5,R,ri == null    

> || b.GS != ri.GS)

.

Key Evidence 1.  Developers first find logs in trace showing  

> ri = X != null

and  b.GS + 1 == ri.GS  at  L5 . This indicates 

that the error was due to the  NameNode  asking the  DataNode 

to transfer an outdated block. This evidence demonstrates 

Lumos’ ability to record  concrete  values for developers to 

decide from which values to perform further backwards 

reasoning. Pre-determined logs lack this information, forcing 

developers to guess if the error was due to other conditions 

like  ri==null .

Key Evidence 2.  Developers then seek where  ri 

comes from, and find it propagated from the shared  

> volumeMap

based on the logs  (L4:volumeMap=X,ri=Y) .

Seeking the corresponding write event that added  ri  to 

> volumeMap

, developers find a  potential  write from logs  

> (L10:volumeMap=X,newRep=Y)

in trace . Since no other 

potential writes are to be found, this event is considered as 

the  actual  writer. This evidence demontrates Lumos’ ability 

to track cross-trace shared-state provenances. With pre-

determined logging, developers cannot find the write event 

that propagated  ri .

Key Evidence 3.  Based on the above, developers conclude 

that the problem lies in the block  b instead of the replica 

information  ri . They then seek where the block  b at  L4 

stems from. Based on the logs recording control-flows of the 

loop at  L3 , they understand that it orignates from  resp[i] ,

where  i is the loop iteration where the error at  L5  was 

reported. By backtracking further, they find that  resp[i] 

was written by  pendingList  at  L7  in a different component 

(NN) under loop iteration  i. This evidence shows Lumos’ 

ability to track intra-trace provenances that potentially span 

multiple components. With predetermined logs, developers 

cannot figure out under which iterations the propagation 

> L7:pendingList[i]

→L4:b  happened that led to the error at  

> L5

due to the lack of control-flow information and distributed 

tracing functionality. 

Key Evidence 4 & 5.  Developers then seek the origin of the 

block added at  L7 . At this point, no evidence in the current 

round is available. Therefore, developers start a second round 

with the query  (L7,R,poll()) , where  poll()  represents the 

call’s return value. In the second round, they find that the 

block was propagated from  (L14,b)  in trace based on shared 

state logs similar to those in evidence 2. The provenance of 

this block is further found at  (L16,b)  in trace in a third round 

with query  (L14,R,b) . While the last two pieces of evidence 

are simple, they are still difficult to pinpoint without the logs 

and traces due to the existence of other potentially relevant 

information. For example,  (L14,b)  may be propagated from 

a different trace than , under which the root cause may lie 

elsewhere. 

Root Causes.  At this point, developers can deduce the 

root cause. According to the semantics of the file system,  

> completeFile

was called the first time the client finishes 

modifying the block which adds the block to  priQs . Later, 

the client appends to the file and indicates the  DataNode 

that block has been modified by updating the  volumeMap .

However, the old block was not removed from the priority 

queue, causing the error. 

HDFS-5465&5479.  In this bug  [5], certain blocks failed to be 

replicated. The developer starts debugging by noticing that 

the  NameNode  asked the  DataNode  to replicate an unexpect -

edly lower number of  Block  according to the reports. This 

bug spans two components and three threads. Additionally, 

this bug has two root causes, where one is a semantic 

misinterpretation and the other being a race condition. 

Figure 9  shows the relevant codes and  Figure 10  shows the 

provenance graph. The initial query is set to node  (L6,R, 

> (results,*))

.

Key Evidence 1&2.  Developers first found that  results 

is underpopulated due to the branch at  L5  not taken based 

81 List<Block> sendHeartbeat(int xmitsInProgress){ // NN 2 int numTargets = maxRStreams-xmitsInProgress; 3 for(;!blockq.isEmpty() && numTargets>0){ 4 numTargets-=blockq.peek().targets.length; 5 if(numTargets >= 0) results.add(blockq.poll()); } 6 return results; } 7 void offerService(){ // DN 8 for(Block b:sendHeartbeat(DN.xmitsInProgress)){..} } 9 void run(ReplicaInfo newReplica){ // DN 10 DN.xmitsInProgress++; 11 finally{DN.xmitsInProgress--;} } 

> 1
> 3
> 2

Figure 9: HDFS-5465&5479 relevant codes 

Figure 10: HDFS-5465&5479 provenance graph 

on log  (L5,numTargets=-1)  in trace . This value was com -

puted at  L4  where  numTargets=1  and  targets.length=2 .

At this point, developers uncover the first root cause, 

which is the misinterpretation of  numTargets  as the 

number of blocks in the queue. Suspecting the initial 

value  numTargets=1  being problematic, developers seek 

and found its provenance at  L2 . The logs illustrates that 

> xmitsInProgress=1,maxRStreams=2

, causing  numTargets 

to be lower than expected. This enables them to suspect 

a second root cause involving  xmitsInProgress , which 

is the number of blocks currently being transmitting by 

the heartbeating  DataNode . With pre-determined logging, 

developers cannot uncover the value of  numTargets  at the 

branch at  L6  as well as its provenances at  L5 &L2 .

Key Evidence 3.  Developers then start the next round of 

debugging with query  (L3,R,xmitsInProgress) . The traces 

illustrate that the value was propagated from the shared 

counter read  (L8,DN.xmitsInProgress=1)  in a different 

component (DN). With the available shared state logs, 

developers found multiple  potentially concurrent  writes to 

the counter at  L10 &L11  in several traces such as and with 

overlapping intervals marked by the timestamps. With pre-

determined logs, it can be challenging for developers to 

uncover the potential race. 

Root Causes.  Developers can now deduce that the faulty 

value of  xmitsInProgress  is  potentially  caused by a data race 

at  L10 &L11 . While Lumos cannot unambiguously conclude 

the existence of data races, it still helps developers to trace 

the bug manifestation back to the anomolous shared variable. 

## 6 Evaluation 

In this section, we quantitatively evaluate how well Lumos 

enables fast diagnosis at low overheads. 

6.1  Macrobenchmarks 

We first conduct macrobenchmarks to evaluate whether 

Lumos achieves a good trade-off between diagnosis latency 

and overhead. We repeat the multi-step debugging process 

in Section  §5  and measure the overhead added by Lumos’ 

operations in each round, and count the number of rounds 

as the diagnosis latency. We then compare the results with 

that of the baselines. 

Setup.  We performed macrobenchmarks on a machine with 

72 Intel Xeon Gold 5220 CPUs at 2.20GHz with 125G DRAM 

running Ubuntu 18.04. We used version 2.7.2 of Hadoop 

instrumented with XTrace  [12 ] and modified the codes to 

inject the bugs. We run one  NameNode  and two  DataNode s. We 

picked the benchmarks used in previous work  [27 ], which 

includes 7 benchmarks from the NNThroughputbenchmark 

suites  [6] for the  NameNode , and a benchmark (read8k) for  

> DataNode

adapted from the DFSIO bench  [7] that reads an 8K 

file. The benchmarks send requests from increasing numbers 

of close-loop clients in separate threads. For each experiment, 

10000 samples are collected per thread. 

Baselines.  We compare Lumos against two baselines. The 

first is a  simulated  always-on record-and-replay (RR), where 

all operations are instrumented. This includes non-deter -

minism logs, lightweight dataflow tracing operations and 

the remaining agent operations. To achieve a fair compar -

ison, we do not instrument library functions. In addition, 

we excluded two subsystems in HDFS: the EditLog system 

(for persistence and recovery), and the data plane of the 

> DataNode

s (for reading and writing actual block contents). 

These components perform expensive I/Os and could result 

in high overheads when recording is enabled for them. Since 

none of our case studies require evidence in these compo -

nents, having them instrumented could greatly increase the 

overhead of RR and would bias the benefits of Lumos. 

The second baseline is sampled recording, which instru -

ments the same amount of operations as RR, but only turns on 

recording for each trace with a sampling rate  𝑝 . We estimate 

its diagnosis latency as  ( 1 

> 𝑝

)𝑁 

, which is the expected number 

of bug ocurrences needed before a full chain of provenance 

can be recorded. Here  𝑁  is the number of traces involved 

to pinpoint the root causes (e.g.,  𝑁  = 4 for HDFS-4022 

and  3 for HDFS-5465). This exponentiation reflects that 

sampling is performed for each trace (or alternatively, at 

more fine-grained levels such as per-function) as a whole, 

and it requries all  𝑁  traces to be sampled to recover full 

provenances. 

Results.  We compare overheads of Lumos ( 𝑂 𝐿 ) to that of RR 

(𝑂 𝑅 ) with results summarized in  Figure 15 . The overheads 

are reported as the reduction in max throughput and the 

increase in average latencies at a low load (five concurrent 

clients), compared with the baseline with no Lumos’ opera -

tions instrumented (only with the default logs and distributed 

9Figure 14: Overhead comparison for RR and Lumos. The relative overheads in terms of max throughput and average latencies 

at low load are shown for each case study separately. The x-axis labels represent the name of each benchmark. The first 7 

benchmarks are the NameNode benchmarks, and last one (read8k) is the DataNode benchmark. 

Figure 15: Diagnosis Latency vs Overhead comparison 

for RR, sampled recording and Lumos. Diagnosis latencies 

are shown in log scale. The vertical dash line shows the 

overheads for sampled recording with  𝑝  = 1%.

tracing operations from the original system instrumented). 

The per-round overheads of Lumos for each case study are 

shown. For instance, L4022-1 represents the first round of 

case study HDFS-4022. Notice that Lumos’ overheads are 

only incurred when it’s in the recording phase, and are zero 

otherwise. 

Observation 1.  Lumos achieves practical per-round over -

heads (<11% reduction in max throughput on average across 

the benchmarks, and <9% in average latencies) that are 

significantly  lower than RR. 

Next, we compared the overhead-diagnosis-latency trade-

offs of sampled recording, RR and Lumos with results 

shown in  Figure 15 . For sampled recording, we measure its 

overheads under different  𝑝 s and plot the resulted diagnosis 

latency  ( 1 

> 𝑝

)𝑁 

as a function of the overheads for different 

values of  𝑁  . In addition, we mark the points representing 

RR and Lumos (for each case study). The diagnosis latency 

of Lumos is 4 reoccurrences for HDFS-4022 and 3 for 

HDFS-5465 as reported in Section  §5 . RR has a diagnosis 

latency of 1 since it records all information needed on the 

first bug occurrence. For Lumos and both baselines, we 

report the  average  overheads in max throughputs across the 

8 benchmarks ( 𝑂 𝑅  = 157%,𝑂 𝐿  = 8% across the rounds for 

HDFS-4022 and  5% for HDFS-5465). Notice that sampled 

recording incurs overheads all the time as it is  always-on .

Therefore, a practical sampling rate must be very low (such 

as 1%) to ensure the amortized overheads remain low. 

Observation 2.  Lumos’ diagnosis latency is close to RR and 

several orders of magnitude lower than sampled recording 

under the same overhead budget. Combined with Obser -

vation, we conclude that Lumos not only achieves a good 

trade-off between overheads and diagnosis latencies, but 

also advanced the  pareto frontier  of the trade-off between 

the two goals. 

Agt. Op.  startTrace  endT.  setCaller  getC. 

Lat. (ns)  2606  678  1580  798 

Table 3: Latencies of Agent Operations. Address is a long 

integer for the address of a Java object retrived from 

> System.identityHashCode()

. Str. is a Java string of length 

10. Array is a byte array of length 32. 

10 Case  Analy -

sis 

Controller  Inst. (NN)  Inst. (DN) 

Rd. 1  2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3

4022  122  15  10  9 11  11  13  1 125m34s 

5465  13  10  - 6 2 - 2 1 -

Table 2: Per-component Cost Breakdown. Units are in 

seconds, unless otherwise noted. 

Log Op.  bool  Int (4)  Address (8)  Str.  Array 

Lat. (ns)  34  35  39  158  278 

Table 4: Latencies of Agent Operations. Address is a long 

integer for the address of a Java object retrived from 

> System.identityHashCode()

. Str. is a Java string of length 

10. Array is a byte array of length 32. 

6.2  Microbenchmarks 

Per-component Costs.  We measure the time spent on 

each phase of Lumos.  Table 2  summarizes the results. The 

analysis time includes the time for running static analysis 

and that for SDG construction. The result illustrates the 

scalability of Lumos’ analysis as the time is moderate. Next, 

the time spent on the controller’s graph traversal in each 

debugging round (Rd.) is low except for L4022-1. We believe 

a highly optimized traversal algorithm can further improve 

this latency. Combined with the low instrumentation time 

(Inst.) for the  NameNode  and the  DataNode s, we conclude that 

Lumos could swiftly respond to debugger’s queries. 

In addition, we measure the average latencies of the agent 

operations. This includes  startTrace ,endTrace , setCaller , 

> getCaller

and log operations that each carries a payload of 

one of the 5 representative content types used in our case 

studies. As shown in  Table 4 , Lumos agents’ operations are 

lightweight. 

## 7 Limitations 

In this section, we discuss the limitation of Lumos. First, 

Lumos only records application-space values and prove -

nances and does not cover libraries and lower layers of the 

system stack (e.g., operating system). We leave the work of 

cross-layer provenance recording as future work. 

Second, Lumos supports limited forms of shared-state 

dataflow tracing. It only tracks accesses to thread-shared 

data structures. We leave supporting others (e.g., shared 

state in file systems) as future work. Furthermore, Lumos 

approximates orderings of concurrent events, which may 

be ineffective for concurrency bugs that require finer time 

resolution to resolve. We consider such concurrency bugs 

as an orthogonal direction  [22 ], as Lumos’ goal is to help 

developers link bugs’ manifestation to their root causes. 

Third, Lumos currently requires extra manual work 

between each debugging round (e.g., inferring values from 

captured non-determinism). We leave building an automatic 

provenance reconstructor as future work. 

Finally, Lumos relies on a small set of developer annota -

tions to track library-induced dependencies. When a system 

uses a large number of libraries exposing complex external 

semantics, it may be hard for Lumos to strike a good trade-off 

between the amount of manual labor and analysis precision. 

However, we believe recent trends in automatic library 

semantic summarization may alleviate this problem  [11 ,

19 , 35 ].

## 8 Conclusion 

Lumos enables lightweight and fast provenance-guided 

online debugging for distributed systems through automatic 

dependency-guided instrumentation of logs and tracepoints. 

Lumos achieves this through scalable static analysis that 

guides efficient tracing runtimes to capture coherent prove -

nances of bugs. Our experiences showed that Lumos could 

support debugging complex bugs with latent root causes 

spanning multiple components and traces with low diagnosis 

latency and minimal overheads. We believe that Lumos can 

open up a new revenue for efficient runtime debugging of 

complicated incidents in real-world in-production distrib -

uted systems. 

11 References 

[1]  OpenTelemetry: High-quality, ubiquitous, and portable telemetry to 

enable effective observability. 

[2]  HDFS-4022:Replication not happening for appended block. 

[3]  Google cloud authentication failures. 

[4]  SOLVED: Microsoft Azure AD issues. 

[5]  HADOOP-5465:Blocks remain under-replicated. 

[6]  Hadoop Benchmarking. 

[7]  Distributed I/O Benchmark of HDFS. 

[8]  Karim Ali and Ondřej Lhoták. 2012. Application-only call graph 

construction. In  European Conference on Object-Oriented Programming ,

2012. 688–712. 

[9]  Frances E Allen. 1970. Control flow analysis.  ACM Sigplan Notices  5, 

7 (1970), 1–19. 

[10]  Anastasios Antoniadis, Nikos Filippakis, Paddy Krishnan, Raghaven -

dra Ramesh, Nicholas Allen, and Yannis Smaragdakis. 2020. Static 

analysis of Java enterprise applications: frameworks and caches, 

the elephants in the room. In  Proceedings of the 41st ACM SIGPLAN 

conference on programming language design and implementation , 2020. 

794–807. 

[11]  Osbert Bastani, Rahul Sharma, Alex Aiken, and Percy Liang. 2018. 

Active learning of points-to specifications. In  Proceedings of the 39th 

ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and 

Implementation , 2018. 678–692. 

[12]  Rodrigo Fonseca, George Porter, Randy H Katz, and Scott Shenker. 

2007.  {X-Trace }: A pervasive network tracing framework. In  4th 

USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design & Implementation 

(NSDI 07) , 2007. 

[13]  Andy Georges, Mark Christiaens, Michiel Ronsse, and Koenraad De 

Bosschere. 2004. JaRec: a portable record/replay environment for 

multi-threaded Java applications.  Software: practice and experience  34, 

6 (2004), 523–547. 

[14]  Haryadi S Gunawi, Mingzhe Hao, Tanakorn Leesatapornwongsa, 

Tiratat Patana-anake, Thanh Do, Jeffry Adityatama, Kurnia J Eliazar, 

Agung Laksono, Jeffrey F Lukman, Vincentius Martin, and others. 

2014. What bugs live in the cloud? a study of 3000+ issues in cloud 

systems. In  Proceedings of the ACM symposium on cloud computing ,

2014. 1–14. 

[15]  Zhenyu Guo, Xi Wang, Jian Tang, Xuezheng Liu, Zhilei Xu, Ming Wu, 

M Frans Kaashoek, and Zheng Zhang. 2008. R2: An Application-Level 

Kernel for Record and Replay. In  OSDI , 2008. 193–208. 

[16]  Yigong Hu, Gongqi Huang, and Peng Huang. 2020. Automated 

reasoning and detection of specious configuration in large systems 

with symbolic execution. In  14th USENIX Symposium on Operating 

Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 20) , 2020. 719–734. 

[17]  Peng Huang, Chuanxiong Guo, Jacob R Lorch, Lidong Zhou, and 

Yingnong Dang. 2018. Capturing and enhancing in situ system 

observability for failure detection. In  13th USENIX Symposium on 

Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 18) , 2018. 1–16. 

[18]  Jonathan Kaldor, Jonathan Mace, Michał Bejda, Edison Gao, Wiktor 

Kuropatwa, Joe O'Neill, Kian Win Ong, Bill Schaller, Pingjia Shan, 

Brendan Viscomi, and others. 2017. Canopy: An end-to-end perfor -

mance tracing and analysis system. In  Proceedings of the 26th 

symposium on operating systems principles , 2017. 34–50. 

[19]  Shuangxiang Kan, Yuekang Li, Weigang He, Zhenchang Xing, Liming 

Zhu, and Yulei Sui. 2025. Spectre: Automated Aliasing Specifications 

Generation for Library APIs with Fuzzing.  ACM Transactions on 

Software Engineering and Methodology  (2025). 

[20]  Baris Kasikci, Weidong Cui, Xinyang Ge, and Ben Niu. 2017. Lazy 

diagnosis of in-production concurrency bugs. In  Proceedings of the 

26th Symposium on Operating Systems Principles , 2017. 582–598. 

[21]  Baris Kasikci, Benjamin Schubert, Cristiano Pereira, Gilles Pokam, and 

George Candea. 2015. Failure sketching: A technique for automated 

root cause diagnosis of in-production failures. In  Proceedings of the 

25th Symposium on Operating Systems Principles , 2015. 344–360. 

[22]  Baris Kasikci, Cristian Zamfir, and George Candea. 2013. RaceMob: 

Crowdsourced data race detection. In  Proceedings of the twenty-fourth 

ACM symposium on operating systems principles , 2013. 406–422. 

[23]  Tanakorn Leesatapornwongsa, Jeffrey F Lukman, Shan Lu, and 

Haryadi S Gunawi. 2016. TaxDC: A taxonomy of non-deterministic 

concurrency bugs in datacenter distributed systems. In  Proceedings 

of the twenty-first international conference on architectural support for 

programming languages and operating systems , 2016. 517–530. 

[24]  Yue Li, Tian Tan, Anders Møller, and Yannis Smaragdakis. 2020. 

A principled approach to selective context sensitivity for pointer 

analysis.  ACM Transactions on Programming Languages and Systems 

(TOPLAS)  42, 2 (2020), 1–40. 

[25]  Haopeng Liu, Guangpu Li, Jeffrey F Lukman, Jiaxin Li, Shan Lu, 

Haryadi S Gunawi, and Chen Tian. 2017. Dcatch: Automatically de -

tecting distributed concurrency bugs in cloud systems.  ACM SIGARCH 

Computer Architecture News  45, 1 (2017), 677–691. 

[26]  Wenjie Ma, Shengyuan Yang, Tian Tan, Xiaoxing Ma, Chang Xu, and 

Yue Li. 2023. Context sensitivity without contexts: A cut-shortcut 

approach to fast and precise pointer analysis.  Proceedings of the ACM 

on Programming Languages  7, PLDI (2023), 539–564. 

[27]  Jonathan Mace, Ryan Roelke, and Rodrigo Fonseca. 2018. Pivot tracing: 

Dynamic causal monitoring for distributed systems.  ACM Transactions 

on Computer Systems (TOCS)  35, 4 (2018), 1–28. 

[28]  Robert O'Callahan, Chris Jones, Nathan Froyd, Kyle Huey, Albert 

Noll, and Nimrod Partush. 2017. Engineering record and replay for 

deployability. In  2017 USENIX Annual Technical Conference (USENIX 

ATC 17) , 2017. 377–389. 

[29]  Ernest Pobee and Wing Kwong Chan. 2019. Aggreplay: Efficient record 

and replay of multi-threaded programs. In  Proceedings of the 2019 27th 

ACM Joint Meeting on European Software Engineering Conference and 

Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering , 2019. 567–577. 

[30]  Alexandru Salcianu and Martin Rinard. 2001. Pointer and escape 

analysis for multithreaded programs.  ACM SIGPLAN Notices  36, 7 

(2001), 12–23. 

[31]  Benjamin H Sigelman, Luiz André Barroso, Mike Burrows, Pat 

Stephenson, Manoj Plakal, Donald Beaver, Saul Jaspan, and Chandan 

Shanbhag. 2010. Dapper, a large-scale distributed systems tracing 

infrastructure. (2010). 

[32]  Yannis Smaragdakis, George Kastrinis, and George Balatsouras. 

2014. Introspective analysis: context-sensitivity, across the board. In 

Proceedings of the 35th ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming 

Language Design and Implementation , 2014. 485–495. 

[33]  Lilia Tang, Chaitanya Bhandari, Yongle Zhang, Anna Karanika, 

Shuyang Ji, Indranil Gupta, and Tianyin Xu. 2023. Fail through the 

Cracks: Cross-System Interaction Failures in Modern Cloud Systems. 

In  Proceedings of the Eighteenth European Conference on Computer 

Systems , 2023. 433–451. 

[34]  Raja Vallée-Rai, Phong Co, Etienne Gagnon, Laurie Hendren, Patrick 

Lam, and Vijay Sundaresan. 2010. Soot: A Java bytecode optimization 

framework.  CASCON First Decade High Impact Papers , 214–224. 

[35]  Chengpeng Wang, Jipeng Zhang, Rongxin Wu, and Charles Zhang. 

2024. Dainfer: Inferring API aliasing specifications from library 

documentation via neurosymbolic optimization.  Proceedings of the 

ACM on Software Engineering  1, FSE (2024), 2469–2492. 

[36]  Mark Weiser. 2009. Program slicing.  IEEE Transactions on software 

engineering  4 (2009), 352–357. 

[37]  Ming Wu, Fan Long, Xi Wang, Zhilei Xu, Haoxiang Lin, Xuezheng 

Liu, Zhenyu Guo, Huayang Guo, Lidong Zhou, and Zheng Zhang. 

2010. Language-based replay via data flow cut. In  Proceedings of the 

eighteenth ACM SIGSOFT international symposium on Foundations of 

software engineering , 2010. 197–206. 

[38]  Ding Yuan, Yu Luo, Xin Zhuang, Guilherme Renna Rodrigues, Xu 

Zhao, Yongle Zhang, Pranay U Jain, and Michael Stumm. 2014. Simple 

testing can prevent most critical failures: An analysis of production 

failures in distributed  {Data-Intensive } systems. In  11th USENIX 

Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 

14) , 2014. 249–265. 

12 [39]  Cristian Zamfir and George Candea. 2010. Execution synthesis: a 

technique for automated software debugging. In  Proceedings of the 

5th European conference on Computer systems , 2010. 321–334. 

[40]  Lei Zhang, Zhiqiang Xie, Vaastav Anand, Ymir Vigfusson, and 

Jonathan Mace. 2023. The Benefit of Hindsight: Tracing  {Edge-Cases 

} in Distributed Systems. In  20th USENIX Symposium on Networked 

Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI 23) , 2023. 321–339. 

[41]  Yongle Zhang, Serguei Makarov, Xiang Ren, David Lion, and Ding 

Yuan. 2017. Pensieve: Non-intrusive failure reproduction for distrib -

uted systems using the event chaining approach. In  Proceedings of the 

26th Symposium on Operating Systems Principles , 2017. 19–33. 

[42]  Gefei Zuo, Jiacheng Ma, Andrew Quinn, Pramod Bhatotia, Pedro 

Fonseca, and Baris Kasikci. 2021. Execution reconstruction: Harness -

ing failure reoccurrences for failure reproduction. In  Proceedings of 

the 42nd ACM SIGPLAN International Conference on Programming 

Language Design and Implementation , 2021. 1155–1170. 

13