Title: CommonMorph: Participatory Morphological Documentation Platform

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.04515v1

Published Time: Tue, 07 Apr 2026 01:33:53 GMT

Number of Pages: 12

Markdown Content:
# CommonMorph: Participatory Morphological Documentation Platform 

# Aso Mahmudi @, Sina Ahmadi Z, Kemal Kurniawan @,Rico Sennrich Z, Eduard Hovy @, Ekaterina Vylomova @

@The University of Melbourne, ZUniversity of Zurich {mahmudia, vylomovae}@unimelb.edu.au 

Abstract 

Collecting and annotating morphological data present significant challenges, requiring linguistic expertise, methodological rigour, and substantial resources. These barriers are particularly acute for low-resource languages and varieties. To accelerate this process, we introduce CommonMorph , a comprehensive platform that streamlines morphological data collection development through a three-tiered approach: expert linguistic definition, contributor elicitation, and community validation. The platform minimises manual work by incorporating active learning, annotation suggestions, and tools to import and adapt materials from related languages. It accommodates diverse morphological systems, including fusional, agglutinative, and root-and-pattern morphologies. Its open-source design and UniMorph-compatible outputs ensure accessibility and interoperability with NLP tools. Our platform is accessible at https://common-morph.com , offering a replicable model for preserving linguistic diversity through collaborative technology. 

Keywords: Morphology, UniMorph, Multilingual Resources, Low-Resource Languages 

# 1. Introduction 

With over 1,500 languages at risk of extinction by 2100 (Bromham et al., 2022), scaling and improv-ing the efficiency of language documentation and data collection is essential to prevent further irre-versible losses. During the “International Decade of Indigenous Languages” (2022–2032) (United Nations, 2019), tools that assist linguists and com-munities in collecting linguistic data for long-term documentation and preservation should be a pri-ority. Morphological data collection and analysis, the systematic documentation of word structure and inflection patterns, remains one of the most labour-intensive steps of language documenta-tion (Ginn et al., 2023), particularly for low-resource languages with complex inflectional systems. Finite-state transducers (FSTs), the most estab-lished rule-based approach to model morpholo-gies (Gorman and Sproat, 2022), are capable of generating and analysing wordforms licensed by a given grammar. However, the design and imple-mentation of FSTs are labour-intensive, requiring extensive linguistic engineering expertise and a high degree of manual effort (Beemer et al., 2020). Handling irregularities often requires ad hoc solu-tions, while maintaining quality across large-scale FSTs remains difficult. These factors make it chal-lenging to scale FST-based approaches to the hun-dreds of under-documented languages urgently requiring attention. Moreover, FSTs do not gener-alise effectively to out-of-vocabulary (OOV) forms, which limits their applicability in many real-world documentation and processing scenarios. Modern data-driven approaches to morphologi-Unlabelled   

> Database
> (Re)Training
> Labelled
> Database
> Downloadable
> morphological
> dataset
> Linguist Panel
> Submitting
> paradigm
> slots,
> agreements,
> and lemmas.
> Writing optional
> question
> templates for
> non -exert
> speakers
> Linguist User s
> Suggestion Model
> Elicitation :
> submitting
> inflected
> forms with
> suggestions
> Verification
> of inflected
> forms by
> other
> speakers
> Speaker User s
> Speaker Panel
> Paradigm tables are
> initialized based on
> inputs from linguists
> Speakers gradually
> fill in the tables with
> the assistance of AI
> Backend API

Figure 1: The CommonMorph platform workflow facil-itates elaboration of morphological structures by a linguist and provides an interoperable ecosys-tem for contributors to validate and enrich labelled databases. cal analysis and generation rely on large volumes of annotated morphological data—resources that are rarely available for low-resource or endan-gered languages. The UniMorph project (Bat-suren et al., 2022b), while the most comprehen-sive of its kind, provides datasets for only 169 languages, or less than 2.5% of the world’s lan-guages. UniMorph has advanced computational morphology and enabled SIGMORPHON shared tasks on morphological segmentation (Batsuren et al., 2022a), analysis (McCarthy et al., 2019), and generation (Kann and Schütze, 2018), but faces key limitations: (a) the data preparation pro-cess (Kirov et al., 2018) is time-consuming and not easily replicable across languages; (b) systematic 

> arXiv:2604.04515v1 [cs.CL] 6 Apr 2026

correction and maintenance require substantial re-sources; and (c) validation is limited, as there are no mechanisms for broad community feedback. For example, Ahmadi and Mahmudi (2023) identi-fied and corrected 25% of the misleading forms in the Central Kurdish dataset. A further limitation across existing approaches is the lack of systematic integration of related lan-guage varieties. Since most languages belong to a few hundred families (Campbell, 2018), related varieties often share morphological, phonological, and lexical patterns. Exploiting these similarities can reduce annotation effort and accelerate doc-umentation, yet current tools rarely support such reuse. This paper presents CommonMorph , a platform de-signed to streamline and scale the collection of inflectional morphological data across languages. By connecting linguists and speakers in a shared digital environment, CommonMorph supports collab-orative annotation of wordforms with morphosyn-tactic features. While the system is applicable to all languages, it is particularly well-suited to low-resource and endangered ones, whose diverse and complex morphological systems require adapt-able and scalable tools. Unlike traditional fieldwork practices that rely on isolated and offline contribu-tions, the platform enables structured data entry, review, and community validation. It also enhances efficiency through imports from related languages and predictive suggestions. Developed iteratively through user feedback, CommonMorph is tailored to the workflows of both linguists and speaker com-munities. To demonstrate its broad applicability, we tested 

CommonMorph on languages from diverse families, including Indo-European (Italic, Germanic, Iranic), Semitic, Bantu, and Turkic. The case studies show that the platform can handle various morphological systems, from fusional to agglutinative to root-and-pattern structures. In short, CommonMorph offers the following core features: 1. Intuitive Interface : Developed in collabora-tion with both linguists and speakers, the plat-form is intuitive and easy to use, with high user satisfaction reported in surveys (§ 6). 2. Linguist-led Workflow : Linguists can define initial materials and create patterns to reduce the workload for speakers, improving the effi-ciency of the early annotation process (§ 4.4). These materials can be adapted from existing resources of related languages in the system. 3. Built-in Validation : The platform’s interactive evaluation of suggestions allows users to iter-atively refine the data (§ 4.5). 4. Compatibility : Outputs can be exported in standard formats such as UniMorph (Batsuren et al., 2022b), enabling integration with exist-ing NLP tools. 5. Free and Open-Source : CommonMorph is ac-cessible to all and openly available for further development and adaptation. 1

# 2. Related Work 

Recent work in computational linguistics has ex-plored alternative methods for collecting morpho-logical data, ranging from gamified participation to automated annotation. Gamification has been ap-plied to morphological analysis, education, and community engagement, showing potential for improving data coverage and speaker involve-ment (Eryi ˘ git et al., 2023; Qiao et al., 2023; Sun et al., 2025). The rise of large language mod-els (LLMs) has also enabled new forms of auto-matic linguistic annotation across a wide variety of tasks (Tan et al., 2024). Despite these innovations, the development of high-quality morphological data and tools still de-pends heavily on manual work. Beemer et al. (2020) estimate that developing a finite-state trans-ducer (FST) analyser and generator compara-ble to a neural model requires an average of 40 person-hours, excluding infrastructure and design time. The effort varies substantially across lan-guages: while regular inflectional systems can be implemented in under an hour, more complex ones demand extensive analysis of paradigms, lemma classes, and morphophonological alterna-tions. These figures assume prior expertise, un-derscoring the difficulty of scaling traditional ap-proaches. To mitigate annotation costs, active learning methods have been explored for morphological segmentation and labelling, where algorithms iter-atively select the most informative examples for hu-man review (Baldridge and Palmer, 2009; Palmer, 2009). Building on this idea, Mahmudi et al. (2025) propose techniques to help field linguists detect and prioritise data gaps for more efficient elicita-tion. A major effort in large-scale morphological data collection is the UniMorph project. The first release by Kirov et al. (2016) relied on manual mapping of Wiktionary grammatical descriptors to the Uni-Morph schema. In the second release report, Kirov et al. (2018) showed that verifying and correcting automatically parsed tables required at least as much effort as direct manual annotation, though annotators successfully produced initial datasets for 47 languages within days. The third phase (Mc-Carthy et al., 2020) expanded coverage to 50 more   

> 1Website: https://common-morph.com , the source code is available at https://github.com/Aso-UniMelb/ CommonMorph

languages with a team of nine annotators. Data validation within UniMorph evolved from manual expert review to more systematic quality checks. Early annotations were adjudicated by linguists or speakers (Kirov et al., 2018), while later efforts integrated automated validation tools to flag errors such as rare characters, malformed cells, or inconsistencies between lemma and in-flected form (McCarthy et al., 2020). These steps improved quality control but still relied heavily on post-hoc correction. Despite these advances, to the best of our knowl-edge, no existing morphological data collection tool provides a unified platform that integrates struc-tured workflows involving both linguists and speak-ers while supporting remote collaboration. Our 

CommonMorph platform fills this gap by combining user-friendly interfaces, active speaker participa-tion, and features for guided elicitation. It supports both manual and semi-automated annotation and encourages the use of cross-linguistic data to re-duce redundancy and improve scalability. 

# 3. Design Principles 

The CommonMorph platform is designed to address the core research question: How can morpholog-ical data collection be streamlined and scaled for low-resource and endangered languages through collaboration between linguists and speakers? To achieve this, the platform adheres to principles that balance the needs of its primary contributors, lin-guists and speakers (Flavelle and Lachler, 2023), while accommodating diverse morphological sys-tems. Linguists play a central role in defining the scope and quality of morphological resources. The platform enables them to define paradigms, mor-phosyntactic features, and lexical entries across diverse language varieties with fine-grained control. They can follow established annotation standards while also adding community-accepted aliases for grammatical terms. Materials from related lan-guages can be imported and adapted, allowing cross-linguistic regularities to reduce redundant work. Linguists can also revise and expand data as new insights emerge, ensuring that resources re-main linguistically accurate and up to date. These capabilities ensure that expert knowledge anchors the data collection process and maintains its relia-bility. Speakers are the primary custodians of endan-gered and low-resource languages. To empower non-experts to participate, the platform offers an intuitive interface that enables speakers to anno-tate and validate forms without requiring specialist training. Its flexible workflows adapt to varying levels of grammatical knowledge within the com-munity, while community feedback loops capture corrections, variations, and alternative forms. Ac-tive learning-driven suggestions for inflected forms, based on patterns in the data, help reduce man-ual effort. This principle recognises speakers not merely as informants but as active collaborators, fostering inclusivity and shared ownership of the resource. 

# 4. System Design 

The CommonMorph platform, as depicted in Figure 1, begins with linguists defining initial linguistic ma-terials. Based on this setup, the system gener-ates suggested inflected forms, which speakers re-view by correcting or confirming them. As verified data accumulates, the system improves its sug-gestions through active learning, reducing manual effort over time. All data remains editable and is exportable in standard formats for integration with other linguistic and NLP tools. In the following sub-sections, we provide a detailed description of our approach. 

4.1. Terminology 

Before outlining the system design, we clarify the terminology used throughout the platform: • A lemma (e.g., walk) is the base dictionary form representing a set of inflected wordforms (e.g., walks, walking). • An inflection class groups lemmas that share the same inflectional pattern. For instance, most English regular verbs follow a four-form pattern (walk-s, walk-ing, walk-ed, walk-ed (past participle)). • A paradigm is the complete set of inflected forms derived from a single lemma, typically organised according to morphosyntactic fea-tures such as tense, number, or person. • A gloss is a short explanation or translation that conveys the meaning or function of a form. • A morphosyntactic feature set is a bun-dle of grammatical properties such as tense, person, or number. For consis-tency, CommonMorph adopts the UniMorph schema (Sylak-Glassman, 2016) for glossing these features. • Morphophonological rules describe spelling changes that occur when morphemes com-bine in particular contexts (e.g., the plural of bus becomes buses). 

4.2. Required Linguistic Materials 

We assume the availability of some linguistic mate-rials, either gathered during early fieldwork stages or sourced from previous descriptive resources. Note that we anticipate these materials may con-tain errors, and linguists should have the ability to correct or expand them at any time. These materi-als should include: 1. Basic wordlist or vocabulary (Bowern, 2015, Sec. 3.1.3) covering the inflection classes of the language, and 2. Morphosyntactic feature combinations for each inflection class, typically organised in paradigms or conjugation tables. These com-binations describe how lexical items vary ac-cording to grammatical categories such as per-son, number, tense, aspect, mood, or case. Figure 3 provides an example of such a re-source. In practice, documentation often begins with incom-plete information that must be iteratively refined. This initial data may be sourced from prior descrip-tive studies or inferred from related language va-rieties. While linguistic resources exist for many languages, including endangered ones, their struc-ture and quality vary widely. Some wordlists and lexicons are highly detailed, while others lack even basic part-of-speech tags. Similarly, morphosyn-tactic features can appear as detailed grammatical descriptions or as simple tabular paradigms. To manage this variation, linguists are guided to enter and standardise the materials into our platform in a consistent and unified format. 

4.3. User Roles 

In traditional linguistic fieldwork, the linguist typi-cally guides the elicitation process based on their expertise. In a digital environment, however, man-aging this interaction and ensuring that contribu-tors enter accurate data can be challenging. We designed the CommonMorph user interface to accom-modate users with varying levels of familiarity with linguistic concepts. 

CommonMorph considers two roles of users: • Linguists (or language enthusiasts with mor-phological expertise) initiate a project by pro-viding lemmas, paradigm structures (§4.2), and optionally inflectional patterns and anno-tation priorities. They oversee data quality, guide the system’s predictions, and ensure consistency. • Speakers (informants or consultants with-out formal linguistic training) contribute by supplying inflected forms with hints from system-generated suggestions and verifying entries submitted by other speakers, enabling community-driven data validation. Role-specific interfaces ensure that expert guid-ance and community participation are both sup-  

> (a) Paradigm Structures (b) Reusable Layers
> (c) Lexicon (d) Question Design

Figure 2: Linguists define (a) paradigm structures, (b) additional structural layers such as agreement, and (c) lexical entries. These components allow the generation of morphological forms that can be validated during elicitation. Linguists also create elicitation prompts (d), taking inspiration from ex-amples produced by the system. ported. In the following subsections, we describe the user interface tailored for each user role. 

4.4. Linguist Interface 

The linguist interface is structured in a modular fashion to minimise redundancy and to exploit mor-phological regularities. It provides a workflow for defining paradigms, entering lexical items, and specifying rules, while allowing flexibility for irreg-ular or complex systems. Figure 2 shows the in-terface during data submission. Core and optional modules include: 1. Paradigm Structures (Figure 2a): This core module defines the morphosyntactic struc-tures that make up inflectional paradigms, such as tense, aspect, and mood. Each struc-ture is tied to a specific inflection class. Op-tional inflectional patterns with placeholders allow the system to generate candidate forms before the machine learning models have suf-ficient data. 2. Lexicon (Figure 2b): Here, lemmas are entered with their assigned inflection class, stems, and glosses. Glosses ensure clarity for both contributors during elicitation and re-searchers during analysis. 3. Reusable Layers (Figure 2c): To avoid redun-dancy, this module allows defining reusable sets of features (e.g., agreement affixes) linked to paradigm structures. Simpler inflec-tional systems, such as English verbs, may not require this module. 4. Morphophonological rules (Optional) : This module encodes orthographic adjustments (e.g., Turkish vowel harmony) as replacement patterns, implemented as regular expressions to reduce the need for manual corrections. 5. Question Design (Optional) (Figure 2d): This module enables linguists to design elicitation prompts for non-expert speak-ers. Prompts are written in a shared meta-language (e.g., English or Spanish) familiar to both linguist and speaker, and structured as reusable templates with placeholders for lemmas. For example, the prompt “How do you tell more than one person to [LEMMA] right now?” is used to generate a form with the following morphosyntactic features: POS=Verb, Mood=Imperative, Tense=Present, Number=Plural, and Person=2nd. Prompts can be created manually, adapted from other projects, or generated using LLMs (see Ap-pendix B for the exact prompt template used for generation). This feature is especially valu-able when speakers are unfamiliar with gram-matical terminology. Figure 3 illustrates an example of the informa-tion linguists can add through the interface. They can also assign priority levels to lemmas and struc-tures, directing speakers to contribute the most informative data first. To support scalability, cross-linguistic reuse, and community-driven resource sharing, the platform features import and export functionalities. Linguis-tic materials, including paradigm structures and lexicons, can be imported and exported in TSV for-mat. This enables researchers to host and share resources openly and to adapt existing datasets from related languages with minimal effort. 

Figure 3: Example of a Latin verb conjugation table annotated with CommonMorph terminology: (1) An inflection class and (2) a paradigm structure 

within that inflection class; (3) a reusable layer 

contains several (4) reusable morphemes and their (5) morphosyntactic features; (6) a lemma and its (7) gloss and (8–9) different stems .

4.5. Speaker Interface 

Once the linguist has provided the initial materials, the speaker panel becomes available for elicitation, as illustrated in Figure 4. The panel supports two main activities: data entry (elicitation) and verifi-cation (review), with the interface adapting to the speaker’s level of grammatical knowledge. The system combines the defined structures with the lemmas to automatically generate paradigm tables that cover the full range of potential inflected forms. Since the number of possible forms can be very large, the platform presents speakers with only a subset, prioritised according to the linguist’s annotation settings and the informativeness criteria outlined in Section 4.6. To provide transparency regarding how candi-date morphological entries are computed, the inter-face explicitly informs the user about the source of each suggestion. Suggestions are visually tagged to indicate whether they were generated by the linguist’s predefined rules, the internal neural in-flection model, or an LLM. Furthermore, because language documentation often reveals dialectal variation or simple human er-ror, the review interface includes a mechanism for handling disagreements between speakers. If mul-tiple speakers propose or validate conflicting forms for the same morphosyntactic slot, the platform flags the entry. These flagged disagreements are then either resolved through a majority consensus among designated expert speakers or escalated to the linguist for final adjudication. The interface adapts to different levels of exper-tise: (1) Expert speakers see larger sets of forms, such as full or partial paradigm tables, which they can complete or verify in bulk. (2) Non-expert speakers see one form at a time with a simpli-fied prompt that helps them provide or confirm the (a) Eliciting expert speak-ers      

> (b) Checking by expert speakers
> (c) Eliciting non-expert speakers
> (d) Checking by non-expert speakers

Figure 4: Screenshots from the speaker interface. correct wordform without needing specialist termi-nology. This adaptive design allows contributions from both experts and non-experts, combining detailed linguistic knowledge with broader community input. 

4.6. Inflection Model in Active Learning 

The elicitation process follows an active learn-ing framework (Mahmudi et al., 2025), progress-ing in iterative cycles to minimise annotation cost. 

CommonMorph utilises a dynamic, multi-source pre-diction pipeline that transitions from rule-based heuristics to data-driven models as the dataset grows. 

Cold Start: Lacking initial training data, the sys-tem relies exclusively on linguist-supplied inflection patterns and morphophonological rules to gener-ate early suggestions. 

Active Learning: Validated forms periodically train a language-specific neural inflection model. This model drives elicitation by measuring predic-tive uncertainty to prioritise the “most informative” unannotated forms, while simultaneously generat-ing increasingly accurate suggestions for speakers to review. 

Integrating LLMs: To bridge the low-data phase where custom neural models struggle, we lever-age lower-latency LLMs (e.g., Gemini-2.5-Flash ,

gpt-5-mini ) via API. The system dynamically con-structs few-shot prompts using previously validated forms with matching morphosyntactic features as in-context examples (Appendix A), enabling accu-rate predictions without explicit fine-tuning. 

Ensemble Presentation: The system aggre-gates suggestions from all three sources (rules, neural model, LLM). Converging predictions are presented with high confidence, while disagree-ments yield a multiple-choice list where each op-tion is visually tagged by its generative source (Sec-tion 4.5). A comparative analysis of these models is provided in Section 6.1. 

4.7. Implementation 

We implemented CommonMorph as a web applica-tion to make it freely accessible online, allowing researchers and practitioners to use it without in-stallation barriers or platform restrictions. Since speakers of some endangered languages may not have stable internet access, the system includes a feature that allows linguists to print empty tables after submitting the initial data. These tables can then be filled out offline in remote areas and later integrated back into the system. The backend and frontend are implemented as a .NET web application. All data is stored in a PostgreSQL database using relational tables to minimise redundancy. The application can be de-ployed with Docker and runs on both Linux and Windows servers. The active learning component is developed using FastAPI and PyTorch. To implement the neural inflection model for ac-tive learning, we designed a simple and fast net-work that can be trained or fine-tuned on minimal server specifications. The model is a 2-layer LSTM with hidden and embedding dimensions of 128. All input sequences are padded or truncated to a fixed length of 20 character tokens, which enables ef-ficient batch processing and stable training. The network is trained on a CPU for 15 epochs, tak-ing approximately one minute, making it suitable for rapid experimentation in low-resource environ-ments. All development libraries and code used are free and open-source. For simplicity, we do not train or fine-tune LLMs locally; access to LLMs is provided via API. 5. Case studies 

To demonstrate the platform’s ability to support languages with diverse morphological systems, we conducted a series of case studies covering a wide range of language families. The selected languages include Spanish and Latin (Italic), En-glish and German (Germanic), Hawrami Kurdish, Central Kurdish, and Farsi (Iranic), Arabic (Semitic), Swahili (Bantu), and Turkish (Turkic). Spanish, German, English, Farsi, and Kurdish primarily exhibit fusional suffixation with stem alter-nations. Hawrami additionally involves reduplica-tion. Turkish employs agglutinative suffixation with vowel harmony, while Arabic features a templatic, non-concatenative morphology. The platform accommodates these typological differences through flexible paradigm definitions and stem management. In root-and-pattern sys-tems, each lemma may specify multiple stems, allowing individual consonants of the root to be mapped to appropriate vocalic templates. Mor-phophonological rules further enable linguists to encode complex rewrite operations, such as the vowel harmony constraints observed in Turkish. By evaluating CommonMorph across these morpho-logically distinct systems, we assess its general applicability to typologically varied languages. Furthermore, to assess the platform’s ability to support data collection using resources from related language varieties, we conducted exper-iments with several varieties from the Middle East. These experiments show how the platform can leverage linguistic similarity to assist under-resourced varieties. Data collection for each vari-ety involved one linguist and one speaker. Initially, the standard varieties of Central Kurdish and Farsi were added to the platform. Afterwards, additional contributors added their own varieties, using the existing data as a reference when relevant. Hawrami, an endangered language, 2 now has comprehensive digital data on the verbal morphol-ogy of its two dialects for the first time. We hope that these data will be used in future NLP applica-tions to support the preservation of the language. 

# 6. Evaluation and Results 

It is difficult to establish a baseline for evaluating the efficiency of our platform because no existing system offers comparable functionalities. As dis-cussed in Section 2, some previous studies on morphological data collection have provided rough estimates of manual effort. However, we consider such comparisons inappropriate as our platform in-

> 2https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/ pf0000187026

tegrates a wider range of components and involves users with less specialised expertise. To assess the effectiveness of CommonMorph , we conduct a multi-faceted evaluation focused on sys-tem performance and user experience. Our eval-uation aligns with prior work in human-in-the-loop language documentation, where the focus is on reducing annotation effort while maintaining qual-ity (Palmer et al., 2009; Baldridge and Palmer, 2009). 

6.1. Annotation Suggestion Accuracy 

We employed an active learning strategy to im-prove the quality of annotation suggestions over time. The accuracy of model-generated sugges-tions was evaluated by comparing them to user-validated annotations using the Character Error Rate (CER) metric. Lower CER values indicate fewer corrections needed by annotators, and thus, higher model usefulness. Table 1 presents the Character Error Rate (CER) results for 3,000 randomly selected samples from several language varieties. These include Hawrami (Tewêle dialect), Central Kurdish (Sine dialect), Farsi (non-standard Tehrani dialect), Standard Turkish, Standard Spanish, and fully diacritized Modern Standard Arabic. For the first two datasets, no prior morphological data were available; they are published in CommonMorph for the first time. We compare multiple suggestion model config-urations, including linguist-provided patterns (with and without morphophonological rules), neural net-works trained on varying amounts of data, and few-shot prompting with two LLMs. The results demon-strate that linguist-defined morphological patterns substantially enhance model performance for zero-resource varieties, underscoring the importance of expert linguistic knowledge in low-resource set-tings. Incorporating morphophonological rules fur-ther enhances suggestion accuracy for most vari-eties, particularly for Turkish, where vowel harmony plays a central role. However, providing detailed lin-guistic rules can be time-consuming, and in some cases, linguists may have limited knowledge of the target variety. In scenarios involving related lan-guages where sufficient prior knowledge exists, the linguist user can instead focus on identifying poten-tial points of deviation, reducing manual effort. For neural network models, CER consistently decreases with additional training data, validat-ing the effectiveness of active learning. Few-shot prompting with LLMs—particularly with two- or three-shot inputs—achieves competitive results for well-resourced standard languages. However, in the case of Arabic, model performance was lower due to the use of fully diacritised data, while most Arabic training data available to LLMs is undiacri-tised, leading to less accurate suggestions. Suggestion Model Hawrami (Tewêle) Kurdish (Sine) Farsi (Tehran) Turkish (Standard) Spanish (Spain) Arabic (Standard) Linguist patterns 12.33 1.39 0.86 31.74 0.82 6.62 Linguist patterns + morphophonolgy 5.78 0.74 0.85 2.97 0.82 2.24                                                                   

> NN trained on 100 samples 48.41 54.23 37.25 23.31 20.98 41.93 NN trained on 500 samples 15.13 29.12 23.63 11.83 7.18 8.45 NN trained on 1000 samples 7.88 27.37 54.02 3.33 5.91 6.40 NN trained on 2000 samples 6.46 14.36 24.22 4.68 1.14 2.72
> gemini-2.5-flash (1-shot) 17.00 14.86 3.71 2.36 0.50 7.25
> gemini-2.5-flash (2-shot) 14.45 13.43 1.86 1.5 0.50 4.59
> gemini-2.5-flash (3-shot) 13.03 6.86 2.32 2.15 0.50 5.07
> gpt-5-mini (1-shot) 19.26 15.14 4.64 0.43 0.00 10.14
> gpt-5-mini (2-shot) 11.61 14.57 4.64 0.21 0.25 7.97
> gpt-5-mini (3-shot) 12.18 7.43 3.25 0.21 0.00 4.83

Table 1: Character Error Rate (CER, in %) of the inflection model in generating suggestions for different languages, which reflects the amount of correction required by speakers. 

6.2. User Survey 

To evaluate the usability and effectiveness of 

CommonMorph , we conducted a user survey involv-ing both linguists and speakers. Participants re-ported their learning time (in minutes), contribution time (in hours), and rated the following aspects on a 5-point Likert scale: ease of use for clarity of the interface and task design, efficiency for users’ per-ception of how to quickly and effectively complete tasks, pedagogical value for if the platform helps speakers and learners better understand the lan-guage structure, and satisfaction for overall user experience and willingness to reuse the platform. As shown in Table 2, the platform received con-sistently high ratings across all categories, with average satisfaction and ease-of-use scores ex-ceeding 4.7/5. Speakers reported shorter learning curves (8.7 minutes) compared to linguists (17.3 minutes), yet contributed substantially more time to the documentation effort. Both user groups gave strong pedagogical ratings, suggesting that the platform effectively supports language learning and awareness. The positive feedback indicates it helps bridge the expertise gap in collaborative documentation. 

# 7. Conclusion and Future Work 

This study presents CommonMorph , a collaborative platform designed to document and expand mor-phological resources. Our evaluation demonstrates that the platform effectively supports collaborative data collection by integrating rule-based linguistic input with machine learning suggestions derived from active learning. Both linguists and commu-nity speakers found the interface intuitive and easy to use, highlighting its potential for participatory language documentation. A key outcome of this work is the demonstrated benefit of combining structured linguistic knowl-                             

> Linguists Speakers
> Metric Mean SD Mean SD User Learning Time 17.3 min 2.5 8.7 min 3.2 Contributing Time 1.0 hr 2.5 4.1 hr 9.2 Pedagogical Score 3.7/5 1.5 4.7/5 0.5 Efficiency Score 4.3/5 1.1 4.7/5 0.5 Satisfaction Score 4.7/5 0.5 4.7/5 0.5 Ease of Use Score 4.7/5 0.5 5.0/5 0

Table 2: User survey results for the CommonMorph 

platform. The table reports average user learning and contribution times, as well as mean scores (1 = low, 5 = high) for pedagogical value, efficiency, satisfaction, and ease of use. SD indicates stan-dard deviation. edge with the pattern-recognition capabilities of neural models. Initial morphological rules con-tributed by linguists substantially improved the qual-ity of subsequent system-generated suggestions, reducing manual annotation effort while preserving data accuracy. This hybrid workflow proved espe-cially valuable during the initial stages of data col-lection and enabled high-quality input from users with varying levels of expertise. As the amount of collected data increases, the platform has the potential to offer a universal mor-phological analysis system. Additionally, because it captures glossing and morphosyntactic tags, it would assist linguists in generating interlinear glossed text (IGT) data. Future work will focus on expanding both the scope and automation of the platform. One promis-ing direction is the automatic extraction of mor-phological data and rule patterns from descriptive linguistic sources such as grammars and dictio-naries (Virk et al., 2020), allowing community re-viewers to verify and refine the output. Extend-ing the framework beyond morphology to other lin-guistic domains, including phonology, syntax, and semantics, would further enhance its usefulness for language documentation and computational modelling. Finally, because many endangered lan-guages lack standardised orthographies, incorpo-rating speech-based data entry, through manual verification or automatic speech recognition, will further enhance accessibility and inclusivity in lan-guage resource development. 

# Ethical Considerations 

The CommonMorph platform does not publish any per-sonal or identifiable information from its users. All linguistic data contributed through the platform is intended for public release via open-access repos-itories. The study design and participant involve-ment have been reviewed and approved by the University of Melbourne Human Research Ethics Committee (Reference No. 2025-32066-64105-3). Our analyses are based on licensed data, which are freely available for academic use. 

# Acknowledgements 

We extend our deepest appreciation to the contribu-tors of our case studies, especially Ako Marani, Mo-hammadreza Yadegari, Erfan Karami, and Morteza Naserzadeh for their invaluable time, dedication, and linguistic expertise. We are also deeply grate-ful to Borja Herce, John Mansfield, and Demian Aaron Inostroza Améstica for their helpful feed-back and suggestions during the preparation of 

CommonMorph . Furthermore, we would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for their constructive feedback, which significantly improved the final version of this paper. Sina Ahmadi gratefully thanks the support of the UZH Grant (reference number 269093). Ekaterina Vylomova expresses gratitude to the University of Melbourne for providing support for this research (ECR grant 2024ECRG140). 

# 8. Bibliographical References 

Sina Ahmadi and Aso Mahmudi. 2023. Revisit-ing and amending Central Kurdish data on Uni-Morph 4.0. In Proceedings of the 20th SIGMOR-PHON workshop on Computational Research in Phonetics, Phonology, and Morphology , pages 38–48, Toronto, Canada. Association for Com-putational Linguistics. Jason Baldridge and Alexis Palmer. 2009. How well does active learning actually work? Time-based evaluation of cost-reduction strategies for language documentation. In Proceedings of the 2009 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-ral Language Processing , pages 296–305, Sin-gapore. Association for Computational Linguis-tics. Khuyagbaatar Batsuren, Gábor Bella, Arya-man Arora, Viktor Martinovic, Kyle Gorman, Zden ˇ ek Žabokrtský, Amarsanaa Ganbold, Šárka Dohnalová, Magda Ševˇ cíková, Kateˇ rina Pelegri-nová, Fausto Giunchiglia, Ryan Cotterell, and Ekaterina Vylomova. 2022a. The SIGMOR-PHON 2022 shared task on morpheme segmen-tation. In Proceedings of the 19th SIGMOR-PHON Workshop on Computational Research in Phonetics, Phonology, and Morphology , pages 103–116, Seattle, Washington. Association for Computational Linguistics. Khuyagbaatar Batsuren, Omer Goldman, Salam Khalifa, Nizar Habash, Witold Kiera´ s, Gábor Bella, Brian Leonard, Garrett Nicolai, Kyle Gor-man, Yustinus Ghanggo Ate, Maria Ryskina, Sabrina Mielke, Elena Budianskaya, Charbel El-Khaissi, Tiago Pimentel, Michael Gasser, William Abbott Lane, Mohit Raj, Matt Coler, Jaime Rafael Montoya Samame, Delio Siti-conatzi Camaiteri, Esaú Zumaeta Rojas, Di-dier López Francis, Arturo Oncevay, Juan López Bautista, Gema Celeste Silva Villegas, Lu-cas Torroba Hennigen, Adam Ek, David Guriel, Peter Dirix, Jean-Philippe Bernardy, Andrey Scherbakov, Aziyana Bayyr-ool, Antonios Anas-tasopoulos, Roberto Zariquiey, Karina Sheifer, Sofya Ganieva, Hilaria Cruz, Ritván Karahó ˇga, Stella Markantonatou, George Pavlidis, Matvey Plugaryov, Elena Klyachko, Ali Salehi, Candy An-gulo, Jatayu Baxi, Andrew Krizhanovsky, Natalia Krizhanovskaya, Elizabeth Salesky, Clara Vania, Sardana Ivanova, Jennifer White, Rowan Hall Maudslay, Josef Valvoda, Ran Zmigrod, Paula Czarnowska, Irene Nikkarinen, Aelita Salchak, Brijesh Bhatt, Christopher Straughn, Zoey Liu, Jonathan North Washington, Yuval Pinter, Duygu Ataman, Marcin Wolinski, Totok Suhardijanto, Anna Yablonskaya, Niklas Stoehr, Hossep Dolatian, Zahroh Nuriah, Shyam Ratan, Fran-cis M. Tyers, Edoardo M. Ponti, Grant Aiton, Aryaman Arora, Richard J. Hatcher, Ritesh Kumar, Jeremiah Young, Daria Rodionova, Anastasia Yemelina, Taras Andrushko, Igor Marchenko, Polina Mashkovtseva, Alexandra Serova, Emily Prud’hommeaux, Maria Nepomni-ashchaya, Fausto Giunchiglia, Eleanor Chodroff, Mans Hulden, Miikka Silfverberg, Arya D. Mc-Carthy, David Yarowsky, Ryan Cotterell, Reut Tsarfaty, and Ekaterina Vylomova. 2022b. Uni-Morph 4.0: Universal Morphology. In Proceed-ings of the Thirteenth Language Resources and Evaluation Conference , pages 840–855. Euro-pean Language Resources Association. Sarah Beemer, Zak Boston, April Bukoski, Daniel Chen, Princess Dickens, Andrew Gerlach, Torin Hopkins, Parth Anand Jawale, Chris Koski, Akanksha Malhotra, Piyush Mishra, Saliha Mu-radoglu, Lan Sang, Tyler Short, Sagarika Shreev-astava, Elizabeth Spaulding, Testumichi Umada, Beilei Xiang, Changbing Yang, and Mans Hulden. 2020. Linguist vs. machine: Rapid develop-ment of finite-state morphological grammars. In 

Proceedings of the 17th SIGMORPHON Work-shop on Computational Research in Phonetics, Phonology, and Morphology , pages 162–170, Online. Association for Computational Linguis-tics. Claire Bowern. 2015. Linguistic fieldwork: A practi-cal guide . Springer. Lindell Bromham, Russell Dinnage, Hedvig Skirgård, Andrew Ritchie, Marcel Cardillo, Fe-licity Meakins, Simon Greenhill, and Xia Hua. 2022. Global predictors of language endanger-ment and the future of linguistic diversity. Nature ecology & evolution , 6(2):163–173. Lyle Campbell. 2018. How many language families are there in the world? Anuario del Seminario de Filología Vasca" Julio de Urquijo" , 52(1/2):133– 152. Gül¸ sen Eryi ˘ git, Fatih Bekta¸ s, Ubey Ali, and Bihter Dereli. 2023. Gamification of complex morphol-ogy learning: the case of Turkish. Computer Assisted Language Learning , 36(8):1421–1449. Darren Flavelle and Jordan Lachler. 2023. Strengthening relationships between indigenous communities, documentary linguists, and compu-tational linguists in the era of NLP-assisted lan-guage revitalization. In Proceedings of the First Workshop on Cross-Cultural Considerations in NLP (C3NLP) , pages 25–34, Dubrovnik, Croatia. Association for Computational Linguistics. Michael Ginn, Sarah Moeller, Alexis Palmer, Anna Stacey, Garrett Nicolai, Mans Hulden, and Mi-ikka Silfverberg. 2023. Findings of the SIGMOR-PHON 2023 Shared Task on Interlinear Glossing. In Proceedings of the 20th SIGMORPHON work-shop on Computational Research in Phonetics, Phonology, and Morphology , pages 186–201, Toronto, Canada. Association for Computational Linguistics. Kyle Gorman and Richard Sproat. 2022. Finite-state text processing . Springer Nature. Katharina Kann and Hinrich Schütze. 2018. Neural transductive learning and beyond: Morphologi-cal generation in the minimal-resource setting. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Em-pirical Methods in Natural Language Processing ,pages 3254–3264, Brussels, Belgium. Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics. Christo Kirov, Ryan Cotterell, John Sylak-Glassman, Géraldine Walther, Ekaterina Vylo-mova, Patrick Xia, Manaal Faruqui, Sabrina J. Mielke, Arya McCarthy, Sandra Kübler, David Yarowsky, Jason Eisner, and Mans Hulden. 2018. UniMorph 2.0: Universal Morphology. In Pro-ceedings of the Eleventh International Confer-ence on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2018) , Miyazaki, Japan. European Lan-guage Resources Association (ELRA). Christo Kirov, John Sylak-Glassman, Roger Que, and David Yarowsky. 2016. Very-large scale parsing and normalization of Wiktionary mor-phological paradigms. In Proceedings of the Tenth International Conference on Language Re-sources and Evaluation (LREC’16) , pages 3121– 3126, Portorož, Slovenia. European Language Resources Association (ELRA). Aso Mahmudi, Borja Herce, Demian Inos-troza Améstica, Andreas Scherbakov, Eduard H. Hovy, and Ekaterina Vylomova. 2025. Can a neu-ral model guide fieldwork? a case study on mor-phological data collection. In Proceedings of the 18th Workshop on Building and Using Compara-ble Corpora (BUCC) , pages 62–72, Abu Dhabi, UAE. Association for Computational Linguistics. Arya D. McCarthy, Christo Kirov, Matteo Grella, Amrit Nidhi, Patrick Xia, Kyle Gorman, Eka-terina Vylomova, Sabrina J. Mielke, Garrett Nicolai, Miikka Silfverberg, Timofey Arkhangel-skiy, Nataly Krizhanovsky, Andrew Krizhanovsky, Elena Klyachko, Alexey Sorokin, John Mansfield, Valts Ernštreits, Yuval Pinter, Cassandra L. Ja-cobs, Ryan Cotterell, Mans Hulden, and David Yarowsky. 2020. UniMorph 3.0: Universal Mor-phology. In Proceedings of the Twelfth Language Resources and Evaluation Conference , pages 3922–3931, Marseille, France. European Lan-guage Resources Association. Arya D. McCarthy, Ekaterina Vylomova, Shijie Wu, Chaitanya Malaviya, Lawrence Wolf-Sonkin, Gar-rett Nicolai, Christo Kirov, Miikka Silfverberg, Sabrina J. Mielke, Jeffrey Heinz, Ryan Cotterell, and Mans Hulden. 2019. The SIGMORPHON 2019 shared task: Morphological analysis in con-text and cross-lingual transfer for inflection. In 

Proceedings of the 16th Workshop on Compu-tational Research in Phonetics, Phonology, and Morphology , pages 229–244, Florence, Italy. As-sociation for Computational Linguistics. Alexis Palmer, Taesun Moon, and Jason Baldridge. 2009. Evaluating automation strategies in lan-guage documentation. In Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2009 Workshop on Active Learn-ing for Natural Language Processing , pages 36– 44, Boulder, Colorado. Association for Computa-tional Linguistics. Alexis Mary Palmer. 2009. Semi-automated an-notation and active learning for language docu-mentation . Ph.D. thesis, The University of Texas at Austin. Shen Qiao, Samuel Kai Wah Chu, and Susanna Siu-sze Yeung. 2023. Understanding how gami-fication of english morphological analysis in a blended learning environment influences stu-dents’ engagement and reading comprehension. 

Computer Assisted Language Learning , pages 1–34. Jiugeng Sun, Rita Sevastjanova, Sina Ahmadi, Rico Sennrich, and Mennatallah El-Assady. 2025. Dia-lingle: A gamified interface for dialec-tal data collection. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-tational Linguistics (Volume 3: System Demon-strations) , pages 148–158, Vienna, Austria. As-sociation for Computational Linguistics. John Sylak-Glassman. 2016. The composition and use of the universal morphological feature schema (Unimorph schema). Johns Hopkins University .Zhen Tan, Dawei Li, Song Wang, Alimohammad Beigi, Bohan Jiang, Amrita Bhattacharjee, Man-sooreh Karami, Jundong Li, Lu Cheng, and Huan Liu. 2024. Large language models for data anno-tation and synthesis: A survey. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 930–957, Miami, Florida, USA. Association for Computa-tional Linguistics. United Nations. 2019. Rights of indigenous peoples: Resolution adopted by the general assembly on 18 december 2019. UN Gen-eral Assembly Resolution 74/135, on the re-port of the Third Committee (A/74/396). Avail-able at: https://www.unesco.org/en/decades/ indigenous-languages .Shafqat Mumtaz Virk, Harald Hammarström, Markus Forsberg, and Søren Wichmann. 2020. The DReaM corpus: A multilingual annotated corpus of grammars for the world’s languages. In Proceedings of the Twelfth Language Re-sources and Evaluation Conference , pages 878– 884, Marseille, France. European Language Re-sources Association. 

# A. Prompt for Suggestion Generation 

The following prompt is employed to obtain a sug-gestion when two data samples from an identical morphosyntactic feature set have been submitted and verified by speakers. In languages like Kur-dish, where verb lemmas often have two distinct stems, linguists can provide these stems in ad-vance. By retrieving them from the database during prompting, the system can construct more detailed prompts, increasing the likelihood of generating accurate suggestions.                                                    

> A. Prompt for generating inflected forms sugges-tions
> In the language YYY, what is the correct inflected form of the lemma <LEMMA>, given that its stem1 is "<STEM1>" and stem2 is "<STEM2>" for aspecific grammatical feature set? As reference examples, under the same grammatical features: -The lemma <SAMPLE.1.LEMMA> (with stem1: "<SAMPLE.1.STEM.1>", stem2: "<SAMPLE.1.STEM.2>") yields the form <SAMPLE.1.FORM>. -The lemma <SAMPLE.2.LEMMA> (with stem1: "<SAMPLE.2.STEM.1>", stem2: "<SAMPLE.2.STEM.2>") yields the form <SAMPLE.2.FORM>. Think about this quietly and just give me one final inflected word.

For example, its placeholders will be replaced with the following words:             

> Placeholder Replaces with
> <LEMMA> hênan <STEM1> hêna <STEM2> hên <SAMPLE.1.LEMMA> girtin <SAMPLE.1.STEM.1> girt <SAMPLE.1.STEM.2> gir <SAMPLE.1.FORM> degirim <SAMPLE.2.LEMMA> ku¸ stin <SAMPLE.2.STEM.1> ku¸ st <SAMPLE.2.STEM.2> kuj <SAMPLE.2.FORM> dekujim

# B. Prompt for Elicitation Question Generation 

The following prompt is used to generate question templates that can help the linguist create elicita-tion questions for speakers who are not familiar with grammatical terminology. 

B. Prompt for generating English question tem-plates 

You are a field linguist working with native speakers to study the morphology of their language. The speakers are not trained in linguistics but understand English. Ask a speaker how they would say the word "XXX" with these specific features: "< FEATURE-VALUES SET PLACEHOLDER >". Generate only the question for the speaker. "XXX" should be in the question. Do not use linguistic terms. Keep it under 50 words. Do not explain anything to me. 

For example, the UniMorph tag set “ V;PST ”is substituted with ‘‘Part-of-Speech=Verb, Tense=Past ”, which will then replace the corresponding placeholder in the prompt.