Title: Indistinguishability in One-or-Two-Ended Forests on Unimodular Random Graphs

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.19717v1

Published Time: Mon, 23 Mar 2026 00:35:08 GMT

Number of Pages: 96

Markdown Content:
# Indistinguishability in One-or-Two-Ended Forests on Unimodular Random Graphs 

# Francois Baccelli ∗

# , Ali Khezeli †

# March 23, 2026 

Abstract 

We provide a new approach for proving the indistinguishability of con-nected components of random one-or-two-ended oriented forests on uni-modular random graphs. In particular, this approach leads to a new and simpler proof for the wired uniform spanning forest, which is the only one-ended model previously studied in the literature. This approach can also be used for proving the indistinguishability of ‘level-sets’ in this set-ting, where the previously available methods do not work. The approach leads to new indistinguishability results for a variety of models, including, for instance, river models, coalescing renewal process models, coalescing simple random walks and coalescing Markov chains. These models are unified as ‘coalescing Markov trajectories’ (CMT), under some general conditions, where the out-going edges of the vertices are chosen randomly and independently. These models and results are also extended to models based on point-maps on Bernoulli/Poisson point processes, like Howard’s model and the strip point-map. The proof technique is based on conditioning on the ‘ancestry chain’ of the root. It leverages measure-theoretic results on the completion of certain invariant or tail sigma-fields, which are of independent interest. First, non-tail events are ruled out regardless of the forest model. The next step, which is model dependent, is to reduce the indistinguishability of the components (resp. level-sets) to the ergodicity (resp. tail trivial-ity) of the ancestry chain of the root. A result of independent interest is the tail triviality of Markov chains on unimodular random graphs, un-der suitable conditions, which completes the last step of the proof of the indistinguishability of level-sets of CMTs on unimodular graphs. 

# Contents 

1 Introduction 3

1.1 Indistinguishability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3

> ∗

Inria Paris, francois.baccelli@ens.fr 

> †

School of Mathematics, Institute for Research in Fundamental Sciences, alikhezeli@ipm.ir 

1

> arXiv:2603.19717v1 [math.PR] 20 Mar 2026

1.2 Models of Interest in this Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41.3 A General Approach for Proving Indistinguishability in Oriented Forests on Unimodular Graphs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51.4 Main Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10 1.5 Structure of the Paper . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17 

2 Definitions 17 

2.1 Notation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17 2.2 Unimodular Graphs and Discrete Spaces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20 2.3 Point Processes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21 2.4 Random Forests and Point-Maps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21 2.5 Ergodicity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24 2.6 Indistinguishability in General Oriented Forests and Point-Maps 24 2.7 Applications of the Indistinguishability of Level-Sets . . . . . . . 26 

3 Coalescing Markov Trajectories (CMT) on Unimodular Graphs 28 

3.1 Definition and Main Models of CMTs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29 3.2 Examples of CMTs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32 

4 A Simple Proof for Indistinguishability in Lattice CMTs (and More) 39 5 Steps C3 and L3: Ergodicity and Tail Triviality of Markov Chains on Unimodular Spaces 42 

5.1 Stationarity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42 5.2 Step C3: Invariant Path Events and Ergodicity . . . . . . . . . . 44 5.3 Consequences of Markov Chain Ergodicity on the Weak Aperi-odicity Assumption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46 5.4 Step L3: Tail Events and Tail-Triviality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47 

6 Steps C1 and L1: Ruling Out Non-Tail Properties in General Models 52 

6.1 Tail Properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52 6.2 Steps C1 and L1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54 

7 Steps C2 and L2: Reduction to Path Properties and Proof of Indistinguishability in CMTs 59 

7.1 Steps C2 and L2 for CMTs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59 7.2 Proof of Indistinguishability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62 7.3 Indistinguishability in CMTs on Deterministic Graphs . . . . . . 62 

8 Qualitative Properties of the Connected Components of CMTs 65 9 Indistinguishability in the Wired Uniform Spanning Forest 70 

9.1 Definitions and Basic Properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71 9.2 Ergodicity and Tail Triviality of WUSF . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73 9.3 Indistinguishability of Components . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 74 210 Models on Bernoulli and Poisson Point Processes 78 

10.1 Main Examples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79 10.2 Indistinguishability in Howard’s Model and the Discrete Strip Point-Map . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 80 10.3 The General Bernoulli Case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 82 10.4 The General Poisson Case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85 

11 Problems 89 A Measurability Lemmas 90 B Stopping Sets for Marked Poisson Point Processes 92 

# 1 Introduction 

# 1.1 Indistinguishability 

Following the seminal paper [28], the notion of indistinguishability naturally appears in models involving random graphs with more than one connected com-ponent. The general informal question is as follows: Can one find a property A

of the connected components (belonging to a specific class of properties) such that, with positive probability, there exist some components that satisfy A, and some others that don’t? If so, the components are called distinguishable . For instance, is it possible that some components are transient while some others are recurrent? In [28], indistinguishability is proved for the infinite clusters of the Bernoulli percolation (or more generally, any insertion-tolerant percolation) on a unimodular transitive graph. More precisely, [28] proves that the properties which are measurable and automorphism-invariant cannot distinguish the infi-nite clusters of Bernoulli percolation (such properties should be defined without knowing where the origin is; e.g., transience or recurrence of the components). The more recent paper [20] proves a similar statement for the (free or wired) uniform spanning forest of a unimodular random graph or network, which is the only one-ended model whose indistinguishability is proved in the literature. The notion of unimodular random graphs has deep connections to station-ary point processes and measure-preserving actions; see e.g., [1]. Also, when the base graph is ergodic, indistinguishability can be rephrased as ergodicity in various manners. In [28], it is shown that indistinguishability is equivalent to the ergodicity of the lazy simple random walk on C(o), where C(o) denotes the connected component containing the origin. As a result, the probability of every event can be approximated by Birkhoff averages on C(o), although C(o)may be very thin and may occupy an asymptotically zero fraction of the base graph (see Section 2.7). In more recent language, if one regards C(o) as a uni-modular random discrete space 1 (while keeping the information of the rest of     

> 1The term discrete space is used because C(o) might be disconnected in the graph-distance metric of the base graph. The notion of indistinguishability still makes sense even if C(o) is not equipped with a graph structure and just comes from a partitioning of the vertices.

3the forest as a decoration), indistinguishability is equivalent to the ergodicity of C(o) (see Proposition 5 of [13]). Also, indistinguishability can be rephrased as the ergodicity of a certain measured equivalence relation : We say that two configurations are equivalent if the second one can be obtained from the first one by changing the root to a new root in the same component. These inter-pretations are valid for the indistinguishability of level-sets as well, which will be discussed in Section 1.2. Some other works consider deterministic base graphs and other types of component-properties, like monotone properties [15], robust properties [16], tail component-properties or tail properties of k-tuples of connected components [19]. In this work, we will also need tail component-properties, which are dis-cussed in Section 1.3. The approach of [28] involves many novel ideas and results which are valuable on their own. In particular, it is proved that there are one or infinitely many infinite components, and in the second case, each component is transient and has infinitely many ends. Also, the proof uses pivotal edges , the insertion of which changes the type of some components (assuming that the components are distinguishable), and leverages the random walk on a connected component. A similar idea is used in [20], but due to the lack of insertion-tolerance, pivotal edges are replaced by pivotal updates , where the latter are defined using the 

cycle-breaking dynamic . However, the difficulty of one-ended models is that pivotal updates do not exist for tail component-properties , which are discussed further in Section 1.3. Also, by a finite modification, one cannot merge two one-ended components into a single component. For such tail properties, [20] uses another idea based on, roughly speaking, resampling WUSF inside a large ball conditionally on what is seen outside the ball. 2

In the present work, we provide a new approach for proving indistinguisha-bility in one-ended or two-ended models. Instead of pivotal edges or pivotal updates, we leverage some measure-theoretic lemmas on the completion of sub-sigma-fields, which are developed in Section A and might be of independent interest. We discuss the models of interest in Section 1.2, and then introduce the general approach in Section 1.3. The main results are then presented in Section 1.4. 

# 1.2 Models of Interest in this Work 

The main focus of this work is the indistinguishability properties of general ori-ented forests , where each vertex has exactly one out-going edge. Such forests are considered on a base space which is either a unimodular random graph, a unimodular discrete space, or the set of points of the Bernoulli/Poisson point process (we will also discuss deterministic base graphs later; see Section 1.4.1). This includes all undirected forests with one-ended components (since there is a unique way to orient the edges towards the ends), and hence, such models are 

> 2More precisely, conditionally on the union of the ancestral lines of all points outside the ball.

4ubiquitous. By considering the out-going edges, oriented forests are equivalent to cycle-free point-maps , where the latter means a mapping from the base space to itself, possibly using extra randomness (see Section 2.4.2). Unimodu-larity implies that the connected components of such forests are automatically one-ended or two-ended almost surely (see Theorem 2.10), which is stressed in the title of the paper. We provide a general approach for proving the indistinguishability of con-nected components of such models. Additionally, this approach may be used for proving the indistinguishability of level-sets , where the latter correspond to generations if one regards each connected component of F as a family tree, where F (x) is considered as the parent of x (see Section 2.4.3 for the formal definition). Indistinguishability of level-sets was motivated by the study of the existence of equivariant bijections between the level-sets in point-maps (this im-plication will be discussed in Section 2.7), particularly, in the strip point-map (Figure 1). The general approach will be explained in Section 1.3 and the main results will be presented in Section 1.4. We prove some model-free results, but some steps of the approach should be done in each model separately. The main general model for which we prove indistinguishability is Coalesc-ing Markov Trajectories (CMT) on a unimodular random graph or discrete space. Roughly speaking, this means choosing the out-going edges of the ver-tices randomly and independently, under some conditions that will be specified in Models 1 and 2 in Section 3.1. This unifies various specific models defined in the literature, e.g., river models, renewal forests defined on Z, coalescing random walks, and coalescing Markov chains (see Section 3.2). This also implies that the clusters of the stationary voter model on unimodular graphs are indistinguish-able (see Section 3.2.5). These models are also extended in Models 3 to 6 to prove the indistinguishability in some models defined on the support of Bernoulli or Poisson point processes, including Howard’s model, the strip point-map and some variations (see Section 10). We will also provide general results regarding connectedness and one-endedness of these models, which will be introduced in Section 1.4.3. Additionally, we use this approach to provide an alternative and simpler proof of the indistinguishability of connected components of WUSF. It should be noted that the indistinguishability of connected components of CMTs can be proved with the same method as [20] (although the proof is long), but that of level-sets is much more difficult and the previously available methods do not seem to work for it. 

# 1.3 A General Approach for Proving Indistinguishability in Oriented Forests on Unimodular Graphs 

In this subsection, we outline the general proof approach. Two variants are provided, one for connected components and one for level-sets. We also describe how this method can be applied to CMTs and WUSF. Note that WUSF can be regarded as an oriented forest by Wilson’s algorithm rooted at infinity if the base graph is transient (see Section 9.1). 50 20 40 60 80 100 -10 010 20 30 40 50 60 70 Figure 1: The level-sets in the strip point-map on the Poisson point process in the plane (Theorem 10.3). On the left, part of the graph is shown together with one level-set. On the right, only 20 consecutive level-sets are shown. 

1.3.1 Proving Indistinguishability of Connected Components 

Assume we have a random triple [ G, o; F ], where [ G, o] is a unimodular graph, 

o is the root and F is an equivariant random oriented forest on G. As men-tioned in Section 1.2, one may regard F as a function on G by letting F (v)be the endpoint of the unique out-going edge from v. Let anc( v) be the infi-nite path in F started from v using only out-going edges, which we call the 

ancestral line of v.3 As in the previous works, a component-property is formal-ized as an event A, on the space of all samples [ G, o ; f ], that is invariant under changing the root in the same connected component (in the forest defined by 

f ). Then, indistinguishability is equivalent to P [A] = P [[ G, o; F ] ∈ A] ∈ { 0, 1}

for all component-properties A, assuming that [ G, o] is ergodic (see Sections 2.5 and 2.6 for more details). Our method is based on the following simple but essential observation (see Theorem 6.5): 

Every property B which depends only on [G, o; anc( o)] and is shift-invariant, is a component-property. In addition, it is a tail component-property. 

(1.1) Here, as in Markov chain theory, the shift means moving one step forward in the path and forgetting the previous point; more precisely, σ[G, x 0; ( x0, x 1, . . . )] = [G, x 1; ( x1, x 2, . . . )] (see (5.1)). The first part of the observation is clear: For a forest f , if u, v ∈ G belong to the same component, then anc( u) and anc( v) shift-couple (i.e., are identical after removing some initial segments of possibly dif-ferent lengths from each path). Thus, for B as above, 1 B [G, u ; f ] = 1 B [G, v ; f ]. That is, B is a component-property. Also, f satisfies the definition of tail             

> 3The ancestral line of vis called the future of vin [20]. One can imagine two opposite directions of time; one by imagining moving particles (where the particles coalesce), and another by the family tree viewpoint (where F(v) is regarded as the parent of v). We will use the family tree viewpoint throughout the paper.

6component-properties (see Section 6.1 for the precise definition); i.e., if we mod-ify f at finitely many points in such a way that the component of u in f is changed at finitely many points, then 1 B [G, u ; f ] is not changed since, under these assumptions, the new ancestral line of u shift-couples with the initial one. Moreover, in the last paragraph, it is enough that the new component of u

and the initial one share an infinite branch that contains the ancestry chain of u,where a branch means a connected component obtained after removing finitely many edges. Hence, we call B a tail branch-property , see Theorem 6.2 for the formal definition (the latter is not needed in the one-ended cases and, in this case, the reader might replace it with tail component-properties throughout the paper). In fact, we need a converse to Observation (1.1). More precisely, a proof of indistinguishability of components can be obtained by the following steps: 

Step C1 Proving that every component-property is equivalent to some tail branch-property, where two events A1 and A2 are called equivalent if 

P [A1∆A2] = 0. 

Step C2 Proving that every tail branch-property of [ G, o; F ] is equivalent to some shift-invariant property of [ G, o; anc( o)]. 

Step C3 Proving that, if [ G, o] is ergodic, then every shift-invariant property of [G, o; anc( o)] is trivial (i.e., has probability 0 or 1); i.e, [ G, o; anc( o)] is ergodic. Note that in the last step, [ G, o; anc( o)] is not necessarily stationary under shift, but ergodicity still makes sense. This will be discussed in Theorem 2.16. Step C1 rules out non-tail properties and reduces the problem to indistin-guishability by tail branch-properties. We prove this step in full generality in Theorem 6.6. This was proved in [20] in the special case of the WUSF, leverag-ing the ideas of [28] including pivotal updates . With the help of some measure theoretic lemmas that we provide in Section A, we give a proof for the general case, which is much simpler, involves almost no ϵ, δ calculations and does not use pivotal updates. Step C2 is the converse to (1.1) alluded above, and is the core idea of this proof method. It connects the properties of F to those of the path anc( o)(in the latter, the forest is deleted and only anc( o) is kept). We will prove Step C2 for CMTs and WUSF (in Theorem 7.1 and Theorem 9.7 respectively) without requiring unimodularity, by a coupling method briefly described below. In [20], tail component-properties are studied by, roughly speaking, resampling 

F conditionally on what is seen outside a large ball. In the present work, we just condition on G, o and anc( o), which results in a much simpler proof of indistinguishability. Step C2 can be proved for a given model by showing the following claims (which are implicit in the proof of Theorem 7.1 for CMTs): 

Step C2.1 Proving that every tail branch-property A of [ G, o; F ] is equivalent to some event A′ that depends only on [ G, o; anc( o)]. 7Step C2.2 Proving that A′ can be chosen to be a shift-invariant event. To prove Step C2.1, we will use the following simple observation: 

If A is a tail branch-property, then 1A[G, o ; f ] is invariant by all finite modifications of f which do not modify anc f (o). (1.2) This is true for general models because, by such a finite modification of f , the new component of o shares an infinite branch with the initial one. By this observation, Step C2.1 is reduced to the following, where tail triviality has the classical meaning that every tail event has probability zero or one: 

Step C2.1 ′ Proving the tail triviality of F conditionally on knowing G, o and anc( o) (for a suitable version of the conditional distribution). We will prove this step for CMTs and WUSF (Theorem 7.1 and Theorem 9.5) using a coupling method to show that A is independent of F Bn(o) conditionally on G, o and anc( o) (where Bn(o) is the ball of radius n centered at o). This also gives an intuitive proof of the tail triviality of the (wired or free) uniform spanning forest of a given graph, which seems to be a new proof (Theorem 9.3). We will then prove Step C2.2 (Theorem 7.1 and Theorem 9.6) using another coupling method for CMTs and for WUSF. Step C3 should be proved for each model separately. For CMTs, anc( o)is just a Markov chain on a unimodular graph. Such Markov chains satisfy an ergodicity property, which is implied by slightly generalizing a result of [1], which we prove in Theorems 1.3 and 5.4. For WUSF, in the transient case, anc( o) is the loop-erased simple random walk and the claim is quickly implied (in Theorem 9.8) by the ergodicity of the simple random walk on unimodular graphs. 

1.3.2 Proving Indistinguishability of Level-Sets 

As mentioned in Section 1.2, one may regard each component of F as a family tree by regarding F (v) as the parent of v. We define the level-sets of F as the generations in this family tree (see Section 2.4.3). In [4], it is proved that, in the one-ended case, all level-sets are infinite a.s. (see Section 2.4.3). Level-set-properties and tail level-set-properties are defined similarly in the present paper (see Theorems 2.12 and 6.1). It seems that the method of [20] cannot be applied for the indistinguishability of level-sets. Our method is based on the following variant of Observation (1.1), which is again model-free: 

On the event that F is locally-finite, one-ended, and has infinite level-sets, every property B which depends only on 

[G, o; anc( o)] and is a tail event (under shifts) is a level-set-property. In addition, it is a tail level-set-property. 

(1.3) In this observation, the notion of tail properties of [ G, o; anc( o)] is a special case of tail properties of Markov chains (see Theorem 5.9). The observation holds because, if two ancestral lines join after an equal number of steps, then 8the property B holds for either both or none of them (See Theorem 6.5). With the hint of Observation (1.3) and the need for its converse, a proof of indistin-guishability of level-sets can be obtained in a one-ended model by the following steps: 

Step L1 Proving that every level-set-property is equivalent to some tail level-set-property. 

Step L2 Proving that every tail level-set-property is equivalent to some tail property (under shift) of [ G, o; anc( o)]. 

Step L3 Proving that [ G, o; anc( o)] is tail-trivial (under shift) if [ G, o] is er-godic. Step L1 is again proved in full generality in Theorem 6.6. For proving Step L2, the idea is that Observation (1.2) is valid for any tail level-set-property A as well. So, if Step C2.1 ′ is proved, then A is equivalent to an event A′ that depends only on [ G, o; anc( o)]. Then, it remains to show that A′ can be chosen as a tail property under shift. We will prove the latter for CMTs and for WUSF on transitive graphs by a coupling method (see Theorems 7.1 and 9.7). To prove Step L3 for CMTs, we prove that Markov chains on unimodu-lar graphs are tail trivial under mild conditions, which is a novel result (The-orems 1.3 and 5.11). We stress that everything is considered up to graph-isomorphisms here, which makes it difficult to define tail events. We also prove a version of this result on deterministic base graphs: In almost every sample of the graph, the tail sigma-field of the Markov chain is equivalent to the invariant sigma-field, see Theorems 1.12 and 5.8. 

1.3.3 Summary of the General Approach 

The following theorem summarizes the general approach discussed above: 

Theorem 1.1 (Indistinguishability in General Point-Maps) . Let F be an equiv-ariant point-map on a unimodular graph or discrete space [G, o].(i) If F is cycle-free a.s., then it satisfies the claim of Step C1 , which rules out non-tail properties (see Theorem 6.6 for the formal statement). If F

satisfies the claims of Steps C2 and C3 as well, then it has indistinguishable connected components. (ii) If every component of F is one-ended a.s., then it satisfies the claim of Step L1 (see Theorem 6.6 for the formal statement). If F satisfies the claims of Steps L2 and L3 as well, then it has indistinguishable level-sets. 

Note that the claims of the three steps are necessary for indistinguishability. The full generality of Steps C1 and L1 rules out non-tail properties. In words, in Part (i) (resp. (ii)) of this theorem, tail branch-properties (resp. tail level-set-properties) are the only ways to distinguish the components (resp. level-sets) up to equivalence of events. 9The proof idea is already described above, but the formal proof is post-poned to the end of Section 6.2, where the required notations are developed and Steps C1 and L1 are proved (Theorem 6.6). Recall also that Steps C2 and C3 are proved for CMTs and WUSF using couplings, as well as Steps L2 and L3 for CMTs. The formal results in these cases are presented in the next subsection. 

# 1.4 Main Results 

This subsection introduces the main results of the paper. We state the in-distinguishability results on components and level-sets in various models in Sections 1.4.1 and 1.4.4 using the general approach mentioned in the previous subsection. Also, Section 1.4.5 states analogous results on deterministic base graphs. Section 1.4.2 provides a result of independent interest regarding Markov chains on unimodular graphs. Also, Section 1.4.3 provides further qualitative properties of the connected components of CMTs. 

1.4.1 Indistinguishability in CMTs on Unimodular Graphs or on Bernoulli/Poisson Point Processes 

As a main application of the general approach, we apply this method to various models, generalized as CMTs: 

Theorem 1.2 (Indistinguishability in CMTs and Similar Models) . One has: (i) In the following models, which are alluded to in Section 1.2 (see also Sec-tions 3.2 and 10.1 for precise definitions), the connected components are indistinguishable: Nguyen’s river model and its variants, renewal forests on Z, coalescing random walks and coalescing Markov chains on unimod-ular graphs, Howard’s model, strip point map and its variants. (ii) In these models, in the cases where the components are one-ended a.s., the level-sets are also indistinguishable (iii) More generally, these claims hold for general cases of CMTs under the conditions in Models 1 to 6, which unify the last examples (see Theorem 3.4 for a more precise statement). 

We will also prove the one-endedness of the mentioned models (under mild conditions) in Sections 3.2 and 10 based on the qualitative results of Sec-tion 1.4.3. As a result, we deduce the existence of equivariant bijections between consecutive level-sets (Theorem 2.19). 

Proof. The last part will be proved in Theorem 3.4 and in Sections 10.3 and 10.4. The first two parts are derived as special cases in Sections 3.2 and 10. In the next paragraphs, we briefly describe Models 1 to 6, alluded to in Theorem 1.2. A variant of the last theorem is also provided on deterministic base graphs, which will be presented in Theorems 1.11 and 1.13. 10 CMTs on Unimodular Graphs. First, CMTs on unimodular graphs are defined in Theorem 3.1. Roughly speaking, the values F (v) for v ∈ G are chosen randomly and independently (given G). Models 1 and 2, defined in Section 3.1, impose some general conditions on such CMTs, which can be summarized as follows: In Model 1, it is assumed that the CMT is cycle-free, satisfies a bal-ance condition and a weak irreducibility condition. The latter is a relaxation of the notion of irreducibility for Markov chains. In Model 2, for the indistin-guishability of level-sets, it is additionally assumed that the components are one-ended and that a weak aperiodicity condition is satisfied. The latter is a relaxation of aperiodicity of Markov chains (i.e., the gcd of the cycle lenghts is 1), but since no directed cycle is assumed to exist, another type of cycles is considered. See also Theorem 3.5 regarding these conditions. 

Models on Bernoulli/Poisson Point Processes. Models 3 and 4, de-fined in Section 10, are analogous models on the Bernoulli point process on the vertices (i.e., each vertex of the base space is retained or deleted randomly and independently). Here, the inherent randomness of the point process may guar-antee variants of the weak irreducibility and weak aperiodicity conditions, even if no randomness is used in the definition of F (·) (except maybe for breaking ties). This includes Howard’s model. Some extra conditions are needed, in par-ticular, F (·) should depend only on a stopping set with some conditions. This is needed to guarantee that the ancestral line is a Markov chain; see Section 10 for more details. Also, Models 5 and 6 define analogous models on the Poisson point process, which includes the strip point-map. Here, the underlying Pois-son point process is assumed to be defined on Rd, Hd, or more generally, on a 

unimodular random measured metric space .

Models with Non-Independent Jumps. Models 3 and 4 also extend Models 1 and 2 in another way by letting the jumps be non-independent (even if the Bernoulli point process contains all vertices; i.e., has parameter 1). As mentioned, we need that F is a factor of i.i.d. marks and that, for all samples (G, o ), the value of F (o) is determined by the marks in a finite stopping set. In most examples, this is guaranteed by constructing F (o) by revealing the marks one by one (based on the previously revealed marks), and deciding whether to stop or not by a stopping rule (i.e., by a decision tree), which gives a rich flexibility in defining the point-map. Under the further assumptions of Models 3 and 4, indistinguishability of components/level-sets hold in these models as well. 

1.4.2 Ergodicity and Tail Triviality of Markov Chains on Unimodu-lar Graphs 

In this paper, we also prove the ergodicity and tail triviality for Markov chains on unimodular graphs, which are results of independent interest. This establishes Steps C3 and L3 in the proof of indistinguishability in CMTs, but it should be noted that no CMT is assumed in these results. The ergodicity result is a slight generalization of Theorem 4.6 of [1], but the tail triviality result is new to the best of our knowledge. Let [ G, o] be a unimodular random graph. Assume that, for each realization 11 G of the graph and for every x ∈ G, a probability measure K(x, ·) on G is given. Let ( Xn)n≥0 denote the Markov chain on G with kernel K. If K satisfies some isomorphism-invariance and measurability condition, then [ G, o; ( Xn)n] is a well defined random object; see Section 5.1 for the formal definition. Note that there is no CMT at this stage (neither here nor in Steps C3 nor L3), but if we define a CMT with the same kernel K, then ( Xn)n has the same distribution as anc( o) (given G and o). Also, the conditions of Model 1 (namely, cycle-free, balance, and weak irreducibility) are still meaningful for ( Xn)n.For n ≥ 0, by choosing Xn as the new root and forgetting X0, . . . , Xn−1, a random object [ G, Xn; ( Xn+i)i≥0] is obtained, which defines another Markov chain 4 (see Section 5.1 for more details). Note that two different Markov chains, (Xn)n and ([ G, Xn; ( Xn+i)i≥0]) n, are considered here. We will clarify which Markov chains is meant each time. 

Theorem 1.3 (Steps C3 and L3: Ergodicity and Tail Triviality of Markov Chains on Unimodular Graphs) . Let [G, o] be an ergodic unimodular graph or discrete space and (Xn)n be a Markov chain on G started from o.(i) If the conditions of balance and weak irreducibility of Model 1 hold, then the Markov chain ([ G, Xn; ( Xn+i)i≥0]) n is ergodic. (ii) If, in addition, the weak aperiodicity condition of Model 2 is satisfied, then the Markov chain of Part (i) is also tail trivial. 

Theorem 10.11 also provides a similar result for Markov chains on unimod-ular continuum spaces. Also, Theorem 1.12 provides a version of this theorem for deterministic graphs. It states that, on a typical sample of the graph, the tail sigma-field of the Markov chain is equivalent to the invariant sigma-field. It should be noted that ([ G, Xn; ( Xn+i)i≥0]) n is not necessarily stationary. Nevertheless, the balance condition implies that the last sequence becomes sta-tionary after biasing the probability measure suitably; see Theorem 5.1. This might not be true for general point-maps, but ergodicity still makes sense (see Theorem 2.16). Part (i) is in fact a slight generalization of Theorem 4.6 of [1], which in turn generalizes a result of [28] (we just weaken the condition K > 0 to weak irre-ducibility). We provide a restatement of this claim in Theorem 5.4 in Section 5.2, mentioning the connection with harmonic functions. We will also provide a self-contained proof. This serves as Step C3 in the proof of the indistinguishability of components of CMTs. Part (ii) is a new result. Here, as in the classical theory of Markov chains, tail triviality means that the probability of every tail event is either 0 or 1, where being a tail event means, roughly speaking, not depending on the first 

n elements of the chain for every n. We will restate and prove this claim in Theorem 5.11 which serves as Step L3 in the proof of the indistinguishability of level-sets of CMTs. 

> 4In fact, this is a dynamical system since the shift requires no additional randomness. The state space will be defined in Section 5.1.

12 1.4.3 Qualitative Properties of the Connected Components in CMTs 

In Section 8, we prove several qualitative properties of CMTs regarding con-nectedness and one-endedness, which are described below. In addition, as an application of indistinguishability, we prove a connectivity decay property in Theorem 1.8. These results are useful for verifying one-endedness in order to use Model 2. In particular, they are used in Section 3.2 to prove easily that all models alluded to in Theorem 1.2 have one-ended components under mild conditions, and mostly have infinitely many connected components. The proofs of all of these results are given in Section 8 using coupling techniques. We start by showing that the cycle-free assumption is necessary in the study of indistinguishability: 

Proposition 1.4. Assume [G, o; F ] satisfies the balance and weak irreducibility conditions of Model 1. Then, almost surely, if the cycle-free condition fails, all components of F are finite. 

Also, we show that the balance condition cannot be dropped; see Sec-tion 3.2.7 for examples with distinguishable components or level-sets. It is also easy to see that the weak irreducibility condition cannot be dropped (see coalescing Markov chains in Section 3.2.4). In the rest of the subsection, we assume that F is a CMT on a unimodular graph or discrete space [ G, o] that satisfies the conditions of Model 1. For a real-ization G of the graph, we let PG be the distribution of the oriented forest on the base graph G. We also let K(x, y ) := PG [F (x) = y]. The indistinguishability of components (Theorem 1.2) implies that either all components are one-ended or all are two-ended. We strengthen this in the following results, which is of independent interest and is proved in without using indistinguishability. 

Theorem 1.5 (Disconnectedness Implies One-Endedness) . In Model 1, almost surely, if the graph of F is disconnected, then all components are one-ended. In other words, the following dichotomy holds for almost every sample of [G, o; F ]:(i) Either the graph of F is connected (and it is either one-ended or two-ended), (ii) Or the graph of F is disconnected and all its components are one-ended. 

It is easy to see that the connectedness of F is equivalent to the condition that, starting from any two points of G, the trajectories of two independent instances of the Markov chain on G intersect a.s. We weaken this condition as follows, and also show that there are either one or infinitely many components. 

Definition 1.6 (Collision Property) . In Model 1, we say that a sample ( G, o )satisfies the path-collision property (resp. infinite path-collision prop-erty ) if the paths of two independent copies ( Xn)n and ( X′

> n

)n of the Markov chain on G started from o and with kernel K collide (resp. collide infinitely many times) a.s., where a collision means ( m, n ) ∈ N2 such that Xm = X′

> n

(note that the starting points are excluded). 13 Theorem 1.7 (Number of Components) . In Model 1, the number of connected components of F is either 1 or ∞ a.s. Additionally, if [G, o] is ergodic, then: (i) If almost every sample of [G, o] has the path-collision property, then F is connected a.s. (ii) Otherwise, F has infinitely many connected components a.s. 

As an application of indistinguishability, we leverage the last theorem to prove the following result, which is similar to Theorem 4.1 of [28]. The proof uses indistinguishability and also uses cluster frequencies , which will be discussed in Theorem 8.7. 

Proposition 1.8 (Connectivity Decay) . In Model 1, almost every sample (G, o )

satisfies the following connectivity decay property: If F is disconnected, then 

inf {PG [x ∈ C(o)] : x ∈ G} = 0 ,

where PG [x ∈ C(o)] is the probability that x and o are in the same connected component of F .

Whether or not F is connected, one still needs one-endedness in order to verify the conditions of Model 2 and to study the indistinguishability of level-sets (see the examples of Section 3.2). For this, consider the Green function of 

K, which is defined by the following classical formula for every graph or discrete space G:

gK (G, x, y ) := 

> ∞

X

> n=0

Kn(x, y ) = PG [y ∈ anc( x)] , (1.4) where the last equality follows from the cycle-free condition. 

Theorem 1.9 (One-Endedness) . In Model 1, the connected components of F

are one-ended a.s. if and only if 

lim  

> n

gK (G, o, Xn) = 0 in probability , (1.5) 

where (Xn)n is the Markov chain on G starting from o and with kernel K. In particular, this holds if, almost surely, lim y gK (G, o, y ) = 0 , where the limit is over y ∈ G when d(o, y ) → ∞ .

Both types of convergence in this theorem will be used in the examples of Section 3.2. 

1.4.4 Alternative Proof for WUSF 

As an application of the general approach, we provide in Section 9 an alterna-tive simpler proof for the following result of [20]. As already mentioned, when WUSF is disconnected, the graph is transient and Wilson’s algorithm provides an oriented version of WUSF (see Section 9). In this case, WUSF can be re-garded as a point-map (which is not a CMT), and hence, Steps C1 to C3 make sense. 14 Theorem 1.10 ([20], Theorem 1.1) . In every unimodular graph [G, o] in which 

E [deg( o)] < ∞, the connected components of WUSF( G) are indistinguishable. 

We will also prove the analogous result on a deterministic base graph (The-orem 1.11). Also, this method gives a simple proof of the ergodicity of WUSF on unimodular graphs and the tail triviality of WUSF on deterministic graphs, which is provided in Theorem 9.3. The proofs are given in Section 9 and do not rely on the cycle-breaking dynamics of [20]. Verifying Step C2 is achieved by a coupling method based on a generalization of the stochastic covering property of WUSF [31], which is provided in Theorem 9.2. However, we could not establish Steps L2 and L3 for WUSF (we prove the former in the transient case). A natural problem is whether the level-sets of WUSF on a unimodular non-bipartite graph are indistinguishable or not (Theorem 11.7). In the transient case, only Step L3 is missing, which is the tail-triviality of the loop-erased random walk. 

1.4.5 Results on Deterministic Base Graphs 

Theorem 1.2 of [19] provides an analogous indistinguishability result for WUSF on a deterministic base graph, assuming one-endedness and the Liouville prop-erty (i.e., every bounded harmonic function is constant). This result extends Theorem 4.5 of [7], which deals with the special case Zd. The result of [19] also deals with k-tuples of components. We provide alternative proofs of these results and similar results for CMTs, and extend them to non-Liouville or non-one-ended cases. In contrast to the setting of unimodular random base graphs, when the base graph is deterministic, we neither fix a root nor consider equivalence under isomorphisms. This gives more flexibility to distinguish the components; e.g., one can color the components based on the inclusion of any given arbitrary point. In [20], indistinguishability is proved only for tail component-properties, assuming one-endedness and the Liouville property. In fact, the latter is neces-sary (otherwise, the Poisson boundary is nontrivial and the boundary points of the components distinguish them). We restate this result as follows and study the non-Liouville and non-one-ended cases as well. For the latter, we use the 

oriented version of WUSF given by Wilson’s algorithm rooted at infinity (see Section 9.1). 

Theorem 1.11 (Components in a Deterministic Graph) . Let F be the oriented wired uniform spanning forest on a transient locally-finite graph G (resp. aCMT on a countable set G). (i) If G (resp. the Markov kernel corresponding to the CMT) has the Liouville property, then the components of F are indistinguishable by tail branch-properties. (ii) Otherwise, any tail branch-property is equivalent to some measurable sub-set of the Poisson boundary; in other words, the Poisson boundary gives 

15 all the ways to distinguish the components by tail branch-properties. In particular, for every tail branch-property A, the components of any two points such that their ancestral lines have the same boundary points (given an arbitrary realization of the Poisson boundary) are not distinguished by 

A a.s. In addition, similar claims hold for k-tuples of distinct components. 

The required definitions and the proof are given in Sections 7.3 and 9. See also Theorem 7.5 for a non-Liouville example. The core of the proof is that Step C2 for CMTs, proved in Theorem 7.1, does not require unimodularity and works for deterministic graphs as well. Step C1 is not needed since we already consider tail branch-properties. Step C3 is also equivalent to the Liouville prop-erty in the setting of deterministic base graphs. For the level-sets of CMTs, we first prove a variant of Step L3 in Theo-rem 1.12 below. Despite Theorem 1.3, the invariant and tail sigma-fields of a Markov chain on G might be nontrivial. The equality or inequality of these two sigma-fields is of great importance in the literature. If this holds, the Markov chain is called steady . We prove the equality under the following conditions, which is of independent interest: 

Theorem 1.12 (Steadiness on Deterministic Graphs) . In Part (ii) of Theo-rem 1.3, almost every sample (G, o ) of [G, o] satisfies the following property: For every probability measure μ on G, the Markov chain (Xi)i≥0 on G with initial distribution μ is steady. In particular, in the Liouville case, (Xn)n is tail-trivial. In addition, the same holds for any deterministic graph or discrete space G that satisfies the following: 

∃l ∈ N, ∃ϵ > 0 : ∀x ∈ G : || Kl(x, ·) ∧ Kl+1 (x, ·)|| TV > ϵ. (1.6) Here, || · || TV denotes the total variation norm of measures. Note that (1.6) does not necessarily hold in Model 2. This theorem is restated and strengthened in Theorem 5.8 and is proved in Section 5.4. 

Theorem 1.13 (Level-Sets in a Deterministic Graph) . Consider a cycle-free CMT on a deterministic base graph G such that all of its level-sets are infinite a.s. Then, the tail properties of the ancestral line are the only properties (up to equivalence) that can distinguish the level-sets. In particular, if the Markov chain on G is steady (e.g., for typical realizations of the graph in Model 2, see Theorem 1.12), then: (i) If the Liouville property holds, then the level-sets of F are indistinguishable by tail level-set-properties. (ii) Otherwise, the Poisson boundary gives all the ways to distinguish the level-sets by tail level-set-properties. In particular, in each component, the level-sets are indistinguishable by tail level-set-properties. 

16 This will be proved in Section 7.3. In fact, every tail level-set-property is equivalent to some tail property of the ancestral line (see Theorem 7.2). Also, the first paragraph of the theorem means that the tail boundary (see, e.g., [21]) gives all the ways to distinguish the level-sets by tail level-set-properties. 

# 1.5 Structure of the Paper 

To help the reader, Figure 2 describes the dependency structure of the sections. Also, Table 1 lists the frequently used symbols, in particular, the various in-variant and tail sigma-fields used throughout the paper. The relations between these sigma-fields are also depicted in Figure 3. In Section 1.3, we introduced the general approach of proving indistinguisha-bility in oriented forests on unimodular graphs. We also summarized the main results in Section 1.4. Basic definitions are provided in Section 2, including uni-modularity, point-maps, ergodicity and indistinguishability. Section 3 provides the formal definition of CMTs and specifies Models 1 and 2. In particular, Sec-tion 3.2 discusses how these models unify various models of the literature and studies their indistinguishability properties. The three steps of proving indis-tinguishability for CMTs are given in Sections 5 to 7, where Section 5 proves ergodicity and tail triviality of Markov chains on unimodular graphs. Before that, Section 4 provides a significantly simpler proof for CMTs on Euclidean lattices and similar models. This proof does not cover general CMTs, but con-tains many important ingredients of the ideas. Section 8 studies the qualitative properties of CMTs regarding connectedness and one-endedness. The alterna-tive proof for the indistinguishability in WUSF is given in Section 9. The reader may jump to this section right after Section 2, but the arguments for WUSF are more compressed than those of CMTs. Section 10 provides the analogous versions of CMTs on Bernoulli or Poisson point processes (Models 3 to 6), that generalize Howard’s model and the strip point-map, and proves their indistin-guishability properties. Open problems are listed in Section 11. Section A includes measure-theoretic lemmas on the completion of sub-sigma-fields, which are essential ingredients in the proofs. Finally, some further developments of the notion of stopping sets are also given in Section B, which are used in Section 10. 

# 2 Definitions 

# 2.1 Notation 

If G is a graph or a metric space, the distance function on G is always denoted by d. For r ≥ 0 and v ∈ G, let Br (v) denote the closed ball Br (v) := {w ∈ G :

d(v, w ) ≤ r}. In this paper, we regard graphs merely as metric spaces, and the edges of G are considered as a marking of pairs of points. More generally: 

Convention 2.1. When we talk about a graph or a discrete space G, we pre-sume that G has some given marking of the points and/or the pairs of points, where a marking is a function m : G → M or m : G × G → M for some given 17 2 Definitions 

3 CMTs 4 Lattice CMTs 

5 C3, L3 

1 Introduction 

6 C1, L1 

7 C2, L2 

9 WUSF 

10 Bernoulli, Poisson 

8 Qualitative Properties 

Figure 2: The dependency structure of the sections. A dotted arrow means that only the definitions of the sigma-fields (see Table 1) are used from the preceding section. Table 1: Table of Symbols. 

Symbol Description Defined in 

G∗ The space of rooted graphs or discrete spaces Def 2.2 [G, o ], possibly having marks. 

G′∗ The space of [ G, o ; f ], where f : G → G. Def 2.6 

G∞ The space of [ G, x 0; ( xi)i≥0], where xi ∈ G. Sec 5.1 

F A point-map or CMT. Def 2.7, 3.1 

K a factor Markov kernel. Sec 3.1 

b The function used in the balance condition. Model 1 

C(o) The connected component containing o. Def 2.9 

L(o) The level-set containing o. Def 2.9 anc( o) The ancestor line of o. Sec2.4.3 

D(o), D n(o) The descendants of o. Sec 2.4.3 

I Invariant sigma-field on G∗. Section 2.5 

Ipm Sigma-field of invariant point-map-properties. Def 2.12 

Ipath Sigma-field of invariant path properties. Def 5.3 

Icomp Sigma-field of component-properties. Def 2.12 

Ilevel Sigma-field of level-set-properties. Def 2.12 

T pm Sigma-field of tail point-map-properties. Def 6.1 

T path Sigma-field of tail path properties. Def 5.9 

T branch Sigma-field of tail branch-properties. Def 6.2 

T level Sigma-field of tail level-set-properties. Def 6.1 

Ipath G , . . . Analogous sigma-fields when a deterministic Sec 5.2, 7.3 base graph G is fixed. 18 Ipm Icomp Ilevel 

T pm T branch T level 

I Ipath T path    

> 6.66.66.6
> 6.4
> 7.1
> 6.4
> 7.17.1
> 1.3,5.4
> 6.5
> 1.3,5.11
> 6.5

Figure 3: The relations between the sigma-fields mentioned in Table 1 (see Sec-tions 5.2 and 7.3 for analogous sigma-fields for a fixed underlying graph). An arrow, say from F to F′, means F ⊆ F ′ mod P (Theorem 2.4), possibly with some additional assumptions. Only Icomp , T branch , Ipath and I are needed for the proof of indistinguishability of components. The label of an arrow navigates to the result which proves the inclusion (those without label are straightfor-ward). Solid arrows are valid for all models, but the dashed arrows are proved only for Markov chains or CMTs in Sections 5 to 7 (some are also proved for WUSF in Section 9). complete separable mark space M (this generalizes the notion of networks [1]). Note that we may assume multiple marks as well. We will sometimes distinguish one or more markings of G by using semicolon. For instance, when studying (random) forests on G, we deal with objects of the form ( G; f ), where f is a forest on G, while allowing G to have other markings as well (e.g., edges or i.i.d. marks described later in Section 2.4.1). A graph is locally-finite if the degree of every vertex is finite. More gen-erally, a discrete space G is boundedly-finite if every bounded subset of G is finite. A rooted graph or discrete space is a pair ( G, o ), where G is a graph or discrete (metric) space and o ∈ G. The notion of doubly-rooted spaces is defined similarly and is denoted by ( G, o 1, o 2). We say that ( G1, o 1) is isomor-phic to ( G2, o 2) if there is a mark-preserving invertible isometry ρ : G1 → G2

such that ρ(o1) = o2. This is an equivalence relation and the equivalence class of ( G, o ) is denoted by [ G, o ]. 

Definition 2.2. Let G∗ be the set of equivalence classes of rooted boundedly-finite graphs or discrete spaces (recall that graphs or discrete spaces are allowed to have marks as above, but we do not use a symbol for the presumed mark space to avoid too long notations). Define G∗∗ similarly for doubly-rooted graphs or discrete spaces. For the case of graphs, the Benjamini-Schramm metric is defined on G∗ and 

G∗∗ and makes them Polish spaces (see [1]). For the more general case of discrete 19 metric spaces, [5] defines GHP-type metrics on G∗ and G∗∗ and it is shown that they are Borel subsets of some Polish spaces. 

Convention 2.3. If v ∈ G and f is a function on G∗, we use the notation f (v)rather than f [G, v ] by an abuse of notation, if G is clearly known. Similarly, 

g(u, v ) stands for g[G, u, v ] for a function g on G∗∗ .The symbol A∆B denotes the symmetric difference of the sets A and B. If 

G is a graph, a branch of G is a connected component of G \ U for some finite set U ⊆ G (equipped with the induced graph structure on U ). Two branches 

B1 and B2 are called equivalent if |B1∆B2| < ∞, where |·| denotes the cardinal of a set. The ends of G are the equivalence classes of the infinite branches of 

G.We usually denote the random objects by bold symbols for the ease of read-ing. If X and Y are random objects on the same state space E, then X ∼ Y

means that X and Y have the same distribution (we mostly do not refer to the probability space here). By a sample or a realization of X, we mean a point x ∈ E in the state space of X. The random object X is essentially constant if X = x, a.s., for some sample x. If b : E → R≥0 is a measurable function such that λ := E [b(X)] ∈ (0 , ∞), we let bP be the probability measure obtained by biasing by b(X) (defined on the same probability space as P); i.e., 

bP [A] := 1 

> λ

E [b(X)1 A] for every event A.We say that two sequences ( xi)i and ( x′

> i

)i eventually coincide if ∃N : ∀i ≥

N : xi = x′

> i

. Also, we say that ( xi) and ( x′

> i

)i shift-couple if ∃N, N ′ : ∀i ≥ 0 : 

xN +i = x′ 

> N′+i

.

Definition 2.4 (Null-Event-Augmentation) . Given a probability space (Ω , F, P), two events A and B are equivalent mod P if P [A∆B] = 0. Given a sub-sigma-field F1 ⊆ F , the null-event-augmentation of F1 is ˆF1 := {A ∈ F : ∃A1 ∈ F 1 : P [A∆A1] = 0 }.

If F2 ⊆ F is another sub-sigma-field, we say 

F1 ⊆ F 2 mod P (resp., F1 = F2 mod P)if F1 ⊆ ˆF2, or equivalently, ˆF1 ⊆ ˆF2 (resp. ˆF1 = ˆF2). In particular, F1 is 

trivial if it is equivalent to {∅ , Ω} mod P; i.e., ∀A ∈ F 1 : P [A] ∈ { 0, 1}.It is straightforward to see that ˆF1 is the sigma-field generated by F1 and all null events of F. Section A provides various lemmas regarding null-event-augmentation, which are essential ingredients in the proofs of indistinguishabil-ity in this work. 

# 2.2 Unimodular Graphs and Discrete Spaces 

A random rooted graph or discrete space is a random object [ G, o] in G∗

(recall that we allow G to have a marking). Its distribution is a probability 20 measure on G∗. We used brackets here because every sample of [ G, o] is an equivalence class of rooted spaces. However, we sometimes say ‘let (G, o ) be a sample of [G, o]’, meaning that it is a representative of an equivalence class. In addition, [ G, o] is called unimodular if it satisfies the following mass transport principle (MTP) :

E

" X

> x∈G

g(G, o, x )

#

= E

" X

> x∈G

g(G, x, o)

#

, (2.1) for all measurable functions g : G∗∗ → R≥0. See [1, 5]. The following lemma is well known about unimodular graphs (see e.g., Lemma 2.15 of [5]). 

Lemma 2.5 (Everything Happens at the Root) . Let [G, o] be a unimodular graph or discrete space and A ⊆ G ∗ be an event. The equivariant (factor) subset S := S(G) ⊆ G defined by S(G) := {v ∈ G : [ G, v ] ∈ A} satisfies the following: 

P [o ∈ S] > 0, iff P [S̸ = ∅] > 0,

P [o ∈ S] = 1 , iff P [S = G] = 1 .

# 2.3 Point Processes 

Roughly speaking, a point process Φ on Rd (or Zd) is a random discrete subset of Rd. The point process Φ is stationary if Φ − t ∼ Φ, ∀t ∈ Rd. One might regard Φ as a random discrete metric space. It is well known that the Palm version of Φ, which is heuristically obtained by conditioning on 0 ∈ Φ, is a unimodular discrete space (see e.g., Example 2.7 of [5]). Since we do not assume rotation invariance, it is convenient to add marks to Φ that determine the direction of the primary axes. For instance, one might let 

m(u, v ) := v − u ∈ Rd with mark space Rd. If this marking is used, then every measurable property of Φ corresponds to some measurable subset of G∗.

# 2.4 Random Forests and Point-Maps 

2.4.1 Factor Marking and Equivariant Marking 

Let [ G, o] be a unimodular random graph or discrete space (possibly having some marking). One might assign additional marks to the points or pairs of points of G. For instance, if m0 : G∗∗ → Ξ is a measurable function, where Ξ is a complete separable (new) mark space, then one can let m(u, v ) := m0[G, u, v ]for u, v ∈ G (for marking single vertices, one can restrict attention to m(u, u )or repeat the definition for m0 : G∗ → Ξ). This is called a factor marking .One obtains that [ G, o; m] is unimodular. 21 To allow extra randomness, we use the term equivariant marking 5 or 

equivariant process defined in Definition 2.9 of [5]. Formally, for every sample 

G, the space Ξ G×G is the state space of the markings on G. An equivariant marking is a map that assigns to every sample G a random marking mG(·, ·)of G (or equivalently, a probability measure on Ξ G×G) such that: (1) For every isomorphism ρ : G → G′, the random marking mG(ρ−1(·), ρ −1(·)) of G′ has the same distribution as mG′ , (2) For every event A depending on G, o and a marking of G, the function [ G, o ] 7 → P [[ G, o ; mG] ∈ A] is measurable. By Lemma 2.12 of [5], the random object [ G, o; mG] is unimodular. As an example, one might assign i.i.d. marks with the uniform distribution on [0 , 1] to the points (or pairs of points) of G.

2.4.2 Point-Maps 

Let [ G, o] be a random rooted graph or discrete space. Roughly speaking, a point-map on G is a random function F : G → G. This is defined below using the notion of equivariant marking mentioned above. 

Definition 2.6 (G′∗). Let G′∗ be the set of equivalence classes of tuples of the form ( G, o ; f ), where ( G, o ) is a rooted graph or discrete space and f : G → G

(recall that G is allowed to have some other markings by Theorem 2.3). The equivalence class of ( G, o ; f ) is denoted by [ G, o, f ]. We are interested in the graph of f obtained by connecting u to f (u) for every 

u ∈ G. Note that the edges of G (if any) are not used in defining connected components and may only be used in defining f . Also, the graph of f is not necessarily a subgraph of G.Note that a function f : G → G can be considered as a marking of G

by ( u, v ) 7 → 1{f (u)= v}. Therefore, G′∗ is a subset of another instance of G∗ for a larger mark space. In particular, G′∗ is a Borel subset of some Polish space. Note also that there is a natural projection from G′∗ to G∗ defined by [ G, o ; f ] 7 → [G, o ]. 

Definition 2.7 (Point-Map) . An (equivariant) point-map 6 is a map that assigns to every graph or discrete space G a probability measure νG on GG such that it is equivariant under isomorphisms (i.e., for every isomorphism ρ : G →

G′, the map f 7 → ρ ◦ f ◦ ρ−1 pushes νG forward to νG′ ) and for every Borel set 

A ⊆ G ′∗, the function [ G, o ] 7 → νG({f : [ G, o ; f ] ∈ A}) is measurable on G∗. If 

F = F (G, ·) : G → G is a random function chosen with distribution νG (defined for all G), then F is also called an (equivariant) point-map. Note that in the definition of F (G, ·), no common probability space is as-sumed for different graphs G. A special case of the definition is when F is defined as a function of an i.i.d. marking of G (in addition to the marks already on G, if any). In this case, F is called a factor of i.i.d. in the literature.         

> 5The term equivariant is usually used in the literature without allowing extra randomness, but we use the term factor in this case.
> 6Point-maps are called point-shifts in [4], but we preferred to use the term point-map here because it is more reminiscent of a map from Gto itself.

22 Theorem 2.7 extends the definitions of point-maps and vertex-maps defined in [17] and [4] respectively 7 by allowing extra randomness. This is also a special case of equivariant processes defined in [5]. As mentioned in Section 2.4.1, if [G, o] is unimodular, then [ G, o; F ] (which is well defined as a random element of G′∗) is also unimodular. 

Example 2.8 (Random Forests as Point-Maps) . Let [ G, o] be a unimodular graph and let T be an equivariant random subgraph of G which is a forest a.s. If every connected component of T has at most two ends, then T might be considered as the set of connected components of a point-map F as follows (using equivariant extra randomness). To define F , it is enough to orient the edges such that the out-degrees of all nodes are at most one (let F (v) = v if the out-degree of v is zero). In every one-ended component C of T , orient the edges towards the end of C. In every two-ended component C of T , choose one of the two ends by tossing a coin and orient the edges towards that end. In every finite component C, choose a random point vC ∈ C uniformly and orient the edges towards vC .

2.4.3 Classification of Components and Level-Sets 

The following definition and theorem are borrowed from [4]. 

Definition 2.9 (Components and Level-Sets) . Let G be a graph or discrete space and f : G → G. The graph of f is the graph Gr( f ) with vertex set G and the directed edges ( v, f (v)) for all v ∈ G. The component of v in f and the 

level-set of v in f are defined by 

C(v) := Cf (v) := the connected component of Gr( f ) that contains v, L(v) := Lf (v) := {w ∈ G : ∃n ≥ 0 : f (n)(w) = f (n)(v)} ⊆ C(v).

In each cycle-free connected component, one can define a height function 

h, which is defined (uniquely up to addition by a constant) by the condition 

h(f (v)) = h(v) − 1. The level-sets of the height function are exactly the level-sets of f .

Theorem 2.10 (Classification of Point-Maps, [4]) . Let [G, o] be a unimodular graph of discrete space and F be a point-map. Then, almost surely, the graph of F is locally-finite and every connected component C of F on G is of one of the following types: (i) C is finite and has a unique cycle, (ii) C is two-ended and every level-set in C is finite, (iii) C is one-ended and every level-set in C is infinite.   

> 7Point-maps are called point-shifts in these references.

23 In Gr( f ), a cycle-free component can be regarded as a (unisex) family tree by regarding f (v) as the parent of v for all v ∈ G. These trees are called eternal family trees in [4], since there is no node which is the ancestor of all other nodes. The ancestor line and the set of descendants of v are defined by ( f

is removed from the notation whenever it is clear what f is): anc( v) := anc f (v) := ( f (n)(v)) n≥0,Dn(v) := Dn,f (v) := {u ∈ G : f (n)(u) = v},D(v) := Df (v) := {u ∈ G : v ∈ anc( u)} = ∪nDn(v).

So, one has L(v) = ∪nDn(f (n)(v)). Note that the distribution of [ G, F (o); F ] (obtained by moving the root to its parent) is not equivalent to that of [ G, o; F ] in general (for instance, the new root F (o) always has a child, but this does not necessarily hold for o). However, we can prove the following weaker result: 

Lemma 2.11. If F is an equivariant point-map on a unimodular graph or discrete space [G, o], then the distribution of [G, F (o); F ] is obtained by bi-asing that of [G, o; F ] by d1(o) := F −1(o) . As a result, the distribution of 

σ ([ G, o; anc( o)]) is obtained by biasing that of [G, o; anc( o)] by E [d1(o) |[G, o; anc( o)] ] .Proof. The mass transport principle implies that P [[ G, F (o); F ] ∈ A] = E [d1(o)1 A]for every event A. This implies the first claim. The second claim is obtained by conditioning on [ G, o; anc( o)]. 

# 2.5 Ergodicity 

A unimodular graph or discrete space [ G, o] is ergodic if the invariant sigma-field I is trivial. The latter is the set of events A ⊆ G ∗ which are invariant under changing the root; i.e., 1 A[G, o ] = 1 A[G, v ] for all ( G, o ) and v ∈ G. If F is a point-map, the ergodicity of [ G, o; F ] is defined similarly using the sigma-field of invariant point-map properties defined in Theorem 2.12 below. The ergodic decomposition theorem states that every unimodular probability measure P on G∗ can be written as a mixture (informally, a convex combina-tion in the integral form) of ergodic unimodular probability measures, which are called the ergodic components of P. For proving statements in which the assumptions and the claims are of the form ‘ some invariant property holds a.s. ’(which is the case in this paper; see, e.g., Theorem 3.4), one may use the ergodic decomposition and assume safely that [ G, o] is ergodic from the beginning. 

# 2.6 Indistinguishability in General Oriented Forests and Point-Maps 

In order to define indistinguishability formally, we first provide the definition of invariant properties (which is classical), component-properties (as in [20]) and level-set-properties, in what follows. 24 Recall that G′∗ is the space of all [ G, o ; f ], where G is a graph or discrete space, o ∈ G and f : G → G. In the following definitions, we use the notation [G, o ; f ] for a variable element of G′∗.

Definition 2.12 (Component-Properties and Level-Set-Properties) . Let A ⊆G′∗ be an event. (i) A is called an invariant point-map-property if it is invariant under changing the root; i.e., if [ G, o ; f ] ∈ A, then [ G, v ; f ] ∈ A for all v ∈ G.Let Ipm denote the sigma-field of invariant point-map properties (not to be confused with the sigma-field I of invariant properties defined in Section 2.5). (ii) A is called a component-property if it is invariant under changing the root in its own component; i.e., if [ G, o ; f ] ∈ A, then [ G, v ; f ] ∈ A for all v ∈ Cf (o) (see Theorem 2.9). Let Icomp denote the sigma-field of component-properties. (iii) A is called a level-set-property if it is invariant under changing the root in its own level-set; i.e., if [ G, o ; f ] ∈ A, then [ G, v ; f ] ∈ A for all v ∈ Lf (o). Let Ilevel denote the sigma-field of level-set-properties. Given a component-property (resp. level-set-property) A, a connected compo-nent (resp. level-set) C of the graph of f is called of type A if ∀x ∈ C :[G, x ; f ] ∈ A. Otherwise, C is of type ¬A.We clearly have the following inclusions: Ipm ⊆ I comp ⊆ I level .

Definition 2.13 (Indistinguishability) . A point-map F on a random rooted graph [ G, o] has indistinguishable connected components (resp. level-sets) if, for every component-property (resp. level-set-property) A, almost surely, either all components (resp. level-sets) are of type A or all are of type 

¬A. In other words, every factor coloring of the points of G with two colors (where the coloring may depend on F as well) satisfies the following condition almost surely: If every connected component (resp. level-set) of F is uni-color, then all points of G have the same color. Note that ergodicity is not needed in Theorem 2.13. However, to prove or disprove the indistinguishability of a model, by the discussion in Section 2.5, one may safely assume that [ G, o; F ] is ergodic (we will assume this frequently in the proofs). Indeed, by ergodic decomposition (Section 2.5) and Theorem 2.5, one can rewrite indistinguishability in the following equivalent form: 

Lemma 2.14 (Indistinguishability in the Ergodic Case) . Let [G, o] be a uni-modular graph or discrete space and F be a point-map. (i) F has indistinguishable components (resp. level-sets) if and only if the same holds in almost every ergodic component of [G, o; F ] (see Section 2.5). 

25 (ii) In the case where [G, o; F ] is ergodic, F has indistinguishable components (resp. level-sets) if and only if every component-property (resp. level-set-property) A is trivial. In the non-ergodic case, indistinguishability is equivalent to Icomp = I mod P (resp. Ilevel = I mod P). 

In the case where P [A] = 1, all components (resp. level-sets) are of type A

a.s., and in the case where P [A] = 0, all are of type ¬A a.s. Note that all of the steps mentioned in Section 1.3 are necessary for indis-tinguishability. This immediately implies the next corollary, which is of inde-pendent interest. 

Corollary 2.15 (Ergodicity of the Ancestral Line) . Let F be an equivariant point-map on a unimodular graph [G, o] that has a single connected component, or more generally, has indistinguishably components. Then, if (Xn)n≥0 denotes the ancestral chain of o, then [G, X0; ( Xn)n≥0] is ergodic under shift (see The-orem 2.16 below). 

In particular, the loop-erased random walk on a unimodular transient ran-dom graph with E [d(o)] < ∞ is ergodic (see also Theorem 11.7 for its tail-triviality). We will prove this in Theorem 9.8 and use it in the proof of Theo-rem 1.10. 

Remark 2.16. The shift σ does not necessarily preserve the distribution of [G, o; anc( o)]. However, one may still define ergodicity since the distribution of σ[G, o; anc( o)] is absolutely continuous with respect to that of [ G, o; anc( o)] (see Theorem 2.11). If the latter is also absolutely continuous with respect to the former, then this notion is a special case of ergodicity for measure-class-preserving dynamical systems. 

# 2.7 Applications of the Indistinguishability of Level-Sets 

Let F be an equivariant point-map on a unimodular graph or discrete space [G, o]. As mentioned in Section 1.1, when the base graph or discrete space is ergodic, the indistinguishability of components (resp. level-sets) can be in-terpreted as the ergodicity of C(o) (resp. L(o)) in some sense. This is a di-rect consequence of Theorem 2.14. As a result, the probability of every event 

A can be approximated by ergodic averages on C(o) (resp. L(o)). For in-stance, if one performs a random walk ( Xn)n≥0 on C(o), one has P [A] = lim n 1

> n

Pni=1 1A([ G, Xi; F ]) (see stationarity and ergodicity of random walks in Theorems 1.3 and 5.1). For level-sets, one has the following more intrinsic result: 

Lemma 2.17. If [G, o] is ergodic and the level-sets of F are indistinguishable, then for every event A, P [A] is equal to the a.s. limit of the empirical average of 1A([ G, x ; F ]) , where x ranges over the subset Dn(F n(o)) of L(o), as n → ∞ .Proof. The claim is directly implied by Theorems 2.14 and 2.18 below. 26 Lemma 2.18 (Nested Partitions, [23]) . Let [G, o] be a unimodular graph or discrete space and let (Π n)n be a factor nested sequence of finite partitions, where 

finite and nested mean that |Πn(u)| < ∞, Πn(u) ⊆ Πn+1 (u), ∀n ∈ N, ∀u ∈ G

a.s. Let Π( u) := ∪nΠn(u). Then, for an arbitrary function g ∈ L1(G∗), the limit of the averages over Πn(o) defined by 

˜g := lim  

> n

average {g[G, x ] : x ∈ Πn(o)}

exists and is equal to E g IΠ  a.s. The convergence also holds in L1(G∗).

Here, we have used the notation average {u(x) : x ∈ V } :=  P  

> x∈V

u(x) / |V |.The claim is a special case of Lemma 8.1 of [23], which is included for self-containedness. 

Proof. Let gn be the average of g[G, x ] over x ∈ Πn(o). We claim that gn =

E g IΠn

 a.s. Assuming this, the nested property implies that ( gn)n is a back-ward martingale. Then, the claim is implied by the backward martingale con-vergence theorem. So, it remains to prove that gn = E g IΠn

 a.s. It is clear that gn is IΠn -measurable. Also, for every event B ∈ I Πn , one has 

E [gn1B ] = E

 1

|Πn(o)|

X

> x∈Πn(o)

g(x)1 B (o)



= E

" X

> x∈G

1

|Πn(o)| g(x)1 B (x)1 {x∈Πn(o)}

#

= E

" X

> x∈G

1

|Πn(x)| g(o)1 B (o)1 {o∈Πn(x)}

#

= E [g(o)1 B (o)] ,

where we have used the facts 1 B (x) = 1 B (o) and Π n(x) = Π n(o) for all x ∈

Πn(o) and the mass transport principle. Now, the claim is implied by the definition of conditional probability. The indistinguishability of level-sets also implies the existence of an equiv-ariant bijection between consecutive level-sets of F as follows. By such a bijection, we mean another equivariant point-map F ′ (which may depend on F as well) such that F ′ is injective a.s. (as a mapping on G) and that 

F ′(o) ∈ LF (F (o)) a.s. By the mass transport principle, this implies that F ′

is surjective as well, and ∀x ∈ G : F ′(x) ∈ LF (F (x)) a.s. As a result, F ′

defines a bijection between consecutive level-sets of F indeed. As mentioned in Section 1.2, our study of indistinguishability was motivated by the problem of the existence of such bijections. This is implied by the indistinguishability of level-sets as follows. 

Proposition 2.19 (Bijection Between Level-Sets) . There exists an equivariant bijection between consecutive level-sets of F if and only if E d1(o) Ilevel  = 1 27 a.s., where d1(o) := F −1(o) . In addition, this holds if F has indistinguishable level-sets. 

Here, by Theorem 2.18, if S denote the previous level-set of LF (o), then 

E d1(o) Ilevel  can be interpreted as the relative intensity of S with respect to LF (o); i.e., the average number of points of S per points of LF (o). For instance, for the canopy tree, this quantity is either 0 or 2 depending on whether 

o is in the first level-set or not. 

Proof of Theorem 2.19. First, assume that F ′ exists. To deduce E d1(o) Ilevel  =1, we should prove that E [d1(o)1 A] = P [A] for every A ∈ I level . One has 

P [d1(o)1 A] = E

" X

> x∈G

1A1{F (x)= o}

#

= P [[ G, F (o); F ] ∈ A]= P [G, F ′(o); F ] ∈ A

= P [A] .

In this equation, the second equality holds by the mass transport principle, the third equality holds since A ∈ I level , and the last equality holds because F ′ is bijective, which implies that moving the root to F ′(o) preserves the distribution (Theorem 2.11). So, we proved that E d1(o) Ilevel  = 1. Conversely, assume E d1(o) Ilevel  = 1. For every x ∈ G, choose a total order on F −1(x), randomly and uniformly (if [ G, o; F ] has no nontrivial auto-morphisms a.s., one can choose this order without extra randomness as well). By the forest structure of F , this induces a unique total order on every level-set of F such that x ≤ y if and only if F (x) ≤ F (y) (except when F (x) = F (y)). For every i ∈ Z, let hi(x) be the i-th point after x in this total order. Let 

τ (x) be the smallest i > 0 that satisfies F (hi(x)) ≥ hi(F (x)). Finally, let 

F ′(x) := hτ (x)(F (x)). This is similar to the right-stable balancing allocation studied in [24] (between the counting measure on LF (F (x)) and the measure 

ξ(x) := F −1(x) ). So, by Theorem 5.6 of [24] and leveraging unimodularity of the level-set containing the origin, one can show that F ′ satisfies the claim. Finally, assuming that the level-sets of F are indistinguishable, we should prove that E d1(o) Ilevel  = 1 a.s. By ergodic decomposition, we may assume that [ G, o; F ] is ergodic. So, Theorem 2.14 implies that Ilevel is trivial. Since 

E d1(o) Ilevel  is Ilevel -measurable, it is essentially constant. Since E [d1(o)] = 1, the constant is equal to 1, and the claim is proved. 

# 3 Coalescing Markov Trajectories (CMT) on Uni-modular Graphs 

In this section, we define the notion of coalescing Markov trajectories (in Sec-tion 3.1), alluded to in Section 1.2. We define our main models of interest of 28 CMTs (Models 1 and 2) and state the indistinguishability result for them (The-orem 3.4). The proof of the theorem will be given in Sections 4 to 7. Before that, Section 3.2 discusses how CMTs generalize various models in the literature and studies their indistinguishability and qualitative properties. 

# 3.1 Definition and Main Models of CMTs 

Let K : G∗∗ → R≥0 be a measurable function which satisfies P 

> v

K(G, u, v ) = 1 for all ( G, u ). For every graph or discrete space G and every u ∈ G, one obtains a probability measure K(G, u, ·) on G, which will be called the jump distribution 

in what follows. So, K(G, ·, ·) is a Markov kernel on G for every G. Note that 

K is invariant under the isomorphisms of doubly-rooted graphs (since it is well-defined on G∗∗ ). We call K a factor Markov kernel .

Definition 3.1. Let K be a factor Markov kernel, as defined in the previ-ous paragraph. Define the corresponding Coalescing Markov Trajectories (CMT) model F as follows: For every graph or discrete space G, define a ran-dom function F := F (G, ·) : G → G such that F (u) := F (G, u ) has distribution 

K(G, u, ·), for every u ∈ G, and ( F (u)) u∈G are independent. The terminology of CMT is chosen because, for every x ∈ G, the path (F (n)(x)) n≥0 until the first self-intersection (if any) is the trajectory of a Markov chain on G. Also, two such trajectories on G coalesce and continue together as soon as they intersect (not necessarily after the same number of steps). This is not to be confused with coalescing Markov chains , which are defined on space-time (see Section 3.2.4). It can be seen that a CMT F satisfies the measurability condition in The-orem 2.7, and is hence a point-map. Conversely, a point map is a CMT if and only if, for every graph or discrete space G, the random points ( F (G, u )) u∈G of 

G are independent. We use the notation 

Kn(G, u, v ) := P

h

F (n)(u) = v

i

(3.1) for the n-fold iterate of K.

Remark 3.2. Note that the nontrivial automorphisms of graphs impose restric-tions on CMTs. For instance, if ρ : G → G is an automorphism and ρ(u) = u,then one should have P [F (G, u ) = v] = P [F (G, u ) = ρ(v)] , ∀v (since K is well defined on G∗∗ ). To get rid of the automorphisms, one might add some equiv-ariant marking to G from the beginning. For instance, i.i.d. marks in [0 , 1], or the marking described in Section 2.3 in the case of point processes. In this paper, we consider CMT models together with a unimodular graph or discrete space [ G, o]. Recall from Section 2.4.2 that, if [ G, o] is unimodular, then so is [ G, o; F ]. In addition, if [ G, o] is ergodic, then [ G, o; F ] is also ergodic (we leave it to the reader to build F using i.i.d. marks on G × G; i.e., F is a factor of i.i.d.). A formal proof of this fact will also be included in Theorem 7.1. 29 At first reading, the reader might focus on the case where G is a deterministic Cayley graph or a transitive graph with a unimodular automorphism group. In particular, throughout this subsection, we use the following simple-to-state but important example to illustrate the definitions (see e.g., Theorem 3.9 for an explicit special case). This example generalizes several river models (also called 

drainage networks ) and renewal forests in the literature; see Section 3.2 for discussion and further examples. 

Example 3.3 (Lattice CMTs) . Let Φ be a lattice in Rd (i.e., a discrete subgroup of Rd) and let μ be an arbitrary probability distribution on Φ (called the jump distribution ). For every x ∈ Φ, let F (x) := x + U (x), where U (x) ∈ Φ is a random point with distribution μ chosen independently for all x. In this case, a CMT is obtained. To prove indistinguishability of components, we will require the following assumptions, which constitute one of the main models studied in this paper. 

Model 1. Let F be a CMT on a unimodular graph or discrete space [ G, o], as in Theorem 3.1, and let K be the underlying factor Markov kernel. For every graph or discrete space G, let PG denote the distribution of ( F (G, x )) x∈G, which is a probability measure on GG. Let also b : G∗ → R≥0 be a given measurable function such that E [b(o)] < ∞, where b(o) := b[G, o] by Theorem 2.3. In this model, it is also assumed that almost every sample ( G, o ) of [ G, o] satisfies the following conditions (we call ( G, o ) a typical sample in this case): (i) (Cycle-free) There is no cycle in the graph of F on G, PG-a.s. (ii) (Weak Irreducibility) The graph with vertex set G and edge set {(x, y ) : 

K(x, y ) + K(y, x ) > 0} is connected. (iii) (Balance) 8 For the function b assumed above, one has b(G, ·) > 0 and P 

> x∈G

b(x)K(x, y ) = b(y), ∀y ∈ G. In other words, b(G, ·) is an invariant measure for the kernel K(G, ·, ·). 9

For instance, in Theorem 3.3, the balance condition holds for b ≡ 1. In the examples in this paper, we usually have b ≡ 1, except in the coalescing simple random walks and Markov chains (Theorems 3.11 and 3.15). The lattice CMT is cycle-free if and only if μ is supported in an open side of some linear hyperplane. Also, one can show that weak irreducibility holds if and only if the lattice generated by the support of μ is equal to Φ. See Section 3.2.1. For indistinguishability of level-sets, we will need the following additional assumptions. 

Model 2. Assume [ G, o; F ], K and b satisfy the assumptions of Model 1. As-sume in addition that almost every sample ( G, o ) of [ G, o] satisfies the following conditions:          

> 8One can never have detailed balance here, since K(x, y )>0 implies that K(y, x ) = 0 by the cycle-free condition.
> 9Note that, in general, b(G, ·) is a measure with infinite mass. Indeed, K(G, ·,·) is transient because of the cycle-free condition.

30 (iv) (Weak aperiodicity) The set 

{d ∈ N : ∃n ∈ N, ∃x, y ∈ G : Kn(x, y ) > 0, K n+d(x, y ) > 0} (3.2) is nonempty and its elements have no common divisor larger than 1. (v) (One-Endedness) All components of F on G are one-ended and have infi-nite level-sets, PG-a.s. (see also Theorem 2.10). One-endedness and weak aperiodicity of Theorem 3.3 will be studied in Sec-tion 3.2.1. Note that the conditions of Models 1 and 2 are meaningful for a deterministic base graph G.The following is the main indistinguishability result for CMTs. 

Theorem 3.4 (Indistinguishability in CMTs on Unimodular Graphs) . One has (i) In Model 1, F has indistinguishable connected components. (ii) In Model 2, F has indistinguishable level-sets. 

Remark 3.5. Here are some remarks about the conditions of Models 1 and 2. (i) The cycle-free condition can be solely rephrased in terms of K: The graph with edge set {(u, v ) : K(u, v ) > 0} contains no directed cycle a.s. We will use this fact in Section 5. (ii) In all the examples of Model 1 given in this paper, the cycle-free condition is ensured by the fact that the jumps x 7 → F (x) decrease some function 

h = h[G, o, x ] (see Theorem 11.1 for the converse). This implies the cycle-free condition if h is a Lyapunov cocycle which we define as follows: h is a measurable function on G∗∗ such that h[G, x, y ] + h[G, y, z ] = h[G, x, z ]. The value of h[G, x, y ] may be regarded as the height of y relative to x.For instance, in Theorem 3.3, one might let h[Φ , x, y ] := v ·(y −x) for some unit vector v ∈ Rd. Such a function exists naturally when F describes the movement of particles in space-time in a coalescing particle system (see Theorems 3.11 and 3.15). See Section 3.2 for more examples. (iii) Weak irreducibility and the balance condition are not needed for Steps C1, C2, L1 and L2. They are only used in Steps C3 and L3 and in Section 8. The same applies to the weak aperiodicity condition. So, for indistin-guishability results, one may remove these assumptions and assume that Steps C3 and/or L3 hold. This allows one to have more than one two-ended component; e.g., in Theorem 3.3 (see also Section 3.2.1). (iv) The Markov chain with kernel K(G, ·, ·) on G cannot be irreducible in the classical sense since no two states can be mutually reachable. Also, without weak irreducibility, the model can have two completely differ-ent behaviors in two or more unrelated parts of the graph (e.g., in the checkerboard lattice, one can consider a point-map on the even sublattice and another one on the odd sublattice). 31 (v) A sufficient condition for weak irreducibility is the following variant of the path-collision property (compare with Theorem 1.6): ∀(G, x, y ) : PG [anc( x) ∩ anc( y)̸ = ∅] >

0. But this condition is too strong, see e.g., Theorems 3.19 and 3.20. (vi) The balance condition will be used to show that [ G, o; anc( o)] (after for-getting the rest of F ) satisfies a stationarity property spelled out in The-orem 5.1. This is not just a proof technique, as we will provide examples where indistinguishability fails without the balance condition (see Theo-rems 3.21 and 3.22). See also Theorem 11.2. (vii) The balance condition for Markov kernels on unimodular graphs is actually studied in [1], where K is called an environment and b is called an initial bias . The balance condition is called stationarity in [1]. Further discussion is provided in Section 5. (viii) Condition (iv) is called weak aperiodicity since classical aperiodicity makes sense only for irreducible Markov chains. We will strengthen this condition later in Theorem 5.5 and show that the set (3.2) contains all natural numbers a.s. if all assumptions of Model 2 are satisfied. (ix) Some natural examples do not satisfy the weak aperiodicity condition; e.g., Theorems 3.8, 3.11, 3.15, 3.19 and 3.20. In some of these examples, we will prove the indistinguishability of level-sets with another idea. Without weak aperiodicity, the only missing part of the proof is Step L3 (see The-orem 11.4). See also Theorems 5.12, 11.3 and 11.5 for the general cases where this condition fails or some weaker conditions hold. (x) Without the one-endedness condition, Theorem 1.5 implies that all level-sets of F are finite a.s., and hence, there is nothing to prove regarding their indistinguishability. Recall that Theorem 1.9 provides some criteria for one-endedness. 

# 3.2 Examples of CMTs 

In this subsection, we show that CMTs generalize various models in the liter-ature. We study their indistibuishability properties by Theorem 3.4 and their qualitative properties using the results of Section 1.4.3. 

3.2.1 Lattice CMTs 

To apply Theorem 3.4 to lattice CMTs, we first verify the conditions of Models 1 and 2 in the following lemma. The main result is Theorem 3.7 below, whose proof is postponed to Section 4. 

Lemma 3.6. Let F be a lattice CMT as described in Theorem 3.3. (i) F satisfies the assumptions of Model 1 for b ≡ 1 if and only if the support of μ generates the lattice and is included in an open side of some linear hyperplane. 

32 (ii) Assuming the last condition, if either d ≥ 2 or the jump distribution has infinite mean, then every connected component of F is one-ended. (iii) Assuming the condition mentioned in (i), the weak aperiodicity condition is equivalent to the condition that {u − v : u, v ∈ supp( μ)} generates Φ.

For d = 1, F can be either one-ended or two-ended; see e.g., Theorem 3.10. 

Proof. (i) is already shown after the definition of Model 1. (ii). By Theorem 1.9, it is enough to show that the Green function g(0 , y )vanishes as y goes to infinity. This holds more generally for transient random walks on Zd; see e.g., Theorem T2 in Section 24 of [32] (Blackwell’s theorem also proves the 1-dimensional case with infinite mean). This proves the claim. (iii). Let Φ ′ be the lattice generated by {u − v : u, v ∈ supp( μ)}. If Φ ′ = Φ, then for arbitrary w ∈ supp( μ), one can write w = P 

> i

ci(ui − vi), where ci ∈ Z

and ui, v i ∈ supp( μ). This implies that the set (3.2) contains 1, and weak aperiodicity holds. Conversely, assume that weak aperiodicity holds. For d in the set (3.2), one can find n ∈ N and sequences u1, . . . , u n and v1, . . . , v n+d in supp( μ) such that P 

> i

ui = P 

> j

vj . For every w1, . . . , w d ∈ supp( μ), one obtains P 

> k

wk = ( P 

> k

wk + P 

> i

ui) − P 

> j

vj ∈ Φ′. In words, the sum of any d elements of supp( μ) is in Φ ′. Since such d’s have largest common divisor 1, one can obtain that supp( μ) ⊆ Φ, and hence, Φ = Φ ′.If the conditions of the last lemma hold, then Theorem 3.4 implies that F

has indistinguishable components and level-sets. More generally, the next result shows that some of the assumptions may be dropped. 

Proposition 3.7 (Indistinguishability in Lattice CMTs) . For lattice CMTs of Theorem 3.3, the claims of Theorem 3.4 hold even without the weak irreducibility and weak aperiodicity assumptions. More precisely, (i) If the cycle-free condition holds, then the components are indistinguishable. (ii) If, in addition, the components are one-ended a.s. (see Theorem 3.6), then the level-sets are indistinguishable. 

The proof is postponed to Section 4. In Sections 3.2.2 to 3.2.4 below, we will see some instances of lattice CMTs with different characteristics. 

3.2.2 Nguyen’s River Model and its Variant Example 3.8 (Nguyen’s River Model) . Let Φ be the set of points x = ( x1, . . . , x d) ∈

Zd such that P 

> i

xi is even. Let F (x) := ( f 0(x), x d − 1), where f 0(x) is one of the neighbors of ( x1, . . . , x d−1) in the lattice Zd−1, chosen uniformly at random and independently for all x ∈ Φ. This is an instance of Model 1 with b ≡ 1. It generalizes Nguyen’s model in [30], which is the case d = 2. For any d ≥ 2, Theorem 1.9 easily implies that the connected components are one-ended a.s. In the case d = 2 (resp. d = 3), 33 there is only one connected component and the level-sets are just the horizontal lines (resp. planes) in the lattice. So, for d ∈ { 2, 3}, the indistinguishability of level-sets (Theorem 3.4) easily follows from the mixing property of the lattice. For d ≥ 4, there are infinitely many components. This example is an instance of Model 1, and hence, has indistinguishable components by Theorem 3.4. De-spite the fact that it does not fit into Model 2 due to the lack of weak aperiodicity, Theorem 3.7 implies that the level-sets of this example are indistinguishable. For following the proof of Theorem 3.4, a nice example to keep in mind is the variant of Nguyen’s model, defined below. This example directly satisfies the assumptions of Model 2 and no further trick is needed. 

Example 3.9 (Variant of Nguyen’s Model) . Consider the even lattice Φ ⊆ Z2,as in Theorem 3.8. For each x ∈ Φ, let F (x) be one of x + ( −1, −1) , x + (1 , −1) and x+(0 , −2), chosen uniformly at random and independently for all x (one can generalize this to higher dimensions straightforwardly). This model satisfies the conditions of Model 2. Hence, it has indistinguishable components and level-sets by Theorem 3.4. 

3.2.3 Renewal Model Example 3.10 (Renewal model on Z). Let Φ = Z and μ be a probability measure on N. For each x ∈ Z, let F (x) := x + U (x), where U (x) > 0 is a random number with distribution μ chosen independently for all x ∈ Z.This is an instance of lattice CMTs. By Theorem 3.6, weak irreducibility holds if and only if supp( μ) is non-lattice with respect to Z (i.e., not contained in any dZ, with d > 1). In this case, weak aperiodicity holds if and only if supp( μ) − z is non-lattice for some z ∈ supp( μ). However, even without weak irreducibility and weak aperiodicity, Theorem 3.7 implies that F has in-distinguishable components. Also, if the components are one-ended, then the level-sets are indistinguishable. The one-endedness of the model is characterized by the following results of [6, 3]: If E [U (x)] < ∞ and supp( μ) is non-lattice, there exists a single com-ponent, which is two-ended. Connectedness is also implied by the path collision property (see Theorem 1.7), and two-endedness is also implied by Theorem 1.9 and Blackwell’s theorem, which shows that the Green function tends to a posi-tive constant as distance tends to infinity. If E [U (x)] < ∞ and supp( μ) ⊆ dN,with d minimal, then there are d two-ended components. If E [U (x)] = ∞, then this model has one-ended components by Theorem 3.6 (and has either one or infinitely many components in the non-lattice case). Also, [3] shows that when μ is the Pareto distribution with exponent β, there is a phase transition for connectedness: If β < 12 , there are infinitely many one-ended components, and if 12 ≤ β < 1, there is a single one-ended component. 

3.2.4 Coalescing Random Walks and Markov Chains 

Another fundamental example of CMTs is coalescing Markov chains (Theo-rems 3.11 and 3.15 below), which include coalescing random walks . This is 34 not to be confused with coalescing Markov trajectories defined in Theorem 3.1. Here, the model is space-time; i.e., G × Z, whereas the model of Theorem 3.1 is on G.

Example 3.11 (Coalescing Random Walks) . Let [ G, o] be a unimodular graph such that E [deg( o)] < ∞. At each time t ∈ Z and each vertex x ∈ G, start an independent simple random walk from x under the condition that the particles coalesce when they meet at the same space-time point. To state this in the setting of Model 1, let G′ := G × Z and o′ := ( o, 0) and add marks to G′

for distinguishing the time direction. For each ( x, t ) ∈ G′ and y ∼ x, let 

K(( x, t ), (y, t + 1)) := 1 / deg( x). Then, K is a factor Markov kernel. Let F be the resulting CMT. First, we study which conditions of Models 1 and 2 hold: 

Lemma 3.12. In Theorem 3.11, (i) F is cycle-free and the balance condition is satisfied with b(x, t ) := deg G(x).(ii) Weak irreducibility holds if and only if G is non-bipartite a.s. (iii) Weak aperiodicity does not hold. (iv) If G is infinite a.s. and has bounded degrees, then all components of F

are one-ended a.s. (see Theorem 11.6). 

Note that the connectedness or disconnectedness of F depends on the path-collision property; see Theorem 1.7. 

Proof. The first three parts are clear (note that the simple random walk has period 2 in bipartite graphs). For the last part, we use Theorem 1.9. Denote 

F (n)(o′) by Xn =: ( Y n, n ), where ( Y n)n is distributed as the simple random walk on G. Let p be the kernel of ( Y n)n. By the definition of the Green function 

gK and the fact that deg( x)pn(x, y ) = deg( y)pn(y, x ), one obtains 

E

 deg( o)deg( Y n) gK (o, Xn)



= E

 deg( o)deg( Y n) pn(o, Y n)



= E [pn(Y n, o)] = E p2n(o, o) ,

where the last equality holds because going n steps further from Y n is equivalent to going 2 n steps from o. The last term converges to zero by Blackwell’s renewal theorem (see e.g., [26]) for the return times to the root. Therefore, by the boundedness of deg( o)/deg( Y n), one obtains (1.5). Hence, Theorem 1.9 implies that F has one-ended components a.s. Now, we study indistinguishability of components and level-sets: 

Proposition 3.13 (Indistinguishability in Coalescing Random Walks) . In The-orem 3.11, 

35 (i) The connected components are indistinguishable. (ii) If the level-sets are infinite a.s., then there are at most two indistinguisha-bility classes for the level-sets. If, in addition, G is non-bipartite a.s., then all level-sets are indistinguishable. 

Note that, due to the lack of weak aperiodicity, our results do not directly imply the indistinguishability of level-sets in this example. Nevertheless, we may prove this with another idea. 10 

Proof. If G is non-bipartite a.s., then the first claim follows from Theorem 3.4 and Theorem 3.12. Otherwise, one may partition G′ into two isomorphic weakly irreducible parts (each part is a discrete metric space although not a graph). So, the assumptions of Model 1 hold and F has indistinguishable components by Theorem 3.4. For the second part, we cannot directly apply Theorem 3.4 due to the lack of weak aperiodicity. The only remaining part of the proof is showing the tail triviality of the ancestor line in Theorem 1.3 (see Theorem 11.3 and the dis-cussion around it). One can show that the tail triviality of [ G′, Xn; ( Xn+i)i≥0]is equivalent to the tail triviality of [ G, Y n; ( Y n+i)i≥0] (since there is no ad-ditional information in the second coordinates of (( Y n, n )) n). The latter is directly implied by Theorem 1.3 in the non-bipartite case. This implies that the level-sets of F are indeed indistinguishable. However, if G is bipartite and the two parts are distinguishable, then the level-sets of F are distinguishable by parity (and there are exactly two indistinguishability classes of level-sets). 

Remark 3.14. Given k ≥ 2, the k-tuples of components might or might not be indistinguishable by tail component-properties in G′∗. For instance, if G is the 3-regular tree, then 3-tuples are indistinguishable but 4-tuples are distinguishable. This can be seen by Theorem 1.11. 

Example 3.15 (Coalescing Markov Chains) . Let [ G, o] be a unimodular graph or discrete space and let b0 ≥ 0 be an equivariant function on G such that 

E [b0(o)] < ∞. Assume b0(G, ·) is an invariant measure for a given factor Markov kernel p on G and satisfies the detailed balance condition b0(x)p(x, y ) = 

b0(y)p(y, x ). Then, the model of coalescing Markov chains is defined on 

G′ := G × Z similarly to Theorem 3.11, namely, K(( x, t ), (y, t + 1)) := p(x, y ). This generalizes Theorem 3.11 (let b0(x) := deg G(x) and p be the kernel of the simple random walk). The last proof can be modified slightly to prove the following (see Theorem 1.3 and Theorem 5.12). 

Proposition 3.16 (Indistinguishability in Coalescing Markov Chains) . In The-orem 3.15, assume in addition that the Markov chain on G satisfies weak irre-ducibility and the relaxed version of weak aperiodicity by allowing the gcd of (3.2) 

be d < ∞. Then, the components are indistinguishable and the number of in-distinguishability classes of level-sets is a divisor of d.

> 10 The reader might postpone reading the rest of these arguments to after seeing the proof of Theorem 3.4.

36 3.2.5 Discrete-Time Voter Model 

The voter model describes the evolution of opinions in a graph. To the best of our knowledge, on infinite graphs, this model is discussed only in continuous-time in the literature. Here, we provide a discrete-time version and study dual-ity, stationary version and indistinguishability. 

Example 3.17 (Discrete-Time Voter Model) . Let G be a graph or discrete space and r : G × G → [0 , 1] be the rate function of opinion spread. Each (x, y, i ) ∈ G × G × N is called a potential trigger at time i. Assume each trigger is activated with probability r(x, y ) independently from all other triggers. Start from a partition of G at time t = 0, whose clusters represent the vertices with the same opinions (at the beginning, all vertices have different opinions and the values of the opinions are irrelevant for us, but it is straightforward to modify the definitions if one is interested in specifying the opinions by marks). Inductively, proceed as follows. At time t + 1, each active trigger ( x, y, t + 1) tries to push the opinion of x to y; i.e., to cut y from its own cluster and attach it to the cluster of x. If there are more than one active triggers of the form ( ·, y, t + 1), choose one of them randomly and uniformly (or with a prescribed distribution defined measurably and not depending on time). So, at each time t ∈ N ∪ { 0},a partition of G is obtained. We call this the discrete-time voter model .This model has a dual representation by coalescing random walks. For each (x, t ) ∈ G × N, if we trace backwards the opinions leading to ( x, t ), one can see that a backward Markov chain is obtained. Doing this for all ( x, t ), one obtains a coalescing Markov chain model as in Theorem 3.15. Every level-set of F rep-resents a set of vertices with the same opinion at a given time. This immediately gives a stationary version of the voter model: If F is the backward coalescing Markov chain model on G × Z, consider the partition obtained by the level-sets of F . In addition, one can prove that this is the finest stationary distribution; i.e., the partitions of every other stationary distribution of the model are coarser than this specific one (in a suitable coupling). Now, let [ G, o] be a unimodular graph or discrete space. One may define a voter model as above, assuming that all parameters ( r and the choice at the ties) are factors. We need to assume that the kernel of the backward chains satisfies the balance condition of Theorem 3.15. For example, this holds if G is a graph, r is constant on the edges and E [deg( o)] < ∞ (hence, the backward chains are just lazy simple random walks). In this case, Theorem 3.16 implies: 

Proposition 3.18. The clusters of the stationary voter model on unimodular graphs or discrete spaces (under the conditions mentioned above) are indistin-guishable. 

Similar indistinguishability results may also be given for the voter model on deterministic graphs in the light of Section 7.3. 37 3.2.6 CMTs on Free Groups and Diestel-Leader Graphs 

The following examples show CMTs where the forward paths from two vertices may have zero chance to meet, and also where the weak aperiodicity condition is not satisfied. 

Example 3.19 (Free Groups) . Let G be the free group generated by k ele-ments, namely, e1, . . . , e k. To distinguish the generators, put mark i on every pair ( x, xe i). Then, for each x ∈ G, let F (x) be one of xe 1, . . . , xe k chosen uniformly at random. This satisfies the assumptions Model 1 with b ≡ 1, and hence, the components of F are indistinguishable (note that there are infinitely many components because the path-collision property is not satisfied, see Theo-rem 1.7). In fact, the descendants of a given x ∈ G form a critical Galton-Watson tree and C(x) is an Eternal Galton-Watson tree [4]. So, the components are one-ended a.s. However, the weak irreducibility condition does not hold. We guess that the level-sets are distinguishable as well, but this is not implied by our results (see Theorem 11.5). 

Example 3.20 (Diestel-Leader Graph) . Given 2 ≤ q ∈ N, let Tq be the ( q + 1)-regular tree. Let h be the height function with respect to a distinguished end of Tq . The (unimodular) Diestel-Leader graph DL (q, q ) is defined on the vertex set {(x, y ) ∈ T 2 

> q

: h(x) + h(y) = 0 }. Two vertices ( x, y ) and ( x′, y ′) are adjacent if and only if x′ and y′ are adjacent to x and y respectively. In this case, let 

K(( x, y ), (x′, y ′)) = 1 /q only if h(x′) = h(x) − 1. This model satisfies all of the assumptions except weak aperiodicity. However, similarly to Theorem 3.11, one can show prove that the components and level-sets are indistinguishable. As a variant, assume the vertices have i.i.d. marks I(t) ∈ { 1, 2} for t ∈ Z. Let 

K(( x, y ), (x′, y ′)) = q−I(h(x)) if d(( x′, y ′), (x, y )) = I(h(x)) and h(x′) = h(x) −

I(h(x)). Does this model have indistinguishable level-sets? (see Theorem 11.5). The reader is invited to define similar models on lamp-lighter groups. 

3.2.7 Distinguishability Without the Balance Condition 

The following are examples in which the balance condition are not satisfied and level-sets or components are distinguishable. These examples are inspired from Example 14.15 of [27], which is an example of a Markov chain on Z with a nontrivial tail sigma-field. The canopy tree is used to obtain a unimodular analogue of the example. We recall from [1] that the canopy tree consists of a sequence of layers, say H0, H 1, . . . with the following properties: For all i, each point x ∈ Hi has exactly one neighbor in Hi+1 , which is called the parent of 

x. Also, x has exactly 2 neighbors in Hi−1 if i > 0. Denote the parent of x by 

p(x). Then, if the root o is chosen such that P [o ∈ Hi] = 2 −i−1, a unimodular tree is obtained. 

Example 3.21 (Distinguishable Level-Sets) . Consider the following kernel on the canopy tree (defined above): Let l(x) ≥ 0 denote the index of the layer containing x. Let K(x, p (x)) := 1 − 2−l(x)−1, K(x, p (2) (x)) := 2 −l(x)−1. It is easy to check that the graph of the resulting CMT F is cycle-free and connected. 38 Weak irreducibility holds, but the balance condition is not satisfied for any function b (such a b should be zero on H0, and inductively be zero on all Hi’s). We claim that F has distinguishable level-sets. Indeed, if n(x) is the number of n ≥ 0 in which F (n+1) (x)̸ = p(F (n)(x)), then l + n is an invariant of the level-sets of F and distinguishes all of them. 

Example 3.22 (Distinguishable Components) . Let T be the canopy tree and 

G := T × { 0, 1}. We may put the mark 0 on T × { 0} and the mark 1 on 

T × { 1}. So, G contains two distinguishable copies of T .11 Define the kernel K

for v ∈ T and i ∈ { 0, 1} by K(( v, i ), (p(v), i )) := 1 −2−i−1 and K(( v, i ), (p(v), 1−

i)) := 2 −i−1. This model is cycle-free and weakly-irreducible, but the balance condition does not hold. We claim that F has distinguishable components. By the Borel-Cantelli lemma, one can check that anc( o) contains finitely many 

jumps between T ×{ 0} and T ×{ 1} a.s. For i = 0 , 1, let Si be the set of vertices 

v in which anc( v) eventually lies in T × { i}. One can check that S0 and S1

are precisely the connected components of F a.s. One has 0 < P [o ∈ Si] < 1. Hence, ergodicity implies that S0 and S1 are nonempty a.s. Now, we have distinguished the two connected components. 

# 4 A Simple Proof for Indistinguishability in Lat-tice CMTs (and More) 

In this section, we prove Theorem 3.4 in the special case of the lattice models of Theorem 3.3 and Section 3.2.1. The benefit is that the proof is much simpler than the general case of Theorem 3.4 (and simpler than other indistinguishabil-ity proofs in the literature), but shows many underlying proof ideas. In addition, we will show in Theorem 3.7 that the assumptions of weak irreducibility and weak aperiodicity are not necessary for lattice CMTs. The main proof technique consists in constructing a coupling of F with another copy F ′ such that F ′ 

> Bn(o)

is independent from F , but the two ancestor lines of o shift-couple. The proof is provided in Theorems 3.7 and 4.2 below, and is based on the following lemma. In Section 9.3, a similar coupling will be used to obtain a simple proof of indistinguishability for the wired uniform spanning forest on Zd.

Lemma 4.1. In the lattice CMTs of Theorem 3.3, given x, y ∈ Φ, let (Xn)n

and (Y n)n be Markov chains on Φ with kernel K and starting from x and y

respectively. (i) (Shift-Coupling). If supp( μ) generates the lattice, then, for every x, y ∈ Φ,there exists a coupling of (Xn)n and (Y n)n such that, ∃k, N : ∀n ≥ N :

Xn = Y n+k a.s.      

> 11 If you feel that we are cheating in distinguishing the two copies of T, append a leaf to every vertex of T× { 0}instead. One can make this graph unimodular. The point is that the marks are defined before defining the point-map.

39 (ii) (Successful Coupling). If, in addition, {u − v : u, v ∈ supp( μ)} generates 

Φ, then, for every x, y ∈ Φ, there exists a coupling of (Xn)n and (Y n)n

such that ∃N : ∀n ≥ N : Xn = Y n a.s. 

Note that the converses of these claims also hold. In dimension 1, The second statement is a slight generalization of Ornstein’s coupling; see Example 5.7.7 of [10] and note that the assumptions of irreducibility and aperiodicity in the proof of [10] can be weakened to weak irreducibility and weak aperiodicity. A generalization to higher dimensional lattices (and more general Abelian groups) is proved in [29] as mentioned in the following proof. 

Proof. Let Φ ′ be the sub-lattice generated by {u − v : u, v ∈ supp( μ)}. By Theorem 1.3 of [29], Φ ′ is equal to the set of y ∈ Φ such that there exists a successful coupling of ( Xn)n and ( Y n)n starting from X0 = 0 and Y 0 = y.This immediately implies (ii). Now, we prove (i). One has supp( μ) ⊆ Φ′ + w

for some w ∈ Φ. Since supp( μ) generates Φ, one obtains that Φ ′ + wZ = Φ. Hence, given any x, y ∈ Φ, there exists m ∈ Z such that y − x ∈ Φ′ + mw .If m ≥ 0, construct ( Xi)i≤m starting from X0 := x. For all i ≥ 0, one has 

Xi ∈ x + Φ ′ + iw , and thus, y − Xm ∈ Φ′. So, there exists a successful coupling for the Markov chains starting from Xm and y. This gives a shift-coupling of (Xn)n and ( Y n)n. If m < 0, construct ( Y i)i≤− m starting from Y 0 := y, which implies that Y −m −x ∈ Φ′. So, there exists a successful coupling for the Markov chains starting from x and Y −m. By the same argument as above, this gives a shift-coupling of ( Xn)n and ( Y n)n and the claim is proved. In the case of one-dimensional Markov chains, the successful coupling of Theorem 4.1 is used in Theorem 5.7.6 and Example 5.7.7 of [10] to prove the tail triviality of the Markov chain. This establishes Step L3 in this case. In the following proposition, we return to general CMTs and show that the ex-istence of a shift-coupling (resp. successful coupling) can be used to deduce indistinguishability directly from Step C1 (resp. Step L1). Note that there ex-ist examples which do not have the shift-coupling property; e.g., the coalescing simple random walk on the regular tree (Theorem 3.11). 

Proposition 4.2 (Simpler Case for Indistinguishability) . One has (i) In Model 1, if [G, o] has the shift-coupling property a.s. (i.e., satisfies the claim of part (i) of Theorem 4.1), then F has indistinguishable connected components. (ii) In Model 2, if [G, o] has the successful coupling property a.s. (i.e., satisfies the claim of part (ii) of Theorem 4.1), then F has indistinguishable level-sets. In particular, these claims hold for lattice CMTs under the assumptions of The-orem 4.1. 

This is a special case of Theorem 3.4, but we present a separate proof which is significantly simpler. The goal is to highlight the differences with the proof 40 of the general case of Theorem 3.4. So, we will make further assumptions in the proof (assuming one-endedness and that Step C1 and Step L1 hold) for simplicity of arguments. 

Proof. We may assume that [ G, o] is ergodic. Let A be a component-property (resp. level-set-property). It is enough to prove that P [A] ∈ { 0, 1}. As men-tioned before the proposition, we assume that Step C1 (resp. Step L1) holds (this will be proved for general point-maps in Section 6, but can also be proved for CMTs using the method of pivotal updates of [28, 20]). Therefore, it is enough to assume that A is a tail component-property (resp. tail level-set-property). We also assume that F is one-ended a.s. for simplicity (otherwise, for part (i), one needs to assume that A is a tail branch-property ; see Section 6). The idea of the proof is to show that A is independent from the restriction of F to Bn(o) (conditionally on [ G, o]) for all n, and to deduce that A is independent of itself. Let n ≥ 0 be arbitrary. For every sample ( G, o ) of [ G, o], construct another copy F ′ of F on G as follows. Inside Bn(o), construct F ′ as an independent copy of F (given ( G, o )). This constructs a part of anc F ′ (o). By assumption, one can continue the ancestor line of o in F ′ by coupling it with 

F in such a way that anc F ′ (o) shift-couples (resp. successfully couples) with anc F (o). The possible issue is that anc F ′ (o) hits Bn(o) before the coupling time. If this occurs, say at x = F ′(T )(o) for the first time, forget the coupling after time T since F ′(x) is already defined. Instead, after time T + 1, use a similar coupling starting from F ′(x) and repeat if Bn(o) is hit again. Using the fact that every point of Bn(o) appears at most once in anc F ′ (o) (by the cycle-free condition), this procedure repeats at most finitely many times. So, at the end, anc F ′ (o) is constructed such that it shift-couples (resp. successfully couples) with anc F (o) a.s. Let E denote the event where this last property holds, which satisfies P [E] = 1. Finally, for each x̸ ∈ Bn(o) where F ′(x) is not already defined, let F ′(x) := 

F (x). The definition implies that F ′ has the same distribution as F given ( G, o )and given F Bn(o)). Let A′ be the event [ G, o; F ′] ∈ A. By construction, A is independent from F ′ 

> Bn(o)

(conditionally on [ G, o]). Also, the construction shows that F ′

is a finite modification of F and the component (resp. level-set) of o is modi-fied at only finitely many points (one the event E). Therefore, since A is a tail component-property (resp. level-set-property), one obtains that A∩E = A′ ∩E.Hence, P [A∆A′] = 0. This shows that A′ is independent from F ′ 

> Bn(o)

(condi-tionally on [ G, o]). Since this holds for all n, one obtains that A′ is independent from F ′ (conditionally on [ G, o]). Therefore, A′ is independent from itself (con-ditionally on [ G, o]). So, P [A′ |G, o ] ∈ { 0, 1}, and hence, P [A |G, o ] ∈ { 0, 1}.For every sample ( G, o ) of [ G, o], let h(G, o ) := PG [[ G, o ; F ] ∈ A], where PG

is defined in Model 1. By the last paragraph, h ∈ { 0, 1} for almost every sample (G, o ). Note that for u, v ∈ G, on the event u ∈ C(v) (resp. u ∈ L(v)), one has 1A[G, u ] = 1 A[G, v ] by the definition of A. Therefore, if PG [u ∈ C(v)] > 0 (resp. 

PG [u ∈ L(v)] > 0), then h(G, u ) = h(G, v ). So, h is constant if we show that 41 the graph with vertex set G and edge set EC := {(u, v ) : PG [u ∈ C(v)] > 0}

(resp. EL := {(u, v ) : PG [u ∈ L(v)] > 0}) is connected. The connectedness of 

EC is directly implied by the weak irreducibility condition. That of EL can also be proved by the weak aperiodicity condition, but this is a little more involved and we prove it in Theorem 5.6. The last paragraph shows that, in almost every sample ( G, o ), either ∀u ∈

G : PG [[ G, u ; F ] ∈ A] = 0 or ∀u ∈ G : PG [[ G, u ; F ] ∈ A] = 1. This implies indistinguishability and the claim is proved. The last result implies Theorem 3.7 as follows. 

Proof of Theorem 3.7. As mentioned after the definition of Model 1, the balance condition holds for b ≡ 1. Let Φ ′ and w be as in the proof of Theorem 4.1. The idea is that F has similar behaviors in all translates of Φ ′. This is formalized as follows. One has F (Φ + mw ) ⊆ Φ + ( m + 1) w for all m ∈ Z. One can repeat the proof of Theorem 4.2 until deducing that h ∈ { 0, 1}, but the graphs with edge sets {(u, v ) : PG [u ∈ C(v)] > 0} or {(u, v ) : PG [u ∈ L(v)] > 0} are possibly disconnected. Repeating the proof is possible since, in the proof, the constructed parts of anc F (o) and anc F ′ (o) start from the same vertex. This implies that 

∀n : F (n)(o) − F ′(n)(o) ∈ Φ′, and hence, the successful coupling in the proof can always be constructed for lattice CMTs with the minimal assumptions of this proposition. Now, since Φ is transitive, h should be constant. So, either 

h ≡ 0 or h ≡ 1. This implies the claim. 

# 5 Steps C3 and L3: Ergodicity and Tail Trivial-ity of Markov Chains on Unimodular Spaces 

In this section, as announced in Section 1.4.2, we study Markov chains on uni-modular graphs or discrete spaces. We prove the results stated in Section 1.4.2; i.e., stationarity (after a suitable biasing), ergodicity and tail-triviality for such Markov chains. These results establish Step C3 and Step L3, but recall that there is no CMT in these results. 

# 5.1 Stationarity 

Fix a factor Markov kernel K as in Section 3.1. Given a sample ( G, o ), let (Xn)n≥0 be a Markov chain on G with kernel K and starting from o. Assume that the balance condition of Model 1 is satisfied by K for some initial bias 

b : G∗ → R≥0 (note again that no CMT is required for this assumption). So, the measure b(G, ·) is an invariant measure for the Markov chain on G. In general, 

b(G, ·) is an infinite measure and the Markov chain on G might be transient. Below, we define a different Markov chain on the space G∞ of all [ G, o ; ( xi)i≥0], where G is a graph or discrete space and ( xi)i is a sequence of points in G such 42 that x0 = o. Consider the shift operator σ on G∞ defined as follows: 

σ[G, x 0; ( xi)i≥0] := [ G, x 1; ( xi+1 )i≥0]. (5.1) It can be proved that the map that assigns, to every [ G, o ], the distribu-tion of [ G, o ; ( Xn)n≥0] (which is a probability measure on G∞), is measurable. Therefore, given a random graph or discrete space [ G, o], the random element [G, o; ( Xn)n≥0] of G∞ makes sense. The next lemma studies when the distri-bution of [ G, o; ( Xn)n] is stationary (i.e., invariant) under the shift σ, possibly after a biasing. Note that the Markov chain ( Xn)n on G might be transient (e.g., in Model 1) and might not have any stationary probability measure, in contrast to the Markov chain ([ G, Xn; ( Xn+i)i≥0]) n on G∞.Recall that E [b(o)] < ∞ in Model 1 and that biasing by b(o) means consid-ering the probability measure ˆP[B] := 1 

> E[b(o)]

E [b(o)1 B ] for every event B. One might bias the distribution of [ G, o; ( Xn)n≥0] by b(o) as well. We denote the resulting distribution by ˆP again, by an abuse of notation. 

Lemma 5.1 (Stationarity of Markov Chains on Unimodular Graphs [1]) . If K

satisfies the balance condition of Model 1, then the probability measure ˆP on G∞

is invariant under the shift σ. In other words, after biasing by b(o), the Markov chain ([ G, Xn; ( Xn+i)i≥0]) n≥0 (on G∞) is stationary. 

This lemma generalizes Theorem 4.1 of [1], which proves that ([ G, Xn]) n is a stationary Markov chain when biasing by b(o) (reversibility is also studied in [1]). In fact, the special case of random walks is already considered in Equation (1.1) of [20]. An important consequence of this result is that it enables the use of Birkhoff’s pointwise ergodic theorem. 

Proof. Fix an event B ⊆ G ∞. Let P(G,v ) be the distribution of the Markov chain ( Xi)i≥0 on G starting from v. Define the function g : G∗ → R≥0 by 

g[G, v ] := P(G,v ) [[ G, v ; ( Xi)i≥0] ∈ B]. One has 

bP [[ G, X1; ( Xi+1 )i≥0] ∈ B] = 1

E [b(o)] E

"

b(o) X

> v∈G

K(o, v )g(v)

#

= 1

E [b(o)] E

" X

> v∈G

b(v)K(v, o)g(o)

#

= 1

E [b(o)] E [b(o)g(o)] = bP [[ G, X0; ( Xi)i≥0] ∈ B] ,

where the second and third equations hold by the MTP (2.1) and the balance condition respectively. So, the claim is proved. Note that if K is cycle-free and one considers a CMT F with the same kernel 

K, then anc( o) = ( F (n)(o)) n has the same distribution as ( Xn)n given G and 

o, but the sequence [ G, F (n)(o); F ] is not stationary in general, as discussed before Theorem 2.11. 43 5.2 Step C3: Invariant Path Events and Ergodicity 

In this subsection, we prove the part of Theorem 1.3 regarding ergodicity, which is restated in Theorem 5.4 below. For a deterministic graph or discrete space G, the space GN∪{ 0} is the state space of Markov chains on G. We recall the following classical definition. 

Definition 5.2. For deterministic G, an event A ⊆ GN∪{ 0} is called an invari-ant path property on G if it is invariant under the shift ( xi)i≥0 7 → (xi+1 )i≥0.Let Ipath G denote the sigma-field of invariant path properties of G.Allover the paper, the subscript G is used for the sigma-fields when a deter-ministic graph G is fixed. The following similar definition allows one to consider all graphs, but it is important to note that graphs are considered up to isomor-phism, despite the last definition. 

Definition 5.3 (Invariant Path Properties) . Consider the space G∞ defined in Section 5.1. An event A ⊆ G ∞ is called a (shift-) invariant path property (on 

G∞) if σ−1A = A. Equivalently, for every G and every pair of sequences ( xi)i≥0

and ( x′

> i

)i≥0 in G that shift-couple (see Section 2.1), one has 1 A[G, x 0; ( xi)i] = 1A[G, x ′

> 0

; ( x′

> i

)i]. Let Ipath be the sigma-field of invariant path events on G∞.Theorem 5.10 shows an example of an invariant event. Note also that, given 

G, the map ( xi)i 7 → [G, x 0; ( xi)i] induces a function Ipath → I path G .This following theorem is a restatement of Part (i) of Theorem 1.3. As mentioned in Section 1.4.2, it is a slight generalization of Theorem 4.6 of [1]. 

Theorem 5.4 (Step C3: Ergodicity of Markov Chains on Unimodular Graphs, [1]) . Let [G, o] be an ergodic unimodular graph and (Xi)i be a Markov chain on 

G, starting from o, whose kernel satisfies the balance condition and the weak irreducibility of Model 1 (but not necessarily the cycle-free condition). Then, (i) The invariant path sigma-field Ipath is trivial. (ii) The distribution of [G, o; ( Xi)i], biased by b(o) (which is invariant under the shift σ by Theorem 5.1), is ergodic. (iii) Every bounded K-harmonic function on G∗ is essentially constant. In addition, if [G, o] is not ergodic, then Ipath = I mod P.

In this theorem, we say that a measurable function h : G∗ → R is K-harmonic if 

h[G, o ] = X

> x∈G

K(o, x )h[G, x ], ∀[G, o ] ∈ G ∗.

Proof. (i). We proceed similarly to the proof of Theorem 5.1 of [28]. Consider the space of all [ G, o ; ( xi)i∈Z]; i.e., we allow for negative indices. Let ρ be the shift on this space defined similarly to σ. Since [ G, o; ( Xn)n≥0] is ˆP-stationary by Theorem 5.1, one can extend it to negative times to obtain a ˆP-stationary process 44 [G, o; ( Xn)n∈Z] (consider [ G, Xm; ( Xm+n)n≥− m] and take weak limit using the consistency of this sequence). One can check that the process ( X−n)n≥0

is the time-reversal (with respect to the infinite invariant measure b); i.e., a random walk with kernel K′(x, y ) := b(y)K(y, x )/b (x), and is independent from (Xn)n≥0 (conditionally on ( G, o)). Let A ∈ I path . It makes sense to consider 1 A[G, o; ( Xi)i∈Z]. Let ϵ > 0be arbitrary. By standard tools of measure theory, one can approximate A

as follows: There exists N ∈ N and an event A′ ⊆ G ∞ that depends only on [ G, o; ( Xi)0≤i≤N ], such that bP [A∆A′] < ϵ . By the stationarity (Theo-rem 5.1) and the relation σ−1(A) = A, one obtains bP A∆ρN (A′) < ϵ . The key point is that ρN (A′) depends only on [ G, o; ( Xi)i≤0], while A′ depends only on [G, o; ( Xi)i≥0]. Since the two sides of ( Xi)i are independent, this implies that 

ρN (A′) is independent from A′, conditionally on [ G, o]. Since both events are arbitrarily close to A, it should be the case that A is independent from itself, conditionally on [ G, o]. This is made precise in the next paragraph. Let Y := bP [A |G, o ], Z := bP [A′ |G, o ] and W := bP ρN (A′) |G, o . The pre-vious paragraph implies that bE [( Z − Y )+] ≤ bP [A′ \ A] < ϵ and bE [( W − Y )+] ≤

bP ρN (A′) \ A < ϵ . Hence, using the facts Y ≥ Z − (Z − Y )+ ≥ 0 and 

Z, W ∈ [0 , 1], one obtains 

bE Y 2 ≥ bE (Z − (Z − Y )+)( W − (W − Y )+)

≥ bE [ZW ] − bE (Z − Y )+ − bE (W − Y )+

≥ bE

hbE [1 A′ |G, o ] · bE 1ρN (A′) |G, o i

− 2ϵ

= bE

hbE 1A′ 1ρN (A′) |G, o i

− 2ϵ

= bP A′ ∩ ρN (A′) − 2ϵ

≥ bP [A] − 4ϵ = bE [Y ] − 4ϵ. 

Since ϵ can be arbitrarily small and 0 ≤ Y ≤ 1, this implies that Y ∈ { 0, 1} a.s.; i.e., bP [A |G, o ] ∈ { 0, 1} a.s. We now show that bP [A |G, o ] does not depend on o (note that the ex-plicit distribution of ( Xn)n, given a sample of ( G, o), provides an explicit ver-sion of the last conditional distribution). For j ∈ { 0, 1}, let Ej be the event 

bP [A |G, o ] = j. By the previous paragraph and Theorem 2.5, almost all samples (G, o ) of [ G, o] satisfy [ G, u ] ∈ E0 ∪ E1, ∀u ∈ G. Consider such a sample. The definition of Ej implies that, if [ G, u ] ∈ Ej , then P [[ G, u ; ( Xi)i] ∈ A] = j, where (Xi)i is the Markov chain started from u. Assume K(u, u ′) > 0 and let ( X′

> i

)i be the Markov chain started from u′. Since P [X1 = u′] > 0, we can couple the two chains in such a way that P Xi+1 = X′

> i

, ∀i > 0. In this case, the invariance of A gives 1 A[G, u ; ( Xi)i] = 1 A[G, u ′; ( X′

> i

)i]. Since this happens with positive probability, one obtains that 1 Ej [G, u ] = 1 Ej [G, u ′]. Hence, the assumption of weak irreducibility of Model 1 implies that either [ G, u ] ∈ E0, ∀u ∈ G or [G, u ] ∈ E1, ∀u ∈ G. This implies that E0 and E1 are invariant events up to 45 null modifications (note that we have considered a generic sample in the last argument). So, the ergodicity of [ G, o] implies that P [Ej ] ∈ { 0, 1}. This implies that P [A] ∈ { 0, 1} and the claim is proved. (ii). The claim is already proved in part (i) by the definition of ergodicity. (iii). The claim is proved similarly to the classical bijection between invari-ant functions and harmonic functions for Markov chains (see e.g, [27]). Let h be a bounded K-harmonic function on G∗. For every deterministic ( G, o ) satisfying the balance condition of Model 1, the process h[G, Xn] is a bounded martingale. Hence, the limit ˜h[G, o, (xi)i] := lim i h[G, x i] is well defined for almost every sample ( xi)i of the random walk. It can be seen that ˜h is an invariant path func-tion. So, the triviality of Ipath implies that ˜h[G, o; ( Xi)i] is essentially constant. In addition, the martingale property implies that h[G, o ] = E

h˜h[G, o ; ( Xi)i]

i

.This implies that h[G, o] is also essentially constant. 

# 5.3 Consequences of Markov Chain Ergodicity on the Weak Aperiodicity Assumption 

This subsection is only needed for the indistinguishability of level-sets and the reader might skip it at first reading. As a first application of Theorem 5.4, we strengthen the weak aperiodicity property of Model 2 in the following lemma, which will be used later in the proof of Theorem 5.8. 

Lemma 5.5. In Model 2, almost surely, 

∀u ∈ G, ∀d0 ∈ N : ∃n ∈ N, ∃y ∈ G : Kn(u, y ) > 0, K n+d0 (u, y ) > 0.

The cycle-free and one-endedness conditions are not needed here. Proof. By Theorem 2.5, it is enough to prove the claim for u = o. We may assume that [ G, o] is ergodic, without loss of generality. Let ( Xn)n be the Markov chain with kernel K, starting from o. Let d0 ∈ N be arbitrary. For each 

d ∈ N, let Sd := {x ∈ G : ∃n, y : Kn(x, y ) > 0, K n+d(x, y ) > 0}. The weak aperiodicity of Model 2 implies that Sd̸ = ∅ for sufficiently many values of d,more precisely, for d1, . . . , d k such that P 

> i

aidi = d0 for some a1, . . . , a k ∈ Z. By ergodicity, we may choose d1, . . . , d k to be constant. Also, Theorem 2.5 implies that P [o ∈ Sdi ] > 0, ∀i. Therefore, ergodicity (Theorem 5.4) implies that ( Xn)n

intersects each Sdi infinitely often a.s. In addition, at each intersection with Sdi ,say at time t, there is a positive probability that ∃n : Kn+di (Xt, Xt+n) > 0. By ergodicity again, for every i, the last event happens for infinitely many t

a.s. Therefore, for each i, one can almost surely find |ai| intervals of the form [tij , t ij + nij ] ⊆ N (for 1 ≤ j ≤ | ai|), such that Knij +di (Xtij , Xtij +nij ) > 0 and the intervals are disjoint. Note that, in each of these intervals [ tij , t ij + nij ], we have two choices for going from Xtij to Xtij +nij : One by a path of length 

nij and another by a path of length nij + di. Now, for T ≥ max i,j (tij + nij ), one can show that KT +c(o, XT ) > 0 and KT +c+d0 (o, XT ) > 0, where c =

− P 

> i

aidi1{ai≤0} = P 

> i

aidi1{ai≤0} − d0 ≥ 0. This proves the claim. 46 Figure 4: The paths used in the proof of Theorem 5.6. 

Lemma 5.6. In almost every sample (G, o ) of Model 2, the graph with vertex set G and edge set {(u, v ) : PG [v ∈ L(u)] > 0} is connected. 

This lemma was used in the proof of Theorem 4.2. We stress that the claim may fail if the level-sets are finite. 

Proof. For v̸ = u, the condition PG [v ∈ L(u)] > 0 is equivalent to the existence of k > 0 and admissible sequences u = u0, u 1, . . . , u k and v = v0, v 1, . . . , v k

that intersect only at uk = vk, where admissible means K(ui, u i+1 ) > 0, ∀i.Assume ( G, o ) satisfies the conditions of Models 1 and 2 and the claim of Theorem 5.5. Assume also that F is locally-finite and all level-sets of F are infinite, PG-a.s. Let u, v ∈ G be such that K(u, v ) > 0. We will show that u

and v are connected in the graph mentioned in the lemma. The claim of the lemma then follows from weak irreducibility. By Theorem 5.5, there exist n ∈ N and w ∈ G such that Kn(v, w ) > 0 and 

Kn+1 (v, w ) > 0. Let v0, . . . , v n and v′

> 0

, . . . , v ′ 

> n+1

be two admissible sequences from v to w. We call a point u0 ∈ G good if there exist k ≥ 0 and admissible sequences ( ui)n+k+1  

> i=0

and ( wi)ki=0 such that w0 = w, un+k+1 = wk and ( ui)i

does not intersect any of the sequences ( wi)i, (vi)i and ( v′

> i

)i except at wk (see Figure 4). We claim that there exists a good point. Indeed, consider the event that ∀0 < i ≤ n + 1 : F (i)(u) = vi, F is locally-finite and LF (u) is infinite. On this event, the set LF (u)\∪ iD(v′

> i

) is infinite and consists only of good points a.s. So, there exists a good point u0. Now, both u and v have admissible sequences to un+k+1 , of length n + k + 1, and disjoint from ( ui)i. So, PG [u0 ∈ L(u)] > 0and PG [u0 ∈ L(v)] > 0. So, u and v are connected by the two edges ( u, u 0) and (u0, v ), and the claim is proved. 

# 5.4 Step L3: Tail Events and Tail-Triviality 

In this subsection, we prove Part (ii) of Theorem 1.3 and Theorem 1.12, which are restated in Theorems 5.8 and 5.11 respectively. This subsection is only needed for the indistinguishability of level-sets and the reader might skip it at 47 first reading. We first recall the tail sigma-field on a deterministic space in Theorem 5.7 below. Then, the analogous notion on G∗ is given in Theorem 5.9. 

Definition 5.7. For deterministic G, An event A ⊆ GN∪{ 0} is called a tail path property on G if, for every n ∈ N, it is contained in the sigma-field generated by xn, x n+1 , . . . ; i.e., it does not depend on x0, . . . , x n−1. Let T path G

denote the sigma-field of invariant path properties of G.One has Ipath G ⊆ T path G . Our first result is the following, which is a restate-ment of Theorem 1.12. Here, given a deterministic ( G, v ), we let P(G,v ) be the distribution of the Markov chain on G with kernel K starting from v. Note that this Markov chain is steady if T path G = Ipath G mod P(G,v ).

Theorem 5.8 (Steadiness on Deterministic Graphs) . Let [G, o] be an ergodic unimodular graph and (Xi)i be a Markov chain on G, starting from o, whose kernel satisfies the conditions of balance, weak irreducibility and weak aperiod-icity of Model 2 (but not necessarily the cycle-free condition). Then, in almost every sample (G, o ) of [G, o], the Markov chain (Xi) is steady. In addition, 

T path G = Ipath G mod X

> v∈G

P(G,v )

!

. (5.2) 

Also, the same holds for any deterministic G that satisfies (1.6) .

Note that equivalence mod P 

> v∈G

P(G,v ) is stronger than equivalence mod 

P(G,v ) for all v ∈ G. For the former, one should approximate the events in a way not depending on the choice of v ∈ G. We will need this in Section 7.3 because Theorem 2.5 no longer holds and we need to consider all possible roots simultaneously. This theorem generalizes a similar claim on transitive Markov chains on a deterministic transitive environment (see e.g., Theorem 14.47 of [27]). We prove the above result by a slight generalization of the proof, but by leveraging unimodularity. Before giving the proof, we present the analogous claim on tail triviality when G is not fixed (Theorem 5.11). 

Definition 5.9 (Tail Path Properties on G∞). Consider the space G∞ defined in Section 5.1. An event A ⊆ G ∞ is called a tail path property (on G∞)if, for every n ∈ N, A is in the sigma-field generated by [ G, x n; ( xn+i)i≥0]; i.e., does not depend on ( x0, . . . , x n−1). Let T path denote the sigma-field of tail path events on G∞.

Example 5.10. Let [ G, o] be the 3-regular tree in which each vertex v is equipped with two marks m1(v) and m2(v). Assume that m1(·) are i.i.d. uniform numbers in [0 , 1] and m2(·) are periodic marks in {0, 1} (i.e., m2(u)̸ =

m2(v) if u is adjacent to v) such that P [m2(o) = 1] = 1 /2. Also, let ( Xi)i be the simple random walk starting from the root. (i) The event that lim sup i→∞ m1(Xi) > 1/2 is a shift-invariant event, but it has probability one. In fact, by Theorem 5.4, there is no nontrivial shift-invariant event here. 48 (ii) The events m2(o) = 0 and m2(o) = 1 are nontrivial tail events. We will see that these are essentially the only nontrivial tail events (see The-orem 5.12). The following is the next tail triviality result, which is an expansion of Part (ii) of Theorem 1.3. 

Theorem 5.11 (Step L3: Tail Triviality for Markov Chains on Unimodular Graphs) . Under the assumptions of Part (ii) of Theorem 1.3, (i) The tail path sigma-field T path is trivial. (ii) [G, o; ( Xn)n] is tail-trivial under the shift σ.(iii) Every bounded space-time K-harmonic function on G∗ is essentially con-stant. In addition, in the non-ergodic case, T path = Ipath = I mod P.

Here, a space-time K-harmonic function is defined as a measurable func-tion h : G∗ × (N ∪ { 0}) → R such that 

h([ G, o ], n ) = X

> x∈G

K(o, x )h([ G, x ], n + 1) , ∀[G, o ] ∈ G ∗, ∀n ≥ 0.

Note that Ipath ⊆ T path . Hence, Theorem 5.11 extends Theorem 5.4. In fact, Theorem 5.4 will be used in the proof. 

Remark 5.12 (Periodic Case) . If the weak aperiodicity condition is modified by allowing the largest common divisor of the set (3.2) to be d0 ∈ N, then a slight modification of the proofs gives that the tail sigma-field is equivalent to the sigma-field generated by at most d0 disjoint tail events (assuming ergodicity). Indeed, if E is the graph on G where u is connected to v when Kd0 (u, v ) > 0, then E has at most d0 connected components and indistinguishability holds in each of its components. Therefore, the level-sets of F can be partitioned into 

d0 classes in a periodic way and each class contains indistinguishable level-sets. Hence, the number of indistinguishability classes of level-sets is a divisor of d0.Note that, when d0 = ∞, the proof fails; e.g., in Theorems 3.19 and 3.20. This was resolved by another idea in coalescing Markov chains of Section 3.2.4. We now start to prove Theorems 5.8 and 5.11. Adapting the strategy of Theorem 14.47 of [27], we start with the following lemma. 

Lemma 5.13. Assume [G, o] is unimodular and K is a factor Markov kernel that satisfies the balance and weak irreducibility conditions of Model 1 (but not necessarily the cycle-free condition). Then, for every k ∈ N and almost every sample (G, o ) of [G, o], if ∃x, l : Kl+k(o, x ) > 0, K l(o, x ) > 0, then 

∀v ∈ G : lim  

> n→∞

|| Kn+k(v, ·) − Kn(v, ·)|| TV = 0 . (5.3) 

The same holds for every deterministic graph or discrete space G that satis-fies (1.6) .

49 The reader might compare the assumption of this lemma with (3.2). 

Proof. We may let k be fixed. We may also assume that [ G, o] is ergodic. For 

l ∈ N and ϵ ≥ 0, let 

Sl,ϵ := Sl,ϵ (G) := {v ∈ G : || Kl(v, ·) ∧ Kl+k(v, ·)|| TV ≥ ϵ}.

Note that the assumption of the lemma on ( G, o ) is equivalent to o ∈ ∪ l,m Sl, 1/m .If ∀l, m : P o ∈ Sl, 1/m 

 = 0, the assumption does not hold. Hence, we can fix l and ϵ > 0 such that P [o ∈ Sl,ϵ ] > 0. Since || Kl(v, ·) ∧ Kl+k(v, ·)|| TV is nondecreasing in l, we may choose l such that it is coprime with k. Then, the ergodicity of [ G, o] and Theorem 2.5 imply that Sl,ϵ ̸ = ∅ a.s. By Theorem 5.1 (stationarity after biasing by b(o)), one obtains that ˆP-almost surely, ( Xi)i lies in Sl,ϵ either infinitely often or never. Thus, this happens P-almost surely as well. The event |(Xi)i ∩ Sl,ϵ | = ∞ is an invariant path property. So, Theorem 5.4 and the previous paragraph imply that this event happens almost surely (even if o̸ ∈ Sl,ϵ ). Independently from ( Xi)i, let ( ti)i be a sequence of times such that t0 := 0 and ti+1 − ti is chosen randomly and uniformly in {l, l + k}. Since (Xti )i is a Markov chain with kernel ( Kl + Kl+k)/2, one obtains similarly that (Xti )i also visits Sl,ϵ infinitely often (note that, since l and k are coprime, this Markov chain is also weakly irreducible). Fix a sample ( G, o ) such that, starting the Markov chain ( Xi)i from every point v ∈ G, the last property holds a.s. Observe that almost every sample is of this type. We will prove that this sample has the desired property. Let v ∈ G be arbitrary. We construct a coupling of two copies of ( Xi)i on G starting from v as follows. We do this by constructing two random sequences ( W 0, W 1, . . . ) and (W ′

> 0

, W ′

> 1

, . . . ), where each W i or W ′ 

> i

is a finite path in G, such that the end points of W i and W ′ 

> i

are the same for all i and each W i and W ′ 

> i

is generated by going either l or l + k steps of the kernel K. To do this, assume that W i

and W ′ 

> i

are constructed and x is their common end point. If x̸ ∈ Sl,ϵ , choose 

W i+1 = W ′ 

> i+1

by going either l or l + k steps from x (by tossing a fair coin). If x ∈ Sl,ϵ , do the following. Let νj be the distribution of a path of length 

j starting from x and qj := Kj (x, ·) be the distribution of its end point. We would like to choose W i+1 and W ′ 

> i+1

with distribution ( μl + μl+k)/2. First, choose the end point y with distribution ( ql + ql+k)/2. Then, choose W i+1 and 

W ′ 

> i+1

randomly with distribution ( μl + μl+k)/2 independently, conditionally on ending in y. Note that the lengths of these paths differ by ±k with probability P 

> y

ql(y)ql+k(y)/(ql(y) + ql+k(y)) ≥ P 

> y

(ql(y) ∧ ql+k(y)) /2 ≥ ϵ/ 2. Otherwise, the lengths are equal. Now, ( W , W ′) is constructed. Since Sl,ϵ is visited by the endpoints of ( W i)i infinitely often, there exists a first i such that the sum of the lengths of W 0, . . . , W i is exactly that of 

W ′

> 0

, . . . , W ′ 

> i

plus k. Let W ′′  

> j

:= W ′ 

> j

if j ≤ i and W ′′  

> j

:= W j if j ≥ i. Now, by concatenating the paths, ( W , W ′′ ) gives a coupling of two copies of ( Xj )j ,namely ( Xj , X′′  

> j

)j , such that X′′  

> j

= Xj+k for large enough j, namely, for j ≥ τ .Hence, lim j P X′′  

> j

= Xj+k

 ≥ lim j P [τ ≤ j] = 1. This implies the claim. 50 Proof of Theorems 1.12 and 5.8. The stronger form of weak aperiodicity, proved in Theorem 5.5, implies that the assumption of Theorem 5.13 holds for every 

k > 0. Let ( G, o ) be a sample that satisfies (5.3) for every k (almost every sample satisfies these conditions). We now show that ( G, o ) satisfies (5.2). This claim follows from (5.3) and Theorem 2.2 of [21], but we include a direct proof which is a modification of that of Theorem 14.47 of [27] and utilizes (5.3). Let f be a bounded T path G -measurable function. It is enough to construct an Ipath G -measurable function ˜f such that ∀x ∈ G : P(G,x )

h

f = ˜f

i

= 1. For every x ∈ G and k ≥ 0, define Λ( G, x, k ) := E(G,x )

h

f  (X(k) 

> i

)i≥0

i

, where 

X(k) 

> i

:= Xi−k for i ≥ k, X(k) 

> i

:= yi for i < k , and ( yi)0≤i<k is arbitrary. Since f is a tail path function, the definition of Λ( G, x, k ) does not depend on the choice of y0, . . . , y k−1. Note that Λ( G, ·, ·) is space-time K-harmonic (as a function on G × (N ∪ { 0})). Hence, for all n, k ≥ 0, Λ( G, x, 0) = E(G,x ) [Λ( G, Xn+k, n + k)] ,

Λ( G, x, k ) = E(G,x ) [Λ( G, Xn, n + k)] .

So, 

|Λ( G, x, 0) − Λ( G, x, k )| ≤ 2 sup(Λ) || Kn+k(x, ·) − Kn(x, ·)|| TV → 0,

where the last convergence holds as n → ∞ by (5.3) and the fact that Λ is bounded (since f is bounded). Therefore, Λ( G, x, k ) = Λ( G, x, 0). This, heuris-tically, implies that f is invariant (up to a negligible modification) by reversing the procedure, which is made precise as follows. Space-time K-harmonicity of Λ implies that the function λ(G, x ) := Λ( G, x, 0) is K-harmonic. So, the martingale convergence theorem implies that, for every x0 ∈ G and P(G,x )-a.e. sequence ( xi)i≥0, the limit ˜f (( xi)i) := lim n→∞ λ(G, x n) exists. Note that ˜f is invariant; i.e., Ipath G -measurable. Since Λ( G, Xn, n ) is almost surely defined, one almost surely has ˜f (( Xi)i) = lim  

> n

λ(G, Xn) = lim  

> n

Λ( G, Xn, n )= lim  

> n

E(G,o ) [f (( Xi)i) |Xn ]= lim  

> n

E(G,o ) [f (( Xi)i) |X0, . . . , Xn ] ,

where the latter uses the Markov property. Since this holds for all n, the L´ evy zero-one law implies that ˜f = f , P(G,o )-a.s. So, the claim is proved. 

Proof of Theorems 1.3 and 5.11. Theorem 2.2 of [21] and (5.3) imply that the Markov chain ([ G, Xn]) n is steady. So, Theorem 5.4 implies that it has trivial tail. If ( G, o) has no nontrivial automorphisms a.s., then it follows that the Markov chain ([ G, Xn; ( Xi+n)i≥0]) n is also tail-trivial. For the general case, we prove the claim similarly to that of Theorem 5.8 mentioned above. Let g

be a bounded T path -measurable function. It is enough to show that g is essen-tially constant. Note that for every sample ( G, o ), the function f := f(G,o ) := 51 g[G, o ; ·] : GN∪{ 0} → R is a tail function, i.e., is T path G -measurable. The argu-ments in the proof of Theorem 5.8 can be repeated word by word to show that for almost all samples ( G, o ), the function Λ( G, x, n ) does not depend on n,the function λ(G, x ) := Λ( G, x, 0) is K-harmonic, and the function ˜f = ˜f(G,o )

defined therein is equal to f , P(G,o )-a.s. Define the function ˜ g : G∞ → R by ˜g[G, o ; ( xi)i] := ˜f(G,o )(( xi)i) and note that it is well defined (i.e., does not de-pend on the representative) and measurable. One also obtains ˜ g = g, P- a.s. One can check that ˜ g is invariant; i.e., Ipath -measurable. Therefore, Theorem 5.4 implies that ˜ g is essentially constant. Hence, so is g and the claim is proved. 

# 6 Steps C1 and L1: Ruling Out Non-Tail Prop-erties in General Models 

In this section, we prove Steps C1 and L1 for general point-maps (not limited to CMTs) in Theorem 6.6 and provide the proof of Theorem 1.1. Before that, Section 6.1 provides the definitions and basic properties of tail branch/level-set properties. 

# 6.1 Tail Properties 

Recall that G′∗ is the space of all [ G, o ; f ], where G is a graph or discrete space and f : G → G. Recall also the sigma-fields Ipm , Icomp and Ilevel of invari-ant point-map-properties, component-properties and level-set-properties from Theorem 2.12. In this subsection, we define tail point-map-properties, branch-properties and tail level-set-properties on G′∗ for general point-maps. The path sigma-fields defined in Section 5 apply to point-maps as well: If 

A is an event in G∞, one might consider the event [ G, o ; anc f (o)] ∈ A on G′∗.More precisely, we identify A with the event π−1(A) ⊆ G ′∗, where π : G′∗ → G ∞

is the projection defined by π[G, o ; f ] := [ G, o ; anc f (o)]. So, by an abuse of notation, one may regard the sigma-fields Ipath and T path , defined in Section 5, as sigma-fields on G′∗.In the following definitions, we use [ G, o ; f ] as a variable element of G′∗.

Definition 6.1 (Tail Point-Map/Component/Level-Set Properties) .

(i) An event A ⊆ G ′∗ is called a tail point-map-property if it is an invari-ant point-map property 12 (that is, A ∈ I pm , see Theorem 2.12) and it is invariant under all finite modifications of f ; i.e., if f ′ : G → G and 

|{ f̸ = f ′}| < ∞, then 1 A[G, o ; f ] = 1 A[G, o ; f ′]. Let T pm be the sigma-field of invariant tail point-map-properties.  

> 12 We assume invariance in the definition of tail point-map properties for coherence with the definitions of tail level-set-properties and tail branch-properties defined next. Note that, when the base graph is deterministic, tail properties can be defined for events in GG, which is classical and no invariance assumption is needed (see also Theorem 9.3).

52 (ii) An event A ⊆ G ′∗ is called a tail component-property if it is a component-property (that is, A ∈ I comp ) and it is invariant under those finite modifi-cations of f such that Cf (o) is also modified at finitely many points. More precisely, if f ′ : G → G is such that |{ f̸ = f ′}| < ∞ and |Cf (o)∆ Cf ′ (o)| <

∞, then 1 A[G, o ; f ] = 1 A[G, o ; f ′]. Let T comp be the sigma-field of tail component-properties. (iii) An event A ⊆ G ′∗ is called a tail level-set-property if it is a level-set-property (that is, A ∈ I level ) and it is invariant under those finite modifi-cations of f such that Lf (o) is also modified at finitely many points. More precisely, if f ′ : G → G is such that |{ f̸ = f ′}| < ∞ and |Lf (o)∆ Lf ′ (o)| <

∞, then 1 A[G, o ; f ] = 1 A[G, o ; f ′]. Let T level be the sigma-field of tail level-set-properties. As mentioned in Section 1.3, tail component-properties are not well suited for two-ended models, which are studied in some of the results of this section. For this reason, we use the following stronger notion of tail branch-properties. For models with one-ended components, the reader might keep using tail component-properties in all of the following discussions; see Theorem 6.3. 

Definition 6.2 (Tail Branch-Properties) . Given [ G, o ; f ], an ancestral branch 

of Cf (o) is a branch B of Cf (o) (see Section 2.1) such that f n(o) is eventually in B as n → ∞ . An event A ⊆ G ′∗ is called a tail ancestral-branch-property 

(or for short, tail branch-property ) if it is a component-property (that is, 

A ∈ I comp ) and, when [ G, o ; f ] and [ G, o ; f ′] are such that |{ f̸ = f ′}| < ∞ and 

Cf ′ (o) shares an ancestral branch with Cf (o) (and the graph structures of f and 

f ′ agree on the common branch), then 1 A[G, o ; f ′] = 1 A[G, o ; f ]. Let T branch be the sigma-field of tail branch-properties. In other words, a component-property A is an ancestral-branch-property if 1A[G, o ; f ] is determined by knowing ( G, o ), knowing f at all but finitely many points, and knowing an ancestral branch of Cf (o). 

Remark 6.3. It is straightforward to check that T branch ⊆ T comp mod P,assuming that the components are cycle-free a.s. Equality might fail in two-ended models (note that if Cf (o) is two-ended, then a finite modification of f

might preserve an ancestral branch of o but result in an infinite modification of 

Cf (o)). If all components are one-ended a.s., then T branch = T comp mod P. In this case, the reader can replace T branch with T comp and the arguments become simpler. This is safe for the indistinguishability theorem since indistinguisha-bility is trivial in the two-ended case of CMTs by Theorem 1.5. However, we use T branch since some of the next results do not require one-endedness; e.g., Steps C1 and C2 (Theorems 6.6 and 7.1). The definitions imply that T pm ⊆ I pm , T branch ⊆ I comp and T level ⊆ I level .We also have the following basic inclusions (see Figure 3). 

Lemma 6.4 (Connections Between Path/Branch/Level-Set Sigma-Fields) . One has T pm ⊆ T branch . Also, if [G, o; F ] is a random element of G′∗ such that C(o)53 is locally finite and cycle-free a.s., and L(o) is infinite a.s., then T branch ⊆ T level 

mod P.Proof. We only prove the second assertion and the rest is left to the reader. Let A ∈ T branch and let E be the set of [ G, o ; f ] in which Cf (o) is locally finite and cycle-free, and |Lf (o)| = ∞. Note that E ∈ T level . Assume [ G, o ; f ] ∈ E,[G, o ′; f ′] ∈ E, |{ f̸ = f ′}| < ∞ and |Lf (o)∆ Lf ′ (o′)| < ∞. These facts imply that there exists z ∈ Lf (o) ∩ Lf ′ (o′), far enough from o, such that anc f (z) = anc f ′ (z). As a result, anc f (o) and anc f ′ (o′) both shift-couple with anc( z). Now, 

Cf (o) and Cf ′ (o′) share an ancestral branch which is obtained by removing the set {f̸ = f ′}. Hence, the definition of A ∈ T branch implies that 1 A[G, o ′; f ′] = 1A[G, o ; f ]. This proves that A ∩ E ∈ T level . The claim then follows since A is equivalent to A ∩ E.As mentioned in Observations (1.1) and (1.3), tail branch/level-set properties are connected to the invariant/tail path-sigma-fields as follows. Recall that Steps C2 and L2 are aimed at proving the converse of this lemma. 

Lemma 6.5 (Comparison of Point-Map/Path Sigma-Fields) . Let [G, o; F ] be a random element of G′∗.(i) One has Ipath ⊆ T branch .(ii) If C(o) is locally finite and cycle-free a.s. and L(o) is infinite a.s., then 

T path ⊆ T level mod P.Proof. (i). Let A ∈ I path . We have 1 A[G, o ; f ] = 1 A[G, o ′; f ] for all o′ ∈ Cf (o), since anc( o) shift-couples (see Section 2.1) with anc( o′). This implies that A ∈Icomp . Assume ( G, o ; f ) and ( G, o ; f ′) are given such that |{ f̸ = f ′}| < ∞

and B is a common ancestral branch of Cf (o) and Cf ′ (o). This implies that anc f (o) shift-couples with anc f ′ (o), and one can hence find i such that v := 

f i(o) satisfies anc f (v) = anc f ′ (v) ⊆ B. Since A ∈ I path , one obtains that 1A[G, o ; f ] = 1 A[G, v ; f ] = 1 A[G, v ; f ′] = 1 A[G, o ; f ′]. Hence, A ∈ T branch and the claim is proved. (ii). Let E′ be the event that C(o) is locally finite and cycle-free and L(o)is infinite. Note that E′ ∈ T level . Let A ∈ T path . We have 1 A[G, o ; f ] = 1A[G, o ′; f ] for all [ G, o ; f ] ∈ E′ and o′ ∈ Lf (o) (since anc( o) eventually coincides with anc( o′)). This implies that A ∩ E′ ∈ I level . Assume [ G, o ; f ], [G, o ; f ′] ∈ E′

are such that |{ f̸ = f ′}| < ∞ and |Lf (o)∆ Lf ′ (o)| < ∞. These imply the existence of z ∈ Lf (o) ∩ Lf ′ (o) such that anc f (z) = anc f ′ (z). Now, anc( z)eventually coincides with both anc f (o) and anc f ′ (o). Since A ∈ T path , one obtains that 1 A[G, o ; f ] = 1 A[G, z ; f ] = 1 A[G, z ; f ′] = 1 A[G, o ; f ′]. Therefore, 

A ∩ E′ ∈ T level . Since A is equivalent to A ∩ E′, one obtains that A is in the null-event-augmentation of T level (Theorem 2.4). 

# 6.2 Steps C1 and L1 

The following theorem establishes Steps C1 and L1 for general point-maps on unimodular graphs (not limited to CMTs). 54 Theorem 6.6 (Steps C1 and L1: Invariant Properties are Almost Tail) . Let 

[G, o] be a unimodular graph or discrete space and let F be a point-map on G.(i) If G is infinite a.s., then Ipm = T pm mod P. More generally, this claim holds if F is any equivariant random graph on G.(ii) If F is cycle-free a.s., then Icomp = T branch mod P.

(iii) If the level-sets of F are infinite a.s., then Ilevel = T level mod P.

Part (i) generalizes the classical fact in point process theory that the invari-ant sigma-field is included in the tail sigma-field modulo zero measure events (see e.g., Exercise 12.3.2 of [9]). Part (ii) establishes Step C1. As mentioned in Section 1.3, this generalizes a result of [20], which proves the claim for WUSF. We prove the general case with a simpler proof that does not involve pivotal updates or ϵ, δ calculations. Part (iii) also establishes Step L1. 

Proof. Let ˆT pm denote the null-event-augmentation of T pm and define ˆT branch 

and ˆT level similarly. Fix ϵ > 0 and let A be an event in Ipm , Icomp or Ilevel ,respectively in each part of the theorem. In order to prove that A belongs to ˆT pm , ˆT branch or ˆT level respectively, by Theorem A.3, it is enough to find a func-tion α, which is measurable with respect to ˆT pm , ˆT branch or ˆT level respectively, and satisfies E [|1A − α|] < ϵ . Since A is a Borel set, there exist R < ∞ and an event A′ that depends only on [ G, o; F BR(o)], such that P [A∆A′] < ϵ . For part (i), take α := P [A′ |I pm ], which heuristically means averaging 1 A′ [G, ·; F ]over all points of G. One has 

E [|1A − α|] = E [|E [1 A − 1A′ |I pm ]|]

≤ E [E [|1A − 1A′ | |I pm ]] = E [|1A − 1A′ |] = P [A∆A′] < ϵ. 

By taking similarly α := P [A′ |I comp ] in part (ii) and α := P A′ Ilevel  in part (iii), one obtains similarly that E [|1A − α|] < ϵ . So, it remains to prove that α is measurable with respect to ˆT pm , ˆT branch or ˆT level respectively, in each part of the proof. In order to prove this, the definition of conditional expectation does not seem to help directly. Instead, we will construct an explicit version of 

α using a random walk or a suitable partition, as described below. We prove the three statements in the order (i), (iii), (ii). (i). By Lemma 3.10 of [23], one can construct a Markov kernel h on G

that does not depend on F , such that h(·, ·) > 0 and it is symmetric (i.e., 

∀x, y ∈ G : h(x, y ) = h(y, x )) a.s. Let ( Y i)i≥0 be a random walk on G with kernel h, starting from o and independent from F . Let ˜P be the distribution of [ G, o; F , (Y i)i]. Since h is symmetric, it balances the counting measure on 

G. Hence, Theorem 5.1 implies that the sequence ([ G, Y i; F ]) i≥0 is stationary. So, Birkhoff’s pointwise ergodic theorem implies that the following limit is well defined ˜P-a.s. 

g[G, o; F , (Y i)i] := lim  

> N→∞

1

N

> N

X

> i=1

1A′ [G, Y i; F ]. (6.1) 55 In addition, the pointwise ergodic theorem implies that g = P [A′ |J ], ˜P-a.s., where J is the sigma-field of events that are invariant under the shift ( Y i)i≥0 7 →

(Y i+1 )i≥0. So, we may apply Theorem 5.4 for ( Y i)i (and keep F as a decora-tion) and deduce that J = Ipm mod ˜P. Hence, g = P [A′ |I pm ] = α, ˜P-a.s. Let M ′ be the set of [ G, o ; f ] such that: (1) G is infinite and, for all x, y ∈ G, one has h(G, x, y ) = h(G, y, x ) > 0 and P 

> z

h(G, x, z ) = 1. (2) For all x ∈ G, the random variable g[G, x ; f, (Y i)i] (with respect to the randomness of ( Y i)i started from x) is essentially constant. (3) If g′[G, x, f ] is the constant such that g[G, x ; f, (Y i)i] = g′[G, x, f ] a.s., then g′[G, x, f ] does not depend on x.Observe that P [M ′] = 1 and g′ = α, a.s. So, it is enough to show that g′

is ˆT pm -measurable. Assume [ G, o ; f ] ∈ M ′, o′ ∈ G and f ′ ∈ GG such that 

|{ f̸ = f ′}| < ∞. By Theorems A.1 and A.2, to prove the ˆT pm -measurability of g′, it is enough to show that [ G, o ′; f ′] ∈ M ′ and g′[G, o ; f ] = g′[G, o ′; f ′](this also implies that M ′ ∈ T pm , as required in Theorem A.2). Let x ∈ G

be arbitrary and let ( Y i)i be the random walk on G with kernel h, starting from x (note that it does not depend on f nor f ′). Since the kernel h on G is positive, this Markov chain on G is irreducible. Therefore, the counting measure on G is the unique stationary measure up to multiplicity by constants. Since the counting measure has infinite total mass (since G is infinite by assumption), this chain cannot be positive recurrent. So, either it is transient or null recurrent. In either case, the frequency of visits of ( Y i)i to the set Bn+R(o) is zero a.s., where 

n is chosen such that {f̸ = f ′} ⊆ Bn(o). On the other hand, the definition of 

A′ implies that 1 A′ [G, y ; f ] = 1 A′ [G, y ; f ′] for all y ∈ G \ Bn+R(o). These facts imply that g[G, x ; f, (Y i)i] = g[G, x ; f ′, (Y i)i] a.s. This in turn implies that 

g[G, x ; f, (Y i)i] is essentially constant and the constant does not depend on x,and hence, the claim is proved. (iii). Instead of using a random walk with kernel h, we use asymptotic averaging on the level-set of the origin as follows. Define 

g[G, o; F ] := lim  

> i→∞

average {1A′ [G, x ; F ] : x ∈ Di(F (i)(o)) },

if the limit exists, (see the definition of average {·} just after Theorem 2.18). If the limit does not exist, let g = 0. Indeed, since for each i, the partition 

{Di(F i(v)) : v ∈ L(o)} of L(o) is equivariant and these partitions are nested, Lemma 8.1 of [23] (see Theorem 2.18) implies that the limit exists and is equal to P A′ Ilevel  = α a.s. So, it is enough to prove that g is ˆT level -measurable. We will prove this by Theorem A.2 again. First, note that g[G, o; F ] = g[G, y ; F ] for every y ∈ L(o), since Di(F (i)(o)) = 

Di(F (i)(y)) for large enough i. Let M ′ be the set of [ G, o ; f ] such that the graph of f is locally-finite, all level-sets of f are infinite, and f is one-ended. Note that 

M ′ ∈ T level and P [M ′] = 1 by Theorem 2.10. Assume [ G, o ; f ] ∈ M ′, [G, o ; f ′] ∈

56 M ′, |{ f̸ = f ′}| < ∞ and |Lf (o)∆ Lf ′ (o)| < ∞. This implies that, for all but finitely many y ∈ Lf (o) ∩ Lf ′ (o), one has anc f (y) = anc f ′ (y) =: anc( y) and anc( y) does not intersect Bn+R(o), where n is chosen such that {f̸ = f ′} ⊆ 

Bn(o). Note that 1 A′ [G, x ; f ] = 1 A′ [G, x ; f ′] for all x ∈ G \ Bn+R(o). This fact, together with the infiniteness of Lf (o), imply g[G, o ; f ] = g[G, o ; f ′]. Since 

M ′ ∈ T level , Theorems A.1 and A.2 imply that g is ˆT level -measurable, and the claim is proved. (ii). We will use percolation in the following steps. 

Defining ˆg. Let [ G, o ; f ] be a sample such that the graph of f is locally-finite and Cf (o) is either one-ended or two-ended. By Theorem 2.10, almost every sample is of this type. We will define ˆ g[G, o ; f ] in the following cases. First, consider the case where C(o) is one-ended. Let Φ i be the Bernoulli bond percolation on C(o) with parameter 1 − 2−i; i.e., every edge of C(o)belongs to Φ i with probability 1 − 2−i independently from the other edges. Let 

Si = Si(o) be the connected component of o in Φ i. One might also couple the percolations for different values of i such that Φ i ⊆ Φi+1 , and hence, Si ⊆ Si+1 .Then, Si is finite a.s. and converges to C(o) as i → ∞ . Define 

gi[G, o ; f, (Φ i)i] := average {1A′ [G, x ; f ] : x ∈ Si}.

Since the percolation clusters form an equivariant nested sequence of parti-tions of C(o) that converge to the trivial partition of C(o), Lemma 8.1 of [23] (see Theorem 2.18) implies that g := lim i gi exists in almost every sample of [ G, o ; f, (Φ i)i]. Note that g might depend on the Φ i’s as well. 13 Define ˆg[G, o ; f ] := E [g], where the expectation is with respect to the randomness of the Φ i’s. Second, consider the case where C(o) is two-ended. In this case, let H be the union of the bi-infinite paths in the graph of f (note that there might be more than one bi-infinite path since we consider general point-maps in this theorem and Theorem 1.5 is not available). For u ∈ G, let τ (u) = τf (u) be the first element of anc( u) that lies in H (if well defined). Let Y0 := τ (o), Yj := f j (Y0)for j > 0 and let Y−j be the unique point in Dj (Y0) ∩ H. Note that  τ −1(Yj )

> j

is the partition of C(o) into the branches hanging from a bi-infinite path. Let 

g′ 

> i

be the average of 1 A′ [G, x ; f ] over x ∈ Sij=0 τ −1 

> f

(Yj ). Define g′′  

> i

similarly by the overage over j ∈ [−i, i ]. Let ˆ g := lim i g′ 

> i

if the limit exists. We will show that this is the case in almost every sample. 

Defining M ′′ . Let M ′′ be the set of [ G, o ; f ] that: (1) [ G, o ; f ] satisfies the claims of Theorem 2.10 and each component of f is either one-ended or two-ended. (2) If Cf (o) is one-ended, then g = lim i gi[G, o ; f, (Φ i)i] exists for almost every sample of (Φ i)i.   

> 13 In fact, one can see at the end of the proof that gdoes not depend on Φ i’s a.s. since adding Poisson randomness does not break ergodicity.

57 (3) If Cf (o) is two-ended, then ˆ g = lim i g′ 

> i

exists. 

Proving P [M ′′ ] = 1. To prove this claim, it remains to show that, on the event E in which C(o) is two-ended, ˆ g exists a.s. We may assume P [E] > 0. By the mass transport principle, one obtains E  τ −1(o)  = P [E]. Hence, 

τ −1(o) is finite a.s. One can easily show that the sequence ([ G, Y i; F ]) i, biased by 1 / τ −1(Y0) 1E , is stationary (this is a general property of unimodular two-ended trees and can be proved by using the mass transport principle directly, see Theorem 4.17 of [4]). Therefore, Birkhoff’s pointwise ergodic theorem implies that the following limits exist a.s. on E:lim 

> i

1

i

> i−1

X

> j=0

τ −1(Yj ) , lim 

> i

1

i

> i−1

X

> j=0

X  

> x∈τ−1(Yj)

1A′ [G, x ; F ].

Hence, lim i g′ 

> i

exists and the claim is proved. In addition, one can make the sum over j ∈ [−i, i ] similarly (and divide by 2 i + 1) and the value of the limits does not change a.s. Therefore, lim i g′ 

> i

= lim i g′′  

> i

a.s. on E.

Proving that ˆg = α a.s. Consider the percolation Φ defined above in the one-ended case. When C(o) is two-ended, replace Φ i by the percolation on the unique bi-infinite path of C(o). Let the rest of the edges of C(o) be always in Φi (i.e., be open ). Define Si, g i and g similarly to the one-ended case. Since 

Si is a union of the sets τ −1(Yj ) over j in a large interval, one deduces that 

g = lim i g′′  

> i

= lim i g′ 

> i

= ˆ g a.s. on E. Now, Theorem 2.18 for the partition Si

(both in the one-ended and two-ended cases) implies that g = α, ˜P-a.s., where ˜P is the distribution of [ G, o; F , (Φ i)i]. This implies that ˆ g = α, P-a.s. 

Measurability of ˆg. We now show that ˆ g is ˆT branch -measurable. Assume that [ G, o ; f ] ∈ M ′′ , o ′ ∈ G, f ′ ∈ GG, |{ f̸ = f ′}| < ∞ and there exists a common ancestral branch B of Cf (o) and Cf ′ (o′). By Theorems A.1 and A.2, we need to prove that [ G, o ′; f ′] ∈ M ′′ and ˆ g[G, o ; f ] = ˆ g[G, o ′; f ′] (this also shows that 

M ′′ ∈ T branch , as required in Theorem A.2). We may assume {f̸ = f ′} ⊆ Bn(o). Note that f B = f ′ 

> B

. So, by Theorem 2.10, either both Cf (o) and Cf ′ (o′) are one-ended or both are two-ended. We consider these cases separately. First, assume Cf (o) and Cf ′ (o′) are one-ended. In this case, Cf (o) \ B and 

Cf ′ (o′) \ B are finite. Denote by (Φ ′

> i

)i the sequence of percolations used in the definition of ˆ g[G, o ′; f ′] and define ( S′

> i

)i similarly. One can couple (Φ ′

> i

)i

with (Φ i)i in such a way that Φ i B = Φ ′  

> iB

, ∀i a.s. (since these are Bernoulli percolations). This implies that Si ∩ B = S′ 

> i

∩ B for large enough i. Note that 

Si \ B and S′ 

> i

\ B are included in a finite set which does not depend on i, and also 1 A′ [G, x ; f ] = 1 A′ [G, x ; f ] if x ∈ G \ Bn+R(o). So, in the averages made in 

gi[G, o ; f, (Φ i)i] and gi[G, o ′; f ′, (Φ ′

> i

)i], all of the terms are equal, except finitely many of them. This implies that ˆ g[G, o ; f ] = ˆ g[G, o ′; f ′], as desired. Second, assume Cf (o) and Cf ′ (o′) are two-ended. Define H′, ( Y ′ 

> i

)i and τf ′

similarly for f ′. Since Cf (o) and Cf ′ (o′) share an ancestral branch, one can easily deduce that 

∃k ∈ Z, ∃J ≥ 0 : ∀j ≥ J : Y ′ 

> j

= Yj+k, τ −1  

> f′

(Y ′ 

> j

) = τ −1 

> f

(Yj+k).

58 As a result, the averaging sets in the definitions of g′

> i

[G, o ; f ] and g′

> i

[G, o ′; f ′]are almost equal. Since 1 A′ [G, x ; f ] = 1 A′ [G, x ; f ′] for all x ∈ G \ Bn+R(o), one obtains that lim i g′

> i

[G, o ; f ] = lim i g′

> i

[G, o ′; f ′]; i.e., ˆ g[G, o ; f ] = ˆ g[G, o ′; f ′], as desired. In both cases, we showed that ˆ g[G, o ; f ] = ˆ g[G, o ′; f ′]. Therefore, Theo-rem A.2 for the event M ′′ implies that ˆ g is ˆT branch -measurable. So, α is also ˆT branch -measurable and the proof is completed. 

Proof of Theorem 1.1. We prove (i). The proof of (ii) is similar and is omitted. In Theorem 6.6, we proved Step C1; i.e., Icomp = T branch mod P. If the claim of Step C2 holds, one has T branch = Ipath mod P. If the claim of Step C3 holds, then Ipath = I mod P. If both hold, one obtains that Icomp = I mod P. This implies indistinguishability of components by Theorem 2.14. 

# 7 Steps C2 and L2: Reduction to Path Proper-ties and Proof of Indistinguishability in CMTs 

In this section, we establish Steps C2 and L2 for CMTs (we do not require unimodularity of the base space). Then, by the results of Sections 5 and 6, the proof of indistinguishability for CMTs (Theorem 3.4) is completed in Sec-tion 7.2. Finally, indistinguishability for CMTs on a deterministic base space (see Section 1.4.5) is discussed in Section 7.3. Note that the triviality of T branch and T level is used in proving the triviality of Icomp and Ilevel , unlike the proof for Markov chains (where the triviality of 

Ipath is proved before that of T path ). 

# 7.1 Steps C2 and L2 for CMTs 

It is a classical fact that an i.i.d. marking of a deterministic base space is tail trivial. Part (i) of Theorem 7.1 below is an analogous claim for CMTs on random base spaces (not necessarily unimodular). In the next parts of the the-orem, analogous claims are proved for tail branch/level-set properties of CMTs, which reduce such properties to invariant/tail properties of anc( o) and establish Steps C2 and L2. 

Theorem 7.1 (Steps C2 and L2 for CMTs) . Let F be a CMT on any random rooted graph or discrete space [G, o]. Then, (i) T pm = I mod P, where I is the invariant sigma-field (not to be confused with Ipm , see Theorem 6.6). 14 

(ii) T branch = Ipath mod P.(iii) If C(o) is locally finite and cycle-free a.s. and L(o) is infinite a.s., then 

T level = T path mod P.        

> 14 If we drop invariance from the definition of Tpm , then Tpm will be equal to the sigma-field of events in G′∗which depend only on [ G,o].

59 Note that, in contrast with the proof of Section 4 for lattice models, we do not require any shift-coupling or successful coupling property. The other conditions of Models 1 and 2 are not required as well. 

Proof. Let K be the Markov kernel of F , defined in Section 3.1. The proof of the first statement uses a method similar to that of Section 4. The same applies to the other statements, but heavily relies on the Markov chain sigma-fields. The idea is to show that the event under consideration is independent from itself, conditionally on [ G, o; anc( o)] (this establishes Step C2.1), and to show that its conditional probability is measurable with respect to the desired path sigma-field (this establishes Step C2.2). The proof relies on Theorems A.2 and A.4. (i). Since events in I depend only on the base graph (not on the CMT nor on the root), one has I ⊆ T pm . So, we should prove that T pm ⊆ I . Let A ∈ T pm 

and n ∈ N be arbitrary. Construct a copy F ′ of F coupled with F as follows. For every sample ( G, o ) of [ G, o], construct F on G and construct F ′ inside 

Bn(o) as an independent copy of F Bn(o). Outside Bn(o), let F ′ be identical to 

F . Then, F ′ has the same distribution as F given ( G, o ). Let A′ be the event [G, o; F ′] ∈ A. By construction, A is independent from F ′ 

> Bn(o)

(conditionally on [ G, o]). Also, since A is a tail point-map-property, one has 1 A = 1 A′ a.s. This shows that A′ is independent from F ′ 

> Bn(o)

(conditionally on [ G, o]). Since this holds for all n, one obtains that A′ is independent from F ′ (conditionally on [ G, o]). Therefore, A′ is independent from itself (conditionally on [ G, o]), and hence, the same holds for A as well. So, g := P [A |[G, o] ] ∈ { 0, 1} a.s. So, Lemma A.4 implies that A is in the null-event-augmentation of the sigma-field generated by [ G, o]. To complete the proof, by Lemma A.4, it is enough to construct a version of 

P [A |[G, o] ] that depends only on G. Let G be deterministic. For x ∈ G, define 

g′[G, x ] := PG [[ G, x ; F ] ∈ A]. It is clear that g′ is a version of P [A |[G, o] ]. By using the same instance of F for different x, y ∈ G, and the fact A ∈ I pm ,one obtains that g′[G, x ] = g′[G, y ]. So, g′ depends only on G and the claim is proved. (ii). Theorem 6.5 implies that Ipath ⊆ T branch . Conversely, let A ∈ T branch .We will use Theorem A.4 for the sigma-fields F and F′ with F = Ipath and F′

the sigma-field of events in G′∗ that depend only on [ G, o; anc( o)]. To use this lemma, we first show that P [A |[G, o; anc( o)] ] is ˆF-measurable (see the notation used in Theorem A.4). For this, we use the following explicit version of the con-ditional probability. Let M ′ be the set of [ G, x 0; ( xi)i≥0] such that xN , x N +1 , . . . 

are distinct for some N . Note that M ′ ∈ I path (while the event that x0, x 1, . . . 

are distinct is not in Ipath ). Note also that P [[ G, o; anc( o)] ∈ M ′] = 1. Given [G, x 0; ( xi)i≥0] ∈ M ′, define a random element F 1 ∈ GG using ( xi)i as follows: Let F be the CMT with kernel K on G. If N is the smallest number such that (xi)i≥N are distinct, let F 1(xj ) := xj+1 , ∀j ≥ N . For other points x ∈ G, let 60 F 1(x) := F (x). Then, on M ′, define 

g[G, x 0; ( xi)i] := PG [[ G, x 0; F 1] ∈ A] . (7.1) Outside M ′, let g[G, x 0; ( xi)i] := 0. Note that anc( x0) is a simple path a.s. and that F 1 is a regular conditional version of F conditionally on anc F (x0) = ( xi)i.We now prove that g is ˆF-measurable. For this, we use Lemma A.2 for the event M ′ and the countable Borel equivalence relation corresponding to 

Ipath ; see Theorem A.1 (in fact, since g is zero outside M ′, it is F-measurable). Assume [ G, x 0; ( xi)i] ∈ M ′, [ G, x ′

> 0

; ( x′

> i

)i] ∈ M ′ and that ( x′

> i

)i shift-couples with (xi)i (but maybe x0̸ = x′

> 0

). Assume xm+i = x′ 

> m′+i

for all i ≥ 0. Define F ′

> 1

similarly to F 1, but for ( x′

> i

)i, using the same source of randomness F . One has 

g[G, x 0; ( xi)i] = PG [[ G, x 0; F 1] ∈ A] ,g[G, x ′

> 0

; ( x′

> i

)i] = PG

[G, x ′

> 0

; F ′

> 1

] ∈ A . (7.2) Now, the constructed coupling between F 1 and F ′ 

> 1

implies that [ G, x ′

> 0

; F ′

> 1

] is obtained from [ G, x 0; F 1] by changing the root to xm, which is in the same component as x0, then applying a finite modification without changing the an-cestors of the new root, and then moving the root again in its component (to 

x′

> 0

). So, the fact A ∈ T branch implies that 1 A[G, x 0; F 1] = 1 A[G, x ′

> 0

; F ′

> 1

] a.s., and hence, g[G, x 0; ( xi)i] = g[G, x ′

> 0

, (x′

> i

)i]. Then, Theorems A.1 and A.2 imply that g is measurable with respect to ˆF.Second, we show that g ∈ { 0, 1} a.s. Let n ∈ N be arbitrary. Given any sample ( G, o ), construct a copy F ′ of F coupled with F as follows. Given F , con-struct F ′ inside Bn(o) \ anc( o) as an independent copy of F . In Bn(o)c ∪ anc( o), let F ′ be identical to F . Then, F ′ has the same distribution as F given (G, o ). Let A′ be the event [ G, o ; F ′] ∈ A. By construction, A′ is indepen-dent from the restriction of F to Bn(o), conditionally on ( G, o ; anc( o)). Also, since A ∈ T branch , one has 1 A = 1 A′ a.s. in this coupling. This shows that A is independent from the restriction of F to Bn(o) conditionally on ( G, o ; anc( o)). Since this holds for all n, one obtains that A is independent from F condition-ally on ( G, o ; anc( o)). Therefore, A is independent from itself conditionally on (G, o ; anc( o))). This implies that g ∈ { 0, 1} a.s. By the above facts, Lemma A.4 implies that A ∈ ˆF, and the claim is proved. (iii). The proof is similar to the previous case, so, we sketch the proof and only highlight the differences. By Theorem 6.5, one has T path ⊆ T level mod 

P. Conversely, let A ∈ T level . We claim that P [A |[G, o; anc( o)] ] is ˆT path -measurable, where the latter is the null-event-augmentation of T path . Consider the regular version g of this conditional probability defined in (7.1). We prove that g is ˆT path -measurable. For this, we use Theorem A.2 for the set M ′′ of all [ G, x 0; ( xi)i] that satisfy the following properties: (xi)i≥N are distinct for some N and if F 1 is the corresponding modification of F (defined before (7.1)), then F 1 is locally-finite and LF 1 (x0) is infinite, PG-a.s. Note that M ′′ is a tail path property and P [[ G, o; anc( o)] ∈ M ′′ ] = 1. Assume [ G, x 0; ( xi)i] ∈ M ′′ and [G, x ′

> 0

; ( x′

> i

)i] ∈ M ′′ such that ( x′

> i

)i eventually coincides with ( xi)i. We should 61 prove that g[G, x 0; ( xi)i] = g[G, x 0; ( x′

> i

)i]. By defining F 1 and F ′ 

> 1

similarly to the previous case, (7.2) is still valid. One can see that LF 1 (x0)∆ LF ′ 

> 1

(x′

> 0

) < ∞

in this coupling. Now, [ G, x ′

> 0

; F ′

> 1

] is obtained from [ G, x 0; F 1] by three steps: By moving the root x0 to a point z ∈ LF 1 (x0) which is far enough, then applying a finite modification to F 1 (which is a finite modification of L(z) as well), and then moving the root again to x′

> 0

, which is in the level-set of z if z is far enough. Therefore, since A ∈ T level , one obtains that 1 A[G, x 0; F 1] = 1 A[G, x ′

> 0

; F ′

> 1

]a.s. So, (7.2) implies that g[G, x 0; ( xi)i] = g[G, x ′

> 0

; ( x′

> i

)i]. Hence, as mentioned above, Theorems A.1 and A.2 imply that g is ˆT path -measurable, and the claim is proved. It is proved in the previous part that g ∈ { 0, 1} a.s. (the proof does not rely on A ∈ T branch ). So, Lemma A.4 implies that A is in the null-event-augmentation of T path and the proof is completed. 

# 7.2 Proof of Indistinguishability 

We now conclude the proof of Theorem 3.4. 

Proof of Theorem 3.4. For the indistinguishability of components, Steps C1, C2 and C3 are established in Theorems 6.6, 7.1 and 5.4 respectively. For the indis-tinguishability of level-sets, Steps L1, L2 and L3 are established in Theorems 6.6, 7.1 and 5.11 respectively. So, the claims are implied by Theorem 1.1. 

# 7.3 Indistinguishability in CMTs on Deterministic Graphs 

In this subsection, we prove the analogous indistinguishability results for CMTs on deterministic graphs; i.e., Theorems 1.11 and 1.13. Let G be a deterministic graph or discrete space and K be a Markov kernel on G. On can define a CMT 

F with kernel K, similarly to Theorem 3.1, on the space GG (or {0, 1}G×G). Component-properties and tail component-properties are defined in [19]. We recall this definition and modify it to tail branch-properties as follows. A Borel subset A of G × GG (rather than G′∗) is called a component-property if 1A(v, f ) = 1 A(v′, f ) for every f ∈ GG, v ∈ G and v′ ∈ Cf (v). If so, A is called a tail branch-property if 1 A(v, f ) = 1 A(v, f ′) for every finite modification 

f ′ of f such that Cf (v) and Cf ′ (v) share a common ancestral branch. We extend these definitions to level-set-properties as follows. We call A a level-set-property if 1 A(v, f ) = 1 A(v′, f ) for every f ∈ GG, v ∈ G and v′ ∈ Lf (v). If so, we call A a tail level-set-property if 1 A(v, f ) = 1 A(v, f ′) for every finite modification f ′ of f in which |Lf (v)∆ Lf ′ (v)| < ∞.As mentioned in Section 1.4.5, we restrict attention to variants of tail prop-erties as follows: Let T pm G , T branch G and T level G denote the sigma-fields of tail point-map-properties, tail branch-properties and tail level-set-properties respec-tively, when the underlying graph G is fixed. By focusing on the ancestral line of v, one can also regard Ipath G and T path G , defined in Section 5, as sigma-fields on G × GG (by identifying them with their inverse images under the projection (v, f ) 7 → anc f (v)). 62 Let F be a CMT on G. Denote the distribution of F by PG (on GG). For considering all possible roots in G simultaneously, we consider the following 

σ-finite measure on G × GG:

QG := X

> v∈G

δv

!

⊗ PG.

Proposition 7.2 (Steps C2 and L2 on a Deterministic Graph) . Let F be a CMT on a deterministic graph or discrete space G and define QG as above. (i) T pm G is trivial under PG.(ii) One has T branch G = Ipath G mod QG.(iii) If F is locally finite and cycle-free a.s. and all level-sets of F are infinite a.s., then T level G = T path G mod QG.Proof. The proof is similar to that of Theorem 7.1 and we only highlight the differences. Given o ∈ G and A ∈ T branch G (resp. A ∈ T level G ), the same proof as that of Theorem 7.1 constructs another event A′ ∈ I path G (resp. A′ ∈ T path G )that is equivalent to A under P(G,o ), where P(G,o ) := δo ⊗ PG. It can be seen that the construction of A′ does not depend on the choice of o ∈ G (one needs to use QG instead of P in Theorem A.2 and extend this lemma accordingly). This implies that QG(A∆A′) = 0, which implies the claim. By combining with Theorem 1.12, one obtains: 

Corollary 7.3. In Model 2, almost every sample G of G satisfies 

T level G = T branch G = T path G = Ipath G mod QG.

The last proposition implies Theorems 1.11 and 1.13 as follows. First, we need to define the Poisson boundary and the Liouville property. The Liouville property holds if there is no nonconstant bounded K-harmonic function on G;equivalently, if Ipath G is trivial mod QG. In this case, the Poisson boundary can be defined to have only one point. The general case is defined as follows, which is a slight generalization of the definition in Section 14.3 of [27] (by removing the assumption of irreducibility). See e.g., [21] for a more general treatment. 

Definition 7.4 (Poisson Boundary) . Let K be a transient Markov kernel on a countable set G. Let μ be an arbitrary probability measure on G with full support. Fix a finite or countable dense sequence of events A1, A 2, . . . in Ipath G .Here, dense is meant with respect to the pseudo-metric d(A, B ) := Pμ [A∆B], where Pμ := P 

> v∈G

μ(v)Pv and Pv is the distribution of the Markov chain with kernel K started from v (the topology of this metric does not depend on the choice of μ). 15 The Poisson boundary is the quotient of GN∪{ 0} under the equivalence relation ( xn)n ∼ (yn)n ⇐⇒ ∀i : 1 Ai (( xn)n) = 1 Ai (( yn)n), and equipped with the quotient sigma-field.        

> 15 Equivalently, A1, A 2, . . . is dense in the subset Ipath Gof the measure algebra of GN∪{ 0}.

63 The choice of the dense set A1, A 2, . . . results in various realizations of the Poisson boundary, but all such realizations are equivalent in some sense, see [27]. Note that, for every initial point v ∈ G, the probability measure Pv induces a probability measure on the Poisson boundary. These probability measures might not be equivalent in the non-irreducible case. However, Pμ induces a probability measure on the Poisson boundary whose equivalence class does not depend on the choice of μ. Also, after adding and removing some null sets of boundary points, one may regard the Poisson boundary as the topological boundary of G

in some compactification of G; see e.g., Remark 14.32 of [27]. Then, the Markov chain converges to a point of the boundary a.s. in the topological sense. As an example, note that the 3-regular tree has a nontrivial Poisson bound-ary. So, the corresponding coalescing random walks model (Theorem 3.11) has distinguishable components. Here, it is important that configurations are not considered up to graph-isomorphisms. Otherwise, the components would be indistinguishable as discussed in Section 3.2.4. 

Example 7.5 (A Non-Liouville Example) . Let G be deterministic and consider the coalescing simple random walk model on G′ := G×Z (Theorem 3.11). It can be seen that the invariant sigma-field of the space-time walk is determined by the tail sigma-field of the walk in G. For instance, let k ≥ 3 and G := G1 ∪ G2,where G1 := Z{1,...,k } and G2 := Z{4,...,k +3 }, regarded as subgraphs of the lattice 

Zk+3 . It can be seen that the simple random walk lies eventually in one of G1

and G2 a.s. It is also known that the tail sigma-field of the simple random walk in Gi is determined by the parity of the starting point. Hence, a version of the Poisson boundary of the space-time walk in G′ has exactly 4 points (determined by parity and by whether the walk eventually lies in G1 or G2). These 4 points distinguish the components of the coalescing simple random walks, which has infinitely many components.. 

Proof of Theorem 1.11 (For CMTs). In the construction of the Poisson bound-ary mentioned above, every event in Ipath G is equivalent to (the inverse image of) some measurable subset of the Poisson boundary (this is analogous to Step C3). So, the claim is directly implied by Theorem 7.2. For k-tuples of components, the proof is similar and we avoid repeating all arguments (see Theorem 1.2 of [19]). We only remark that the definition of component-properties and tail branch-properties can be extended to k-tuples straightforwardly. The sigma-fields Ipath G and T path G can also be extended to 

k-tuples of path. Finally, Theorem 7.2 can be extended with the same proof, which implies the claim. 

Proof of Theorem 1.13. Assume that T path G = Ipath G (by Theorem 1.12, almost every sample ( G, o ) of Model 2 satisfies this property). If ( G, o ) is such a sample and A ∈ T level G is arbitrary, then Theorem 7.2 implies that A is equivalent to some A′ ∈ I path G mod QG. This implies (i). The claim of (ii) is also implied by the fact that all level-sets of a given component of F correspond to a common boundary point in the Poisson boundary. 64 8 Qualitative Properties of the Connected Com-ponents of CMTs 

In this section, we prove the results announced in Section 8 regarding connect-edness and one-endedness. The proofs rely on Section 5. 

Proof of Theorem 1.4. We may assume that [ G, o] is ergodic and the cycle-free condition fails a.s. Given l ∈ N and ϵ > 0, let S := {y ∈ G : Kl(y, y ) ≥ ϵ}. One might choose l and ϵ such that P [S̸ = ∅] > 0, and hence, S̸ = ∅ a.s. If ( Xn)n

is a Markov chain on G starting from o and with kernel K, then Theorem 5.4 implies that Xn ∈ S for infinitely many indices n a.s. The idea is that, in each visit to S, a cycle is created with probability at least ϵ. This is made precise as follows. Let τ0 be the first n such that Xn ∈ S. Inductively, let τi+1 be the first 

n ≥ τi + l such that Xn ∈ S. One has ∀i : τi < ∞ a.s. By the definition of S, one obtains P [Xτi+l = Xτi |[G, o; ( Xn)n≤τi ] ] ≥ ϵ. This implies that 

∃i : Xτi+l = Xτi a.s. Since anc( o) has the same distribution as ( Xn)n until the first self-intersection, one obtains that anc( F ) contains a cycle a.s. So, the claim is implied by Theorem 2.10. 

Definition 8.1. Let G be a sample that satisfies the conditions of Model 1. Define the reachability relation ≤ on G as follows: For u, v ∈ G, we say 

u ≤ v when gK (G, x, y ) = P 

> n≥0

Kn(u, v ) = PG [v ∈ anc( u)] > 0, where the equality is implied by the cycle-free condition. This condition also implies that 

≤ is a partial order. Define the upper cones and the lower cones as {· ≥ 

y} = {z ∈ G : z ≥ y} and {· ≤ y} = {z ∈ G : z ≤ y}. Define {· > y } and 

{· < y } similarly. We also need update-tolerance , defined as follows. This is similar to insertion-tolerance (see e.g., [28]) and the update-tolerance of the uniform spanning forest defined in [20], but we define update-tolerance using finite modifications and prove it by a coupling method. 

Definition 8.2. Given a graph G, a function f : G → G is called ( K-) admissi-ble if K(G, v, f (v)) > 0 for all v ∈ G. Also, an admissible finite modification 

of f means another admissible function f ′ : G → G such that |{ f̸ = f ′}| < ∞.Obviously, almost every sample of [ G, o; F ] is K-admissible. 

Lemma 8.3 (Update-Tolerance) . In Model 1, let B ⊆ G ′∗ be any event such that 

P [B] = 0 . Then, almost all samples (G, o ; f ) of [G, o; F ] satisfy the following property: For all admissible finite modifications f ′ of f , one has [G, o ; f ′]̸ ∈ B.Proof. Choose n ∈ N randomly and independently with the geometric distribu-tion. Define F ′ by resampling F in Bn(o); i.e., choose F ′ 

> Bn(o)

as a copy of 

F Bn(o) independently from F (conditionally on [ G, o]) and, for all x̸ ∈ Bn(o), let F ′(x) := F (x). Then, [ G, o; F ′] has the same distribution as [ G, o; F ]. So, 65 P [G, o; F ′] ∈ B = 0. Thus, for almost every sample ( G, o ; f ) of [ G, o; F ], one has P(G,o ;f )

[G, o ; F ′] ∈ B = 0, where P(G,o ;f ) is the distribution of F ′

given ( G, o ; f ). Note that P(G,o ;f ) is supported on a countable set, which is precisely the set of admissible finite modifications of f (assuming that f is also admissible). This implies the claim. 

Proof of Theorem 1.5. We may assume that [ G, o] is ergodic. Hence, so is [G, o; F ] (Theorem 7.1). Assume the claim does not hold; i.e., with positive probability, there are at least two components, with at least one of them two-ended. By ergodicity, this happens almost surely. By update-tolerance (The-orem 8.3), almost surely, all admissible finite modifications of F satisfy this property; i.e., are cycle-free, have at least two components and have at least one two-ended component. Also, almost surely, all admissible finite modifications of F satisfy the claims of Theorem 2.10 and Model 1. Fix any sample G of G on which F and all admissible finite modifications of F satisfy the properties in the last paragraph a.s. (almost every sample is of this kind). If x is in a bi-infinite path of F , we claim that {· ≥ x} ⊆ C(x) a.s. To prove this claim, assume that it is not true. If {· ≥ x} intersects another two-ended component, then there exists an admissible finite modification of F that results in a 3-ended component, which is a contradiction. If {· ≥ x} intersects a one-ended component, then there exists a finite modification of F that results in a two-ended component with some infinite level-sets. This contradicts the claims of Theorem 2.10. Hence, it is proved that if x is in a bi-infinite path, then 

{· ≥ x} ⊆ C(x). Let H = H(G;F ) be the set of points u ∈ G such that {· ≥ u}

is entirely a subset of a two-ended component of F . Therefore, H includes all bi-infinite paths a.s. Note that H is increasing under the reachability relation; i.e., if u ∈ H and u ≤ v, then v ∈ H.Returning to [ G, o], let X be a random point of G with distribution K(o, ·)chosen independently from F . By the stationarity property of Theorem 5.1, one obtains that bP [X ∈ H] = bP [o ∈ H], where ˆP is the probability mea-sure obtained by biasing by b(o). Note that, by the monotonicity of H, the event o ∈ H is included in the event X ∈ H (after removing the null event 

K(o, X) = 0). So, the assumption b > 0 and the last equality imply that 

P [o̸ ∈ H, X ∈ H] = 0. Therefore, Theorem 2.5 gives that, almost surely, 

∀u̸ ∈ H, ∀v ∈ H : K(u, v ) = 0. Now, we see that any two-ended com-ponent is not connected to any other component in the graph with edge set 

{(x, y ) : K(x, y ) + K(y, x ) > 0}. This contradicts weak irreducibility, and the claim is proved. 

Lemma 8.4 (Infinite Path-Collision) . In Model 1, if the path-collision property (Theorem 1.6) holds a.s., then the infinite path-collision property holds a.s. as well. Proof. Let ( G, o ) be a sample of [ G, o]. By Theorem 2.5, we may assume that two Markov chains on G started from any point o′ ∈ G intersect a.s. Let ( Xn)n

and ( Y n)n be two independent Markov chains on G starting from o and with kernel K. Let i be the first integer such that z := Xi is in the image of ( Y n)n.66 For the index j in which z = Y j , the cycle-free condition implies that j is also the first index such that Y j is in the image of ( Xn)n. The strong Markov property implies that, conditionally on ( z, i, j ), the sequences ( Xn+i)n≥0 and (Y n+j )n≥0 are two independent Markov chains on G started from z. So, they intersect a.s. By repeating this process, we find infinitely many collision points a.s. 

Lemma 8.5. Let K be any cycle-free Markov kernel on a measurable space G.For x, y ∈ G, let p(x, y ) be the probability that the paths of two independent Markov chains on G with kernel K and starting from x and y do not collide. Then, p(x, y ) ≥ p(x, x )/3.Proof. Let ϵ := p(x, x ) and δ := p(x, y ). Let ( Xn)n, ( X′

> n

)n and ( Y n)n be independent Markov chains starting from x, x and y respectively. Let A be the event that the path ( Xn)n does not collide with ( X′

> n

)n. Let 0 < i ≤∞ (resp i′) be the smallest number such that Y i ∈ (Xn)n> 0 (resp. Yi′ ∈

(X′

> n

)n> 0). Let 0 < j ≤ ∞ be the smallest number such that Xj = Y i. Then, conditionally on ( Xn)n≤j and ( Y n)n≤i, the futures ( Xn)n≥j and ( Y n)n≥i of the paths are independent Markov chains with kernel K (the cycle-free assumption is important for the last conclusion). So, by letting Y ′ 

> n

:= Y n for n ≤ i and 

Y ′ 

> i+n

:= Xj+n for n ≥ 0, one obtains that ( Y ′

> n

)n has the same distribution as (Y n)n, and is independent of ( X′

> n

)n. One has P [i < ∞, A ] ≥ P [A]−P [i = ∞] = 

ϵ − δ. By symmetry of i and i′, one gets P [i < ∞, i ≤ i′, A ] ≥ (ϵ − δ)/2. The last event is contained in the event that ( Y ′

> n

)n does not collide with ( X′

> n

)n.Hence, δ ≥ (ϵ − δ)/2 and the claim is implied. 

Lemma 8.6 (Finite Collision) . In Model 1, assume that [G, o] is ergodic, and that not almost all samples of [G, o] satisfy the path-collision property. Then, in almost every sample of G, two Markov chains on G started from any two points intersect finitely often a.s. Proof. Given ϵ > 0, let S be the set of x ∈ G such that two chains started from 

x path-collide with probability at most 1 − ϵ. By the assumption, we may fix ϵ

such that S̸ = ∅ a.s. So, the triviality of Ipath (Theorem 5.4) implies that the Markov chain on G started from o hits S infinitely many times. Let ( G, o ) be a sample of Model 1 such that the Markov chain from any 

o′ ∈ G intersects S infinitely often (by Theorem 2.5, almost every sample is of this type). For x, y ∈ G, we will show that the chains ( Xn)n and ( Y n)n

on G, started from x and y respectively, path-collide finitely often a.s. Let 

t1, t 2, . . . ∈ N ∪ {∞} and s1, s 2, . . . ∈ N ∪ {∞} denote the intersection times, in increasing order, such that Xti = Y si for all i for which ti, s i < ∞. Let τ0 be the first time such that Xτ0 ∈ S. Inductively, let τm be the first time in ( τm−1, ∞]such that Xτm ∈ S and ( τm−1, τ m] ∩ (tn)n̸ = ∅ (we let τm = ∞ if no such time exists). Let im ∈ N ∪ {∞} denote the first number such that tim ∈ (τm−1, τ m](we let i0 := 0). Conditionally on the event τm < ∞ and on ( Xn)n≤τm and (Y n)n≤sim , the futures of the paths are independent Markov chains with kernel 

K (the proof of this fact is left to the reader). So, Theorem 8.5 for the points 67 Xτm and Xtim = Y sim implies that τm+1 = ∞ with conditional probability at least ϵ/ 3. This implies that ∃m : τm = ∞ a.s., and the claim is proved. We are now ready to prove Theorem 1.7. 

Proof of Theorem 1.7. (i). We should prove that two independent Markov chains started from any two points in G intersect a.s. By infinite path-collision (Theo-rem 8.4) and Theorem 2.5, we may consider a sample ( G, o ) of Model 1 in which any two Markov chains with a common starting point o′ ∈ G intersect infinitely often a.s. For x, y ∈ G, say x ∼ y if the chains started at x and y intersect infinitely often a.s. We claim that ∼ is an equivalence relation. Assume x ∼ y

and y ∼ z. Let ( Xn)n and ( Y n)n be Markov chains started from x and y

coupled after the first path-collision. Independently, let ( Y ′

> n

)n and ( Zn)n be Markov chains started from y and z coupled after the first path-collision. Since (Y n)n and ( Y ′

> n

)n are independent chains from y, they intersect infinitely a.s. Hence, by the coupling assumption, so do ( Xn)n and ( Zn)n. Since ( Xn)n and (Zn)n are independent chains started from x and z, we find that x ∼ z. So, we have proved that ∼ is an equivalence relation. Note that if PG [x ∈ anc( a)] > 0 and PG [y ∈ anc( a)] > 0 for some a ∈ G,then x ∼ y (use infinite path-collision for two chains started from a). So, the weak irreducibility condition of Model 1 implies that all points of G are equivalent. This implies the claim. (ii). Let ( G, o ) be a sample of Model 1 that satisfies the finite path-collision property of Theorem 8.6. We claim that, on this sample, F has infinitely many components a.s. It is enough to show that, for all k ∈ N, F has at least k

components a.s. For this, we construct F by the following algorithm: 

• Generate k independent Markov chains ( Xin)n, i = 1 , . . . , k from o.

• For i = 1 , . . . , k :

– For all n ≥ 0, set F (Xin) := Xin+1 . If F (Xin) is already defined, the new definition of F (Xin) replaces the previous one. 

• For all x̸ ∈ S

> i

(Xin)n, choose F (x) with distribution K(x, ·), indepen-dently. It is easy to show that F has the same distribution as the CMT with kernel K.By finite path-collision (Theorem 8.6), there exists N < ∞ such that the paths (Xin)n≥N for i = 1 , . . . , k do not intersect. This implies that X1 

> N

, . . . , XkN are in different components of F and the claim is proved. 

Proof of Theorem 1.8. The proof is similar to that of Theorem 4.1 of [28]. We may assume that [ G, o] is ergodic and F has infinitely many components a.s. (by Theorem 1.7). Let h be a factor Markov kernel 16 such that, almost surely,  

> 16 If [ G,o] is a graph with finite expected degree, one can use the simple random walk instead. But this does not work for the case of infinite expected degree, or for general discrete spaces.

68 h[G, ·, ·] is a strictly positive symmetric function on G × G (see Lemma 3.10 of [23]). For every component C of F , let α(C) be the frequency of C given by Theorem 8.7 applied to the kernel h and the constant function b′ ≡ 1 (which satisfies the balance condition by the symmetry of h). By indistinguishability (Part (i) of Theorem 3.4), all components have the same frequency. Since there are infinitely many components, one obtains that all components have zero frequency a.s. Assume the claim is false. By ergodicity, for some ϵ > 0, we have ∀x ∈ G :

PG [x ∈ C(o)] ≥ ϵ a.s. Now, Let ( Xn)n be the Markov chain on G with kernel 

h from o independent of F . Then, PG [Xn ∈ C(o)] ≥ ϵ. So, the definition of 

α and dominated convergence implies that EG [α[G, o; C(o)]] ≥ ϵ, which is a contradiction. The following lemma is an extension of Lemma 4.2 of [28] and is used in the previous proof. 

Lemma 8.7 (Cluster Frequency) . Let M be the space of all [G, o ; S], where 

(G, o ) is a rooted graph and S ⊆ G.(i) There exists a measurable function α : M → [0 , 1] that satisfies the follow-ing property: For every unimodular graph [G, o] in which E [deg( o)] < ∞,and every equivariant partition Π of G, if (Xn)n is the simple random walk on G started from o, then the frequency of visits of every element E

of Π is equal to α[G, o; E] a.s. More precisely, almost surely, 

∀E ∈ Π : α[G, o; E] = lim 

> n

1

n

> n

X

> i=1

1E (Xi).

In addition, α can be chosen such that it does not depend on the root. (ii) If the simple random walk is replaced by the Markov chain with a given factor Markov kernel h = h(G, x, y ), then the same claim holds for every unimodular graph or discrete space [G, o] such that, for some function b′

for which E [b′(o)] < ∞, almost every sample (G, o ) of [G, o] satisfies the following properties: (1) the balance condition of Model 1 for the kernel h

and the function b′, (2) the paths of two Markov chains on G started from any two points of G collide with positive probability. 

The proof of this lemma is identical to that of Lemma 4.2 of [28] and is omitted for brevity. Note that the claim does not follow from Birkhoff’s ergodic theorem since the sequence (1 E (Xi)) i is not stationary (since the element E of Π is arbitrary and is not chosen equivariantly). 

Proof of Theorem 1.9. In every sample ( G, o ) of [ G, o], construct an instance (Xn)n≥0 of the Markov chain on G with kernel K, starting from o, and inde-pendent from F (note that ( Xn)n and anc( o) have the same distribution and are independent given ( G, o )). Let bP be the distribution obtained by biasing by 69 b(o). By keeping F as a decoration and using Theorem 5.1 for ( Xn)n, under 

bP, for all i, [ G, Xi; ( Xn+i)n, F ] has the same distribution as [ G, o; ( Xn)n, F ]. By ergodic decomposition (Section 2.5), we can assume that [ G, o] is ergodic. So, [ G, o; F ] is also ergodic. So, by Theorem 1.5, we have the following two cases. 

Case 1. Assume that F is connected and two-ended a.s. Let H be the unique bi-infinite path in the graph of F . Then, H is an equivariant subset of 

G. So, by Birkhoff’s ergodic theorem, the frequency of visits of (Xn)n to H is 

bP-a.s. well defined, where the latter is defined by freq( U ) := lim 

> n

1

n

> n

X

> i=1

1U (Xi) for U ⊆ G, if the limit exists. In addition, by ergodicity (Theorem 5.4), freq( H) is constant and is equal to its expectation; i.e., freq( H) = bP[o ∈ H] =: λ a.s. Note that if Xj ∈ H, then ( Xi)i≥j cannot intersect the half-path H ∩ {· <

Xj }. Therefore, at most finitely many of the Xi’s fall in H \ anc( o). So, the last equation implies that lim n 1

> n

Pni=1 1anc( o)(Xi) = λ a.s. The bounded convergence theorem then gives that lim n 1

> n

Pni=1 P [Xi ∈ anc( o)] = λ. In other words, lim 

> n

1

n

> n

X

> i=1

E [gK (o, Xi)] = λ. (8.1) Theorem 2.5 gives that P [o ∈ H] > 0. So, the facts b > 0 and λ = bP[o ∈

H] = E b(o)1 {o∈H}

 /E [b(o)] imply that λ > 0. Therefore, (8.1) implies that 

gK (o, Xn) cannot converge to zero in probability, and the claim is proved. 

Case 2. Assume that all components of F are one-ended a.s. As in the proof of Theorem 5.4, one may extend ( Xn)n≥0 to negative times and the sequence ([ G, Xi; ( Xn+i)n∈Z, F ]) i∈Z is stationary after biasing by b(o). As a result, 

bE [gK (o, Xn)] = bE [gK (X−n, o)] .

By one-endedness, D(o) is finite a.s. This implies that, lim n→∞ 1D(o)(X−n) = 0 a.s.; i.e., lim n→∞ 1{o∈anc( X−n)} = 0 a.s. By taking expectation and using bounded convergence, one obtains that lim n→∞ bE [gK (X−n, o)] = 0. So, the last display implies that lim n→∞ bE [gK (o, Xn)] = 0. Thus, since gK (o, Xn) is a random variable in [0 , 1], it converges to zero in probability. So, the claim is proved. 

# 9 Indistinguishability in the Wired Uniform Span-ning Forest 

In Section 9.3 below, we use the method of the present paper to provide an alternative proof for the indistinguishability of the connected components of the 70 wired uniform spanning forest on unimodular graphs (Theorem 1.10 stated in Section 1.4.4). This method also gives a simple proof of tail-triviality of WUSF on deterministic graphs and its ergodicity on unimodular graphs (Theorem 9.3 in Section 9.2). The proof uses a coupling given by a generalization of the stochastic covering property , which is discussed in Section 9.1. See also Theorem 11.7, and the discussion after it, regarding the indistinguishability of level-sets of WUSF. 

# 9.1 Definitions and Basic Properties 

We briefly recall some definitions and results regarding the wired uniform span-ning forest. The reader is advised to see the main references like [8, 27] for a detailed treatment of this object and for the free uniform spanning forest. The wired uniform spanning forest ( WUSF ) is defined for every infinite locally-finite graph G. In short, WUSF( G) is the weak limit of the uniform spanning tree of G/B n(o)c, where the last notation means contracting all of the vertices of Bn(o)c to a single point, and where uniform spanning tree means the random subgraph obtained by choosing one of the spanning trees with the uniform distribution. It is proved that the limits exist and do not depend on the choice of o ∈ G. It is proved that WUSF( G) is almost surely a forest, but is not necessarily connected. Also, each component is infinite a.s. The wired uniform spanning forest satisfies the spatial Markov property :Conditioned on containing a finite set E of edges and avoiding a finite set E′

(assuming that this event has positive probability), it is distributed as E ∪

WUSF(( G \ E′)/E ). In addition, it is known that WUSF( G) is tail-trivial. The wired uniform spanning forest can be constructed by Wilson’s algorithm: If v0, v 1, . . . is an arbitrary ordering of the vertices and P is an initial subforest of 

G, in each step, choose the next vertex vi, perform a simple random walk from 

vi until hitting the previously constructed forest, and then, erase the loops. If the initial configuration is a single point, the result of Wilson’s algorithm has the same distribution as WUSF( G). If G is transient , we may also let P

be empty. In this case, the algorithm is called Wilson’s algorithm rooted at infinity . Recall that transience of G means that the simple random walk never returns to its starting point with positive probability. Otherwise, G is called 

recurrent . In the transient case, the last algorithm creates an oriented version of WUSF( G), which is denoted by OWUSF( G). In this case, we let anc( o) be the directed infinite path in OWUSF( G) starting from o, which is distributed as the loop-erased random walk starting from o.

Lemma 9.1. Let (G, o ) be a deterministic rooted transient locally-finite graph and F := OWUSF( G). Then, a version of F conditionally on anc F (o) = 

P (where P ranges over infinite simple paths in G starting from o) can be constructed by Wilson’s algorithm with initial configuration P .Proof. If we start Wilson’s algorithm rooted at infinity from o, then anc( o) is the result of the first step of the algorithm. So, the claim follows by conditioning Wilson’s algorithm on its first step. 71 Another property that we use is the stochastic covering property : For an edge e, if F 1 (resp. F 2) is a version of WUSF( G) conditioned on containing 

e (resp. avoiding e), then there exists a coupling of F 1 and F 2 such that 

|F 1∆F 2| ≤ 2. This is implied by the results of [31] (see the proof of Theorem 9.2 below). We prove a variant of this result in Theorem 9.2 below. 

Lemma 9.2. Let (G, o ) be a rooted graph and assume S is a finite subset of the edges. Assume also that, for each e ∈ S, nonempty subsets I1(e), I 2(e) ⊆ { 0, 1}

are given. For i = 1 , 2, let F i be distributed as WUSF( G) conditioned on 

1F i (e) ∈ Ii(e), ∀e ∈ S (assuming that this happens with positive probability). (i) There exists a coupling of F 1 and F 2 such that |F 1∆F 2| ≤ 2 |S| a.s. (ii) If G is transient and P is an infinite simple path starting from o that satisfies 1 ∈ I1(e) ∩ I2(e), ∀e ∈ S ∩ P , then there exists a coupling of the oriented version of F i conditioned on anc F i (o) = P (for each i = 1 , 2)with the same property. Proof. Let Ai be the event ∀e ∈ S : 1 F i (e) ∈ Ii(e). We call the function I1 on 

S valid if P [A1] > 0. This is equivalent to the condition that {e : I1(e) = {1}} 

has no cycles and G \ { e : I1(e) = {0}} has no finite connected component. (i). By the spatial Markov property, F i \ S conditioned on Ai is distributed as WUSF( Gi), where Gi is obtained by deleting the edges e ∈ S in which 

Ii(e) = {0} and contracting the edges e ∈ S in which Ii(e) = {1}.Let S′ := {e ∈ S : I1(e)̸ = I2(e)}. By induction on |S′|, we prove that there exists a coupling such that |F 1∆F 2| ≤ 2 |S′| a.s. The claim is trivial if S′ = ∅.Also, if S′ = {e0} is a single edge, the claim is implied by Proposition 2.2 and Example 5.3 of [31], combined with a subsequential weak limit. For being self-contained, we provide a direct proof of this case using monotone coupling. Let ˆGn := G/B n(o)c and let F ni be the uniform spanning tree of ˆGn conditioned on 

∀e ∈ S : 1 F ni (e) ∈ Ii(e) (for i = 1 , 2). By Rayleigh’s monotonicity principle, one can find a monotone coupling of F n 

> 1

and F n 

> 2

; in the sense that one of F ni \ { e0}

contains the other one (depending on I1(e0) and I2(e0)). Since |F n 

> 1

| = |F n 

> 2

|, one obtains that |F n 

> 1

∆F n 

> 2

| ≤ 2. By taking a subsequential limit of this coupling as 

n → ∞ , one obtains the claim (note that since the marginals of this coupling are known to converge, one can deduce tightness and the existence of a convergent subsequence). So, the base of the induction is shown. Now, suppose |S′| > 1. Choose e0 ∈ S′ and, for j = 1 , 2, let I′ 

> j

(e0) = I3−j (e0)

I′ 

> j

(e) := Ij (e) for e̸ = e0. We show at the end of the proof that e0 can be chosen such that at least one of I′ 

> 1

and I′ 

> 2

is valid (defined above), except in some trivial cases. Assume this holds. Assume also that I′ 

> 1

is valid without loss of generality. Let F ′ 

> 1

be WUSF( G) conditioned on ∀e : 1 F ′ 

> 1

(e) ∈ I′

> 1

(e). Note that 

I′ 

> 1

differs from I1 in a single edge and differs from I2 in |S′| − 1 edges. So, by the induction hypothesis, there exists a coupling of F 1 and F ′ 

> 1

such that 

F 1∆F ′ 

> 1

≤ 2, and a coupling of F ′ 

> 1

and F 2 such that F ′

> 1

∆F 2 ≤ 2 |S′| − 2. By combining these two couplings (by first sampling F ′ 

> 1

and then sampling F 1

and F 2 independently conditioned on F ′

> 1

), one finds a coupling of F 1, F ′ 

> 1

and 

F 2 such that |F 1∆F 2| ≤ 2 |S′|. This proves the induction claim. 72 It remains to show that such an e0 can be chosen except in trivial cases. If there exists e ∈ S′ such that I1(e) = {0, 1} or I2(e) = {0, 1}, then e0 := e

works. Otherwise, one may write S′ = S′ 

> 1

∪ S′

> 2

, where S′ 

> i

:= {e ∈ S′ : Ii(e) = 

{1}, I 3−i(e) = {0}} . In particular, each of S′ 

> 1

and S′ 

> 2

is a forest. If i ∈ { 1, 2}

and e ∈ S′ 

> i

can be chosen such that S′ 

> 3−i

∪ { e} is a forest, then such e0 := e

works. If that this is not the case, S′ 

> 1

and S′ 

> 2

are edge-disjoint forests with the same vertex sets and the same connected components. Thus, for j = 1 , 2, 

F j is distributed as WUSF( G) conditioned on containing S′ 

> j

(the condition of avoiding S′ 

> 3−j

is redundant). Similarly to the case |S′| = 1, there exists a coupling of F j and WUSF( G) such that their symmetric difference has at most 2 S′ 

> j

edges. By combining these couplings, one finds a coupling of F 1 and F 2

such that |F 1∆F 2| ≤ 2 |S′

> 1

| + 2 |S′

> 2

| = 2 |S′|. This proves the claim. (ii). Let ˆGn := \Bn(o)c and let z be its unique vertex out of Bn(o). Since G

is transient, Wilson’s algorithm in G rooted at infinity is the limit of Wilson’s algorithm in ˆGn rooted at zn. So, Theorem 9.1 implies that, if Pn is the path P

stopped at the first exit from Bn(o), then OWUSF( G) conditioned on anc( o) = 

P is the limit of WUSF( Gn) conditioned on containing Pn. Now, the claim is implied by taking a subsequential limit of the coupling in ˆGn constructed in Part (i). If [ G, o] is unimodular (resp. ergodic), then [ G, o; WUSF( G)] is also uni-modular (resp. ergodic) (a proof of the last ergodicity is given in Theorem 9.3 below). Also, the number of ends of WUSF( G) has been recently fully charac-terized recently as follows (see [11]): If G is transient (e.g., if it has infinitely many ends), then every component of WUSF( G) is one-ended a.s. If G is re-current, then WUSF( G) is connected. In this case, if G is two-ended, then WUSF( G) is connected and two-ended a.s. If G is recurrent and one-ended, which is the most difficult case, then WUSF( G) is also one-ended a.s. 

# 9.2 Ergodicity and Tail Triviality of WUSF 

Before proving indistinguishability, we use the coupling methods used in this paper to give an easy proof of the following well-known result. 

Theorem 9.3 (Ergodicity and Tail Triviality of WUSF [8]) .

(i) For every locally-finite graph G, WUSF( G) is tail trivial. (ii) One has Ipm = T pm = I mod P. As a result, if [G, o] is ergodic, then so is [G, o; WUSF( G)] .

It should be noted that, in the first part, tail events are considered in the classical sense of being invariant under finite modifications (the invariance in Theorem 6.1 is not assumed). 

Proof. The proof of (i) is similar to (ii) and is skipped for brevity. It is proved in part (i) of Theorem 6.6 that Ipm = T pm mod P. So, we only need to prove that T pm = I mod P (this is analogous to Theorem 7.1 regarding CMTs). 73 Let A ∈ T pm be a tail property of [ G, o; WUSF( G)]. We claim that A

is independent from itself conditionally on [ G, o]; i.e., P [A |G, o ] ∈ { 0, 1} a.s. For this, it is enough to prove that for every R < ∞, A is independent from WUSF( G) BR(o) conditionally on [ G, o]. Equivalently, for every event B that depends only on G, o and WUSF( G) BR(o), we should prove 

P [A ∩ B |G, o ] = P [A |G, o ] · P [B |G, o ] , a.s. Let ( G, o ) be a sample of [ G, o]. We construct a coupling of two copies ( F 1, F 2)of WUSF( G) as follows. First, construct F 1 and F 2 independently. Then, keep 

F 2 BR(o) and erase the rest of F 2. By Theorem 9.2, one can resample the rest of F 2 coupled with F 1 such that F 1∆F 2 is finite a.s. (see Theorem 9.2). We denote the distribution of this coupling by the same notation P(G,o ).For i = 1 , 2, let Ai (resp. Bi) be the event that [ G, o ; F i] ∈ A (resp. ∈ B). By construction, A1 is independent from B2 in the above coupling. Since F 1∆F 2 is finite a.s. and A is a tail point-map-property, P(G,o ) [A1∆A2] = 0. This implies that A2 is independent from B2. Since F 2 is distributed as WUSF( G), the above claim is proved. So, P [A |G, o ] ∈ { 0, 1} a.s. Since A ∈ T pm ⊆ I pm , one can show that there exists a version of P [A |G, o ]that does not depend on the root. For this, consider the version g[G, x ] := 

P [[ G, x ; WUSF( G)] ∈ A]. By using the same instance of WUSF( G) for different 

x ∈ G, one obtains that g depends only on G. We have also proved that 

g ∈ { 0, 1} a.s. Therefore, Lemma A.4 implies that A is in the null-event-augmentation of I and the claim is proved. 

# 9.3 Indistinguishability of Components 

In this section, we provide the alternative proof of Theorem 1.10 based on the method of Section 1.3.1. If G is recurrent, then WUSF( G) is connected and there is nothing to prove. So, we assume that G is transient. Hence, [18] implies that WUSF( G) is one-ended a.s. So, as mentioned in Section 1.2, one may regard WUSF( G) as a point-map. Indeed, there is a unique way to orient the edges of WUSF towards the ends. So, it is enough to prove Theorem 1.10 for OWUSF. We will prove the theorem by conditioning on the infinite path from the origin (i.e., the ancestral line) according to the steps sketched in the introduction. We need the following coupling, which is based on Theorem 9.2. 

Lemma 9.4. In the setting of Theorem 9.1, given 0 ≤ R < ∞, there exists a coupling (F 1, F 2) of two copies of OWUSF( G) such that: (i) Each F i has the same law as OWUSF( G).(ii) anc F 1 (o) = anc F 2 (o) a.s. (iii) Conditioned on anc F 1 (o), F 1 is independent from F 2 BR(o).(iv) |F 1∆F 2| ≤ 2 E BR(o) a.s., where E is the edge set of G.

74 It should be noted that we do not require the distribution of ( F 1, F 2) in this lemma to be a measurable and equivariant function of ( G, o ). Having the coupling on any single ( G, o ) is sufficient. 

Proof. For every simple path P in G, let μP be the distribution of the random forest constructed by Wilson’s algorithm with initial configuration P .We construct the coupling step by step. In the beginning, the status of every edge is undetermined. Construct F distributed as OWUSF( G). Include 

P := anc F (o) in both F 1 and F 2. Then, given P , construct F 1 BR(o) dis-tributed as the conditional law of F BR(o) conditionally on anc F (o) (i.e., using the distribution μP defined above). Construct F 2 BR(o) with the same distri-bution, but independently from F 1 BR(o) (conditionally on P ). For i = 1 , 2, let νi be the distribution of OWUSF( G) conditioned on the event that its restriction to BR(o) is identical to F i BR(o), and that anc( o) = P

(P and F i BR(o) are constructed in the previous step and are fixed here). Let 

S be the set of edges in BR(o). By Theorem 9.2, there exists a coupling of ν1

and ν2 such that their finite difference is at most 2 |S| a.s. Construct the rest of F 1 and F 2 by this coupling. By construction, the conditions (i), (ii) and (iv) are satisfied. In the above coupling, note that the marginal distribution of F 1 (given the previous steps; i.e., given anc( o)) does not depend on F 2 BR(o). This implies that, once anc( o)is given, F 1 is independent from F 2 BR(o). So, (iii) holds and the claim is proved. We now proceed towards proving Theorem 1.10. First, we provide a short proof for WUSF( Zd) using the method of Section 4. 

Proof of Theorem 1.10 (for the case Zd). More general than Zd, we assume that [G, o] is a unimodular random graph that satisfies the shift-coupling property a.s. (Theorem 4.1). The proof is similar to that of Theorem 4.2, and hence, we only sketch the proof. We may assume transience and ergodicity. Note that this implies a similar shift-coupling property for the loop-erased random walk. By Step C1 (Theorem 6.6), it is enough to prove that every tail branch-property A is trivial. Let F := OWUSF( G). Similarly to the proof of Theo-rem 4.2, construct a copy F ′ of the F as follows: Given n ∈ N and a sample (G, o ), construct F ′ 

> Bn(o)

independently from F . Next, construct anc F ′ (o) cou-pled with F such that it shift-couples with anc F (o). Then, similarly to The-orem 9.4, one can construct the rest of F ′ such that F ′∆F < ∞. By this coupling, one can show that A is independent from [ G, o; F Bn(o)] for all n, and hence, A is independent from itself conditionally on [ G, o]. This proves that 

h(G, o ) := PG [[ G, o, F ] ∈ A] ∈ { 0, 1} for almost every sample ( G, o ) of [ G, o]. It can be shown that either h(G, ·) ≡ 0 or h(G, ·) ≡ 1. Then, ergodicity implies that A is trivial, and the claim is proved. 75 For the general case, we prove Steps C2 and C3 in the next lemmas. In what follows, since the components are one-ended a.s., the reader might replace 

T branch with T comp . However, since some of the lemmas do not need unimodu-larity, we keep using T branch for having more general formulations. 

Lemma 9.5 (Step C2.1) . Let [G, o] be a transient random rooted graph and 

F = OWUSF( G). Then, Every tail branch-property A ∈ T branch (resp. every tail level-set-property A ∈ T level ) is independent from itself conditionally on 

[G, o; anc F (o)] ; i.e., P [A |[G, o; anc F (o)] ] ∈ { 0, 1} a.s. 

Here, we do neither require unimodularity nor one-endedness. 

Proof. To prove the claim, it is enough to prove that for every R ≥ 0, A is independent from [ G, o; F BR(o)] conditionally on [ G, o; anc( o)]. Equivalently, for every event B that depends only on [ G, o; F BR(o)], we should prove 

P [A ∩ B |G, o; anc( o) ] = P [A |G, o; anc( o) ] · P [B |G, o; anc( o) ] , a.s. By Theorem 9.1, a version of the conditional distribution of [ G, o; F ] condition-ally on [ G, o; anc( o)] can be given by a version of Wilson’s algorithm. Denote the latter by P(G,o ;P ) for every sample ( G, o ; P ) of [ G, o; anc( o)]; i.e., P(G,o ;P ) is the distribution of OWUSF( G) conditioned on anc( o) = P . Hence, it is enough to prove that, for almost every sample ( G, o ; P ), 

P(G,o ;P ) [A ∩ B] = P(G,o ;P ) [A] · P(G,o ;P ) [B] . (9.1) Consider the coupling ( F 1, F 2) of two copies of OWUSF( G) given by Theo-rem 9.4. Let Ai (resp. Bi) be the event that [ G, o ; F i] ∈ A (resp. ∈ B). By part (iii) of Theorem 9.4, A1 is independent from B2 under P(G,o ;P ). Parts (ii) and (iv) of Theorem 9.4 imply that CF 1 (o) has a common ancestral branch with CF 2 (o) and |LF 1 (o)∆ LF 2 (o)| < ∞. Therefore, since A is a tail branch-property (resp. tail level-set-property), P(G,o ;P ) [A1∆A2] = 0. This implies that 

A2 is independent from B2. Finally, (9.1) is implied by part (i) of Theorem 9.4. So, the claim is proved. 

Lemma 9.6 (Step C2.2) . In the setting of Theorem 9.5, (i) If A ∈ T branch is a tail branch-property, then P [A |G, o; anc F (o) ] is mea-surable with respect to the null-event-augmentation of Ipath .(ii) If, in addition, the level-set of o in OWUSF( G) is infinite a.s. and A ∈T level is a tail level-set-property, then P [A |G, o; anc F (o) ] is measurable with respect to the null-event-augmentation of T path .Proof. Assume ( G, o ; ( xi)i≥0) and k ≥ 0 are given such that G is transient, 

x0 = o and ( xi)i≥k is a simple path in G (i.e., only traverses the edges and visits every vertex at most once). Let P(G,o ;( xi)i,k ) be the distribution of OWUSF( G)conditioned on ∀i ≥ k : ( xi, x i+1 ) ∈ F , as described in Theorem 9.1 by a version of Wilson’s algorithm. 76 (ii). Define g as follows. Let M ′ be the set of [ G, x 0; ( xi)i≥0] such that G is transient, ( xi)i≥k is a simple path in G for some k, and that P(G,x 0;( xi)i,k )-almost surely, the level-set of x0 in the forest is infinite. By Theorem 9.4, one can see that the last condition does not depend on k, and hence, M ′ ∈ T path . Let g

be zero outside M ′. Given [ G, x 0; ( xi)i] ∈ M ′, let k be the smallest number such that ( xi)i≥k is a simple path and define g[G, x 0; ( xi)i] := P(G,x 0;( xi)i,k ) [A]. The construction shows that g is a version of P [A |G, o; anc F (o) ]. We should prove that g is ˆT path -measurable (In fact, since g is zero outside M ′, the next arguments imply ghat g is T path -measurable). Let G be deterministic and ( xi)i and ( x′

> i

)i be two sequences in G such that [G, x 0; ( xi)i] ∈ M ′ and [ G, x ′

> 0

; ( x′

> i

)i] ∈ M ′. Assume also that ∀i ≥ N : xi = x′

> i

,for some N (but x0 might be different from x′

> 0

). By Theorems A.1 and A.2, it is enough to prove that g[G, x 0; ( xi)i] = g[G, x ′

> 0

; ( x′

> i

)i]. We prove this assuming that ( xi)i and ( x′

> i

)i are simple paths for simplicity. The general case is similar. Let F (resp. F ′) denote OWUSF( G) conditioned on ( xi, x i+1 ) ∈ F , ∀i (resp. (x′

> i

, x ′

> i+1

) ∈ F ′, ∀i). We couple F and F ′ as follows. Let S be the set of edges 

{(xi, x i+1 ) : 0 ≤ i < N } ∪ { (x′

> i

, x ′

> i+1

) : 0 ≤ i < N } and let o := xN = x′ 

> N

.By Theorem 9.4, there exists a coupling of F and F ′ such that F ∆F ′ < ∞

a.s. In this case, since anc F (x0) and anc F ′ (x′

> 0

) eventually coincide, one also has LF (x0)∆ LF ′ (x′

> 0

) < ∞. Choose z ∈ LF (x0) ∩ LF ′ (x′

> 0

) far enough such that anc F (z) = anc F ′ (z) (which exists a.s. since the level-set of x0 is infinite a.s. by assumption). Since A is a level-set-property, one has 1 A[G, x 0; F ] = 1 A[G, z ; F ]and 1 A[G, x ′

> 0

, F ′] = 1 A[G, z ; F ′]. Also, since A is a tail level-set-property, one gets 1 A[G, z ; F ] = 1 A[G, z ; F ′]. This implies that 1 A[G, x 0; F ] = 1 A[G, x ′

> 0

; F ′]. Therefore, g[G, x 0; ( xi)i] = g[G, x ′

> 0

; ( x′

> i

)i] as desired. So, we have proved that g

is ˆT path -measurable. (i). Define M ′ and g similarly to the previous case, but without requiring that the level-set of o is infinite. One can prove similarly that, in almost every sample ( G, o ), if ( xi)i and ( x′

> i

)i are simple paths that shift-couple (but maybe 

x0̸ = x′

> 0

), then g[G, x 0; ( xi)i] = g[G, x ′

> 0

; ( x′

> i

)i]. So, Theorems A.1 and A.2 imply that g is ˆIpath -measurable. 

Corollary 9.7 (Step C2 and Step L2) . In the setting of Theorem 9.5, one has T branch = Ipath mod P. If, in addition, the level-set of o in OWUSF( G) is infinite a.s., then T level = T path mod P.

Proof. The inclusions Ipath ⊆ T comp and T path ⊆ T level mod P are proved in Theorem 6.5. By Theorem A.4, the converses are implies by Theorems 9.5 and 9.6. 

Lemma 9.8 (Step C3) . Let [G, o] be an ergodic transient unimodular graph and (Xn)n be the loop-erased random walk starting from o. If E [deg( o)] < ∞,then [G, o; ( Xn)n] has trivial invariant sigma-field; i.e., Ipath is trivial. 

It should be noted that, despite Theorem 5.1, [ G, o; ( Xn)n] is not necessar-ily stationary here, even after any biasing. In fact, its distribution might be 77 non-absolutely-continuous with respect to that of [ G, X1; ( Xn+1 )n] (see Theo-rem 2.16). 

Proof. Let ( Y n)n be the simple random walk starting from o. Let A ∈ I path 

be arbitrary. Let B0 be the set of [ G, o, (xi)i] such that ( xi)i is a sequence starting from o and d(o, x i) → ∞ . Let B ⊆ B0 be the event that B0 holds and LE( xi)i ∈ A, where LE( ·) denotes the loop-erasure procedure. One has 

P [[ G, o; ( Y i)i] ∈ B] = P [[ G, o; ( Xn)n] ∈ A]. We claim that B ∈ I path . For this, since B0 ∈ I path , it is enough the prove that if ( yi)i and ( y′

> i

)i are sequences in G that shift-couple and d(y0, y i) → ∞ , then 1 B [G, y 0; ( yi)i] = 1 B [G, y ′

> 0

; ( y′

> i

)i]. The latter is equivalent to 1 A[G, y 0; LE( yi)i] = 1 A[G, y ′

> 0

; L E(y′

> i

)i]. The reader can verify that LE( yi)i shift-couples with LE( y′

> i

)i, and so, the last claim follows from the assumption A ∈ I path . So, we have shown that B ∈ I path . By Theorem 5.4, one obtains P [[ G, o; ( Y i)i] ∈ B] ∈ { 0, 1}. So, we have proved that P [[ G, o; anc( o)] ∈ A] ∈ { 0, 1} and the claim is proved. By combining what we have proved, one can complete the proofs of Theo-rem 1.10 and the WUSF case of Theorem 1.11 as follows. 

Proof of Theorem 1.10 (General Case). We may assume that [ G, o] is ergodic. As mentioned, in the recurrent case, WUSF( G) is connected and there is nothing to prove. So, assume that G is transient a.s. In particular, anc( o) is well defined and has the same distribution as the loop-erased random walk (given a realization of the rooted graph). Theorem 9.7 and Theorem 9.8 proved Steps C2 and C3 respectively. So, the claim is implied by Theorem 1.1. 

Proof of Theorem 1.11 (WUSF Case). Similarly to the case of CMTs (see the proof of Theorem 7.2), the proof is the same as that of Step C2 in the proof of Theorem 1.10. We only highlight the differences here (see the proof of Theorem 7.2 for more details). Given an event A ∈ T branch G and o ∈ G,the same proof as that of Theorem 9.7 constructs an event A′ ∈ I path G such that P(G,o ) [A∆A′] = 0, where P(G,o ) := δo ⊗ PG and PG is the distribution of WUSF( G). It can be seen that the construction of A′ does not depend on 

o. This implies that QG[A∆A′] = 0, which proves the claim. The claim for 

k-tuples of components can also be proved similarly. 

# 10 Models on Bernoulli and Poisson Point Pro-cesses 

In this section, we generalize Models 1 and 2 to cover the examples based on the Bernoulli or Poisson point process, as mentioned in Section 1.4.1. The main goal is to prove indistinguishability in these models (Theorem 1.2) and their one-endedness. The main examples are provided first in Section 10.1. Then, indistinguishability is proved for two specific discrete models in Section 10.2. 78 Based on the ideas in this proof, the generalizations of Models 1 and 2 are provided in Sections 10.3 and 10.4. 

# 10.1 Main Examples 

As alluded to in Section 1.2, there are several point-maps studied in the litera-ture, which are built on the points of a Bernoulli or Poisson point process. We generalize these models in the following examples, which are the main aims of this section. 

Example 10.1 (Generalized Howard’s Model) . Let [ G, o] be an infinite uni-modular graph such that G is a transitive graph a.s. Let Φ be a Bernoulli point process on G′ := Z × G. For each point ( t, x ) ∈ Φ, let F ′(t, x ) be the point of the form ( t + 1 , y ) ∈ Φ that is closest to ( t, x ). If there are ties, choose one of them randomly and independently using i.i.d. marks on G′ × G′ (consider the mark of (( t, x ), (t + 1 , y ))). This model was introduced in the case G = Zd

in [14], based on river models, with the goal of studying their empirical/scaling limit properties. It was also shown that F ′ is one-ended a.s. for every d, but connected only for d = 2 , 3. Note that this model does not satisfy the weak aperiodicity condition. 

Example 10.2 (Discrete Strip Point-Map) . Let [ G, o] be an infinite unimodular graph such that E [deg( o)] < ∞. Let Φ be a Bernoulli point process on G′ := 

Z×G. For ( t, x ) ∈ Φ, let F ′(t, x ) be the point of Φ in the strip [ t+1 , ∞)×B1(x)with the minimum first coordinate (choose among the ties randomly using i.i.d. marks on G′ × G′). As a variant, one may choose F ′(x) as the first point in the cone {(t′, x ′) : |x′ − x| < t ′ − t}.

Example 10.3 (Generalized Strip Point-Map) . Let [ G, o, μ] be either the Eu-clidean Rd or the hyperbolic space Hd, equipped with the volume measure (or more generally, any unimodular random measured metric space with some con-ditions, see Theorem 10.10). Let Φ be a Poisson point process in R × G. For each ( t, x ) ∈ Φ, let F Φ(t, x ) be the point of Φ in the strip ( t, ∞) × B1(x) with the minimum first coordinate. One may also replace the strip by a cone as in Theorem 10.2. This model is a space-time version of a particle process, which in the case G = R was introduced in [12]. It was also shown that F Φ is connected and one-ended in this case. The models mentioned above are point-maps on Φ which are clearly cycle-free. Hence, an oriented forest is obtained in each model and one can consider its connected components and level-sets. The one-endedness of these models will be proved in Section 10.2 and the rest of the required conditions (see Models 3 to 6 below) will be verified in Theorems 10.7 and 10.10. In the last examples, the forest is constructed without additional random-ness, except for breaking the ties (but we will allow additional randomness in the next models). Hence, given Φ, the balance condition of Model 1 is violated. Nevertheless, we will leverage the randomness of Φ in order to prove the three 79 steps of Sections 1.3.1 and 1.3.2 and to prove indistinguishability of components and level-sets. 

# 10.2 Indistinguishability in Howard’s Model and the Dis-crete Strip Point-Map 

Before introducing general models, we present the proof of indistinguishability in the generalized Howard’s model and the discrete strip point-map (Theorems 10.1 and 10.2). The proof shows the main ideas for defining the general models (Models 3 to 6). The general Bernoulli case is proved with exactly the same proof. The notion of indistinguishability is defined similarly to Theorem 2.13 as follows. Let ˜G∗ be the space of all [ G, o ; φ, m ], where ( G, o ) is a rooted graph or discrete space (possibly having marks if needed), φ is a subset of G and m : G ×

G → [0 , 1] is a marking of pairs of points (one may consider more general types of marks in similar models). This space is Polish with a topology similar to that of G∗ (see [22]). In the above examples, a random element [ G, o; Φ , m] of ˜G∗ is given and a function F ′ : φ → φ is constructed on almost all samples ( G, o ; φ, m )without additional randomness. The notion of component-properties and 

level-set-properties can be defined similarly to Theorem 2.12 for events A ⊆

˜G∗. This leads to the notion of indistinguishability as in Theorem 2.13. 

Proof of Theorem 1.2 (Howard’s Model and Discrete Strip Point-Map). The proof of indistinguishability in these models is similar to the analogous proof for CMTs (Theorem 3.4) and we only highlight the differences. Note that in these exam-ples, the graph under study is G′ := Z × G rooted at o′ := (0 , o). First, we prove one-endedness. If the claim is false, one can prove similarly to Theorem 1.5 (using update-tolerance) that, with positive probability, there is a single connected component and is two-ended. Let P be the unique bi-infinite path in the graph of F ′. Now, considering the partition {{ t} × G : t ∈ Z} of 

G′, the path P selects at most one point from each element of the partition. This contradicts the mass transport principle, see the no infinite/finite inclusion lemma (Lemma 2.9) of [4]. So, one-endedness is proved. We start by Steps Step C3 and L3. Consider a sample G and x′ := ( t, x ) ∈

G′ := Z × G. Let PG denote the distribution of (Φ , m) when G is fixed. Given that x′ ∈ Φ, we construct F ′(x′) as follows by revealing Φ and m partially until a stopping time. For the discrete strip point-map, reveal Φ in the vertical sections {t + u} × B1(x), u = 1 , 2, . . . one by one until finding a point of Φ. Then, reveal m(x′, ·) on ties. For Howard’s model, reveal Φ on {t + 1 } × Bn(x), 

n = 0 , 1, . . . one by one until finding a point of Φ and then reveal m on the ties. The important property is that, conditionally on the revealed set S(x′), the distribution of the unrevealed data is unchanged ( S(x′) can be regarded as a subset of the disjoint union of G′ and G′×G′). This is a property of stopping sets ,which is an important notion in probability theory and is discussed in Section B (see Theorem B.2). In addition, S(F ′(x′)) (i.e., the data needed to be revealed for constructing F ′(2) (x′)) is completely disjoint from S(x′). Continuing by 80 induction, one obtains that anc( x′) := anc F ′ (x′) is a Markov chain on Z × G

(under PG). The kernel of this Markov chain is 

K(x′, B ) := K(G, x ′, B ) := PG

F ′(x′) ∈ B |x′ ∈ Φ  ,

for x′ = ( t, x ) ∈ G′ and B ⊆ G′. In the discrete strip point-map, one can check that K balances the function b(t, x ) := deg G(x) + 1, where deg G(x) is the degree of x in G (see Theorem 10.7 below for the proof of this claim). In the generalized Howard model, leveraging the fact that G is transitive a.s., K

balances the function b ≡ 1 (see Theorem 10.7 again for the proof). Therefore, in both models, Theorem 5.4 implies that [ G′, o′; anc( o′)] (conditionally on o′ ∈

Φ) is ergodic. In addition, for the discrete strip point-map, K satisfies the weak aperiodicity condition of Model 2. Therefore, Theorem 5.11 implies that [G′, o′; anc( o′)] (conditionally on o′ ∈ Φ) is tail-trivial. For Howard’s model, the weak aperiodicity condition is not satisfied, but the trick in Theorem 3.11 proves the tail-triviality. This establishes Steps C3 and L3 in both models. For Steps C1 and L1, we need to defined tail branch/level-set properties. This can be done similarly to Theorems 6.1 and 6.2 leveraging finite modifica-tions of ( φ, m ) that result in a finite modification of F ′. Indeed, by the mass transport principle, one can show that every data lies in at most finitely many sets S(x) a.s. (this will be proved rigorously in Theorem 10.6 below). This implies that a finite modification of (Φ , m) results in a finite modification of 

F ′ a.s. In the proof of Theorem 6.6, in the definitions of M ′ and M ′′ , add the condition that the sets ( S(x)) x∈G have no infinite overlap. Now, the proof of Theorem 6.6 works word by word. So, Steps C1 and L1 are established. For Steps C2 and L2, we modify the proof of Theorem 7.1 as follows. Assume 

A is a tail branch-property (resp. a tail level-set-property). To prove that A is equivalent to a shift-invariant (resp. tail) path property (of [ G′, o′; anc( o′)]), we will construct a version of the conditional distribution of (Φ , m) given [G′, o′; anc( o′)]. Assume ( G′, o ′; ( x′

> i

)i) is given, where G′ = Z×G and o′ = (0 , o ). Let N be the smallest integer such that ( x′

> i

)i≥N are distinct and ( S(x′

> i

)) i≥N are pairwise disjoint conditionally on F ′(x′

> i

) = x′

> i+1

, PG-a.s., assuming in addi-tion that PG

F ′(x′

> i

) = x′

> i+1

 > 0 for all i ≥ N . Assume N < ∞. Let Ψ i be an independent copy of (Φ , m) S(x′ 

> i)

conditionally on F ′(x′

> i

) = x′

> i+1

. Do this construction such that (Φ , m), Ψ1, Ψ2, . . . are independent. Let (Φ 1, m1) be ob-tained from (Φ , m) by replacing (Φ , m) with Ψ i inside S′ 

> i

for all i ≥ N , where 

S′ 

> i

:= S(x′

> i

, Ψi) is the analogue of S(x′

> i

) when Φ is replaced by Ψ i. The stopping set properties guarantee that S(x′

> i

, (Φ 1, m1)) = S′ 

> i

and F ′(x′

> i

, (Φ 1, m1)) = x′

> i+1

for i ≥ N a.s. In addition, one can see that (Φ 1, m1) is a regular conditional version of (Φ , m) conditioned on anc( o′) = ( x′

> i

)i (for this, one should use Theo-rem B.2 for the nested sequence of stopping sets Sni=1 S(F ′(i)(o′)), n = 1 , 2, . . . 

and take the limit). In addition, (Φ 1, m1) is coupled with (Φ , m) in such a way that they are identical outside ∪iS′

> i

.Let M ′ be the set of all [ G′, o ′; ( x′

> i

)i] that satisfy the conditions mentioned in the previous paragraph, plus the condition that the sets ( S(y′)) y′∈G′ have no infinite overlap. Define M ′′ similarly by the additional assumption that 81 both F ′(Φ , m) := F ′ and F ′(Φ 1, m1) are locally-finite and their level-sets containing o′ are infinite, PG′ -a.s. Note that M ′ ∈ I path , M ′′ ∈ T path and 

P [G′, o′; anc( o′)] ∈ M ′ = P [G′, o′; anc( o′)] ∈ M ′′  = 1. Now, assume [ G′, o ′; ( x′

> i

)i] is in M ′ (resp. M ′′ ) and (˜ x′

> i

)i is another sequence in G′ that shift-couples (resp. eventually coincides) with ( x′

> i

)i. Define ( ˜Φ1, ˜m1)similarly to (Φ 1, m1) using the same source of randomness as that used in Ψ i (as soon as the sequences couple). In this construction, ( ˜Φ1, ˜m1) is a finite modifica-tion of (Φ 1, m1) a.s. and one can continue the proof of Theorem 7.1 to show that 

g ∈ ˆIpath (resp. g ∈ ˆT path ), where g[G′, x ′

> 0

; ( x′

> i

)i] := PG′ [[ G′, x ′

> 0

; Φ 1, m1] ∈ A]. Finally, to prove that g ∈ { 0, 1} in the proof of Theorem 7.1, we construct a copy ( ˆΦ1, ˆm1) of (Φ 1, m1), coupled with itself as follows: Given n > 0, re-sample the first n steps of the construction of (Φ 1, m1) independently from the previous construction, but leave the steps n + 1 , n + 2 , . . . intact. Call the re-sulting sets ( ˆS′

> i

)i, which satisfy ˆS′ 

> n+i

= S′

> n+i

, ∀i. Then, construct the rest of ( ˆΦ1, ˆm1) in Bn(o′) (i.e., except the already constructed parts of ( ˆΦ1, ˆm1) in 

∪i ˆS′

> i

) independently from (Φ 1, m1) and from the previous steps. Let the rest of ( ˆΦ, ˆm) (i.e., outside Bn(o′) and outside ∪i ˆS′

> i

) be identical to (Φ 1, m1). In this coupling, (Φ 1, m1) is resampled in a large neighborhood of o′ (conditionally on anc( o′) = ( x′

> i

)i). Also, ( ˆΦ1, ˆm1) is a finite modification of (Φ 1, m1) a.s. One can use these facts to continue the proof of Theorem 7.1 to show that A is inde-pendent from itself conditionally on [ G′, o′; anc( o′)]. This completes Steps C2 and L2. So, the claim is proved. 

# 10.3 The General Bernoulli Case 

Now, we describe our general model on Bernoulli point process. In fact, every-thing is already mentioned in the proof given in the last subsection, and we only need to single out the minimum requirements of the proof. Let [ G, o] be a unimodular graph or discrete space. Given 0 < p ≤ 1, let Φ be the Bernoulli point process on G with parameter p. That is, given G,the points are retained independently with probability p. In Theorems 10.1 and 10.2, an additional i.i.d. marking was used to break the ties. In general, we may also use the i.i.d. marks as a source of randomness to define a point-map 

F ′ as follows (in particular, if some measurability conditions hold, then F ′ is a factor of i.i.d. here). It should be noted that G might be a marked graph from the beginning. For instance, in Theorems 10.1 and 10.2, a marking is in fact needed to distinguish the time direction. In this case, given G (which might already has some marking), the new i.i.d. marks will be used as a source of randomness. Assume that m is an i.i.d. marking of Gd for some d ∈ N (note that 

d = 2 in Theorems 10.1 and 10.2). More generally, we may assume that k and 

d1, . . . , d k ∈ N are given and mi is an i.i.d. marking of Gdi , with mark space Ξi and with distribution νi, independently from each other. But for simplicity of notation, we assume k = 1 in what follows. Recall the space ˜G∗ of all [ G, o ; φ, m ] from Section 10.2. Assume that for 82 all samples ( G, o ; φ, m ), a function F ′ : φ → φ is given ( F ′ uses m as a source of randomness and there is no other extra randomness). We may extend F ′

to G by F ′(x) := x if x̸ ∈ φ. We no longer require F ′ be a CMT ; i.e., given (G, φ ), the jumps F ′(x), x ∈ φ, are not necessarily independent. Even if F ′ is a CMT, it does not necessarily satisfy the balance condition of Model 1; e.g., in Theorems 10.1 and 10.2. Instead, roughly speaking, we assume that, to con-struct F ′, it is enough to reveal only a part Z of ( φ, m ) (see Theorem 10.4 below for the precise definition). This is based on the notion of stopping pair of sets , see Theorem B.1, which heuristically means that Z is determined by the revealed information of ( φ, m ) (this generalizes stopping times). In fact, in all of the examples of interest in this work, the stopping set condition is guaranteed by constructing F ′(o) via a decision tree (see [25]): Heuristically, an observer starts from o and reveals the evaluation of 1 Φ(·) or m(·) at a sequence of points one by one. At each step, the observer decides whether to stop or not, and de-cides the next information to reveal, based measurably of the currently observed data. We will also assume that the sets Z(F ′(i)(o)) , i ≥ 0 are disjoint a.s. This condition can usually be proved using a Lyapunov cocycle h (see Theorem 3.5) that is non-increasing on the order of the revealed points. 

Assumption 10.4. Assume that, to every ( G, o ; φ, m ), an element F ′(o) := 

F ′(G, o ; φ, m ) ∈ G and a stopping pair of sets Z = ( Z1, Z 2) are assigned (see Theorem B.1 by letting μ be the counting measure on G). Assume that: (i) F ′(o) ∈ φ if o ∈ φ and F ′(o) = o if o̸ ∈ φ. Also, F ′(o) ∈ Z1.(ii) For every ( G, o ), F ′(o) is a measurable function of ( φ ∩ Z1, m Z2 ). (iii) The function [ G, o, x ; φ, m ] 7 → (1 {x∈Z1}, 1{F ′(o)= x}) is well defined and measurable. Note that, for o̸ ∈ φ, one may assume Z(o) = ( {o}, ∅) since F ′(o) = o.Despite the fact that the jumps are not necessarily independent, the last assumptions and Theorem B.2 imply the following Markov property, as in the proof of Section 10.2 (note that we forget Φ and m and keep only F ′): 

Lemma 10.5. Given (G, o ), the ancestor line of o is a Markov chain on G with kernel defined by 

K(x, B ) := K(G, x, B ) := PG

F ′(x) ∈ B |x ∈ Φ  ,

for x ∈ G and B ⊆ G, where PG is the distribution of (Φ , m) given G.

We are now ready to describe the main models of this subsection. 

Model 3. Let [ G, o; Φ , m] be as above. Assume that F ′ and the stopping pair of sets Z = ( Z1, Z 2) satisfy Theorem 10.4, and also satisfy E [|Z1(o)|] < ∞. In addition, assume that almost all samples ( G, o ) satisfy the following conditions: (i) (Cycle-Free) There is no cycle in the graph of F ′ on Φ, PG-a.s. 83 (ii) (Disjoint Stopping Sets) The sets S(F ′(i)(o)) , i ≥ 0 are disjoint when 

o ∈ Φ, PG-a.s. (iii) (Balance) One has b(G, ·) > 0 and the Markov kernel K on G, defined above, balances the measure b(G, ·). (iv) (Weak Irreducibility) The graph with vertex set G and edge set {(x, y ) : 

K(x, y ) + K(y, x ) > 0} is connected. See Theorem 11.8 for an example which does not satisfy the condition of disjoint stopping sets. 

Model 4. In Model 3, assume in addition that almost all samples ( G, o ) satisfy the following: (v) (One-Endedness) All components of F ′ are one-ended with infinite level-sets, PG-a.s. (vi) (Weak Aperiodicity) The elements of the set 

{d ∈ N : ∃n ∈ N, ∃x ∈ G : Kn(x, ·) ∧ Kn+d(x, ·)̸ ≡ 0}

have no common divisor larger than 1, where · ∧ · denotes the minimum of two measures. Note that Models 3 and 4 generalize Models 1 and 2 respectively. This will be shown in Theorem 10.8 below. The measurability assumption of Z1 in Theorem 10.4 and the assumption 

E [|Z1(o)|] < ∞ imply the following: 

Lemma 10.6. The set {y ∈ G : x ∈ Z1(y)} is finite for all x ∈ G, a.s. As a result, any finite modification of (Φ , m) results in a finite modification of F ′,

a.s. Proof. By the mass transport principle, one has E [|{ y ∈ G : o ∈ Z1(y)}| ] = 

E [|Z1(o)|] < ∞. Hence, {y : o ∈ Z1(y)} is finite a.s. The claim is then implied by Theorem 2.5. 

Proof of Theorem 1.2 (For Models 3 and 4). Let Xn := F ′(n)(o). The Markov property (Theorem 10.5) implies that [ G, Xn; anc( Xn)] is a Markov chain. The measurability assumptions in Theorem 10.4 and the assumptions of Models 3 and 4 directly enable one to use the stationarity, ergodicity and tail triviality results given by Theorems 5.1, 5.4 and 5.11. Also, the stopping set condition enables one to describe the conditional distribution of Φ conditionally to anc( o)as in the proof of Section 10.2. The rest of the proof is the same as that of Section 10.2. 

Example 10.7. In this example, we verify the conditions of Models 3 and 4 for the discrete strip point-map and the generalized Howard model (Theorems 10.1 and 10.2). If b(x) := |B1(x)| = deg( x) + 1 and q := 1 − p, then 

K(( t, x ), (t′, x ′)) = qb(x)( t′−t−1) (1 − qb(x))/b (x),

84 for t′ > t and x′ ∈ B1(x). One can check that K balances b. Denoting ( s, y ) := 

F ′(t, x ), one can let S(t, x ) := {(t, x )} ∪ ([ t + 1 , s ] × B1(x)) as discussed in Section 10.2. Now, it is easy to see that all of the conditions of Models 3 and 4 are satisfied. For the generalized Howard model, the formula for K is 

K(( t, x ), (t + 1 , x ′)) = q|Bn−1(x)|(1 − q|∂B n(x)|)/ |∂B n(x)| ,

where n := d(x, x ′) and ∂B n(x) := Bn(x) \ Bn−1(x). Using the fact that 

|∂B n(x)| does not depend on x due to transitivity, one can check that K balances the function b ≡ 1. One can check that all conditions of Models 3 and 4 are satisfied except weak aperiodicity (recall that indistinguishability is proved in Section 10.2 even without weak aperiodicity). 

Example 10.8 (CMTs) . In this example, we show that Models 1 and 2 are special cases of Models 3 and 4 respectively. By letting p = 1, one has Φ = G

and it remains only to check the stopping set conditions. Since G∗ is Polish, one can find a Borel isomorphism ι : G∗ → [0 , 1]. Fix a typical sample ( G, o ). Recall that we have assumed that the points of G might have some marks from the beginning (other than those marks used to define F ′). So, we may assume from the beginning that [ G, x ]̸ = [ G, y ], ∀x̸ = y. This implies that ι[G, ·] is injective. In this case, we construct F (o) using the (new) mark m(o) of o, and hence, one can let S(o) := {o}. For this, sort the vertices of G by increasing distance from 

o and break the ties by ι[G, ·]. If ⪯ denotes this order on G, one can let F (o) be the smallest x ∈ G such that P 

> y⪯x

K(o, y ) ≥ m(o). This satisfies the desired conditions. 

Remark 10.9. Instead of the Bernoulli point process, one may assume that each point x ∈ G belongs to Φ with probability 0 ≤ μ(x) ≤ 1 independently from the other points, where μ is a given equivariant random measure on G.The arguments for indistinguishability are similar to those for the Bernoulli case 

μ(x) ≡ p.

# 10.4 The General Poisson Case 

In this subsection, we define models on the Poisson point process with ideas similar to those of the previous subsection. For this, we leverage the notion of unimodular random measured metric spaces [23] and modify Models 3 and 4 accordingly. The main example is the strip point-map (Theorem 10.3). 

10.4.1 Defining the Model 

At first reading, the reader might assume that the base space G is Rd, Hd

or products of such spaces. More generally, in each sample, we let G be a boundedly-compact metric space, o ∈ G and μ is a boundedly-finite Borel mea-sure on G (in the discrete case, we usually let μ be the counting measure). We assume that [ G, o, μ] is a unimodular random measured metric space ,85 which is defined in [23] by a natural generalization of the mass transport prin-ciple: 

E

Z 

> G

g(G, o, x, μ)dμ(x)



= E

Z 

> G

g(G, x, o, μ)dμ(x)



,

for all measurable and non negative functions g. More generally, G might have some other decorations; e.g., the direction of the axes when G = Rd or the time direction when G = G0 × R (see [23]). Unimodular random measured metric spaces share many ideas with unimod-ular graphs, but there are some differences. For instance, in Theorem 2.5, one should replace S̸ = ∅ and S = G by μ(S) = 0 and μ(G \ S) = 0 respec-tively (Lemma 4.3 of [23]). This should be taken into account in every usage of Theorem 2.5. Also, one can relax invariant events to essentially invariant 

events A defined by the following condition: For P-a.e. sample ( G, o, μ ), for 

μ-a.e. o′ ∈ G, one has 1 A[G, o, μ ] = 1 A[G, o ′, μ ]. Under unimodularity, every essentially invariant event is equivalent to some invariant event (Remark 4.28 of [23]). Let Φ be a Poisson point process on G with intensity measure λμ, where 0 < λ < ∞ is fixed. For simplicity, we assume that μ has no atoms a.s., and hence, Φ has no multiple points a.s. In most of the example, there is no tie a.s. in defining the point-map F ′, but we may still keep an i.i.d. marking m of Φ d

for some d (or a tuple of such markings) as a source of randomness, similarly to Section 10.3. Let ˜G∗ denote the set of all samples [ G, o, μ ; φ, m ]. Here, ˜G∗ is a Borel subspace of some Polish space (obtained by letting φ have multiplicities). Sim-ilarly to the previous subsection, assume that for all samples ( G, o, μ ; φ, m ), an element F ′(o) ∈ G and a stopping pair Z = ( Z1, Z 2) are assigned that satisfy Theorem 10.4. Recall that F ′(φ) ⊆ φ, m is regarded as a source of randomness for defining F ′ and we do not require the jumps F ′(x), x ∈ φ be independent (given ( G, φ )). In fact, in most of the examples of interest, the stopping set condition is guaranteed by constructing F ′(x) via a continuous-time decision tree ; see [25]. Define the Markov kernel K on G by 

K(x, B ) := K(G, μ, x, B ) := P(G,μ )

F ′(x) ∈ B |x ∈ Φ  ,

for x ∈ G and B ⊆ G, where P(G,μ ) is the distribution of (Φ , m) given ( G, μ ). In point process theory, conditioning on the zero probability event x ∈ Φ is for-malized by Palm theory. However, in the special case of Poisson point processes, the situation is simpler and conditioning on x ∈ Φ is equivalent to replacing Φ by Φ ∪ { x} (and extending m accordingly) by Slyvniak-Mecke theorem (Theo-rem 6.24 of [23]). In what follows, we denote by PΦ the distribution obtained by conditioning on o ∈ Φ. 

Model 5. Let [ G, o; Φ , m] be as above. Assume that F ′ and the stopping pair of sets Z = ( Z1, Z 2) satisfy Theorem 10.4. Assume also that EΦ [|Φ ∩ Z1(o)|] <

∞ and EΦ [μ(Z1(o))] < ∞. Assume that b(o) := b[G, o, μ] ≥ 0 is a given measurable function of [ G, o, μ] such that E [b(o)] < ∞. In addition, assume 86 that there exists a full-probability set E of samples of [ G, o, μ] such that every (G, o, μ ) ∈ E satisfies the following conditions: (i) (Cycle-Free) There is no cycle in the graph of F ′ on G, P(G,μ )-a.s. (ii) (Disjoint Stopping Sets) The subsets S(F ′(i)(o)) , i ≥ 0 are disjoint a.s. conditionally on o ∈ Φ. (iii) (Balance) One has b(·) = b[G, ·, μ ] > 0, μ-a.e., and the Markov kernel K on 

G, defined above, balances the measure bμ defined by bμ (dx ) := b(x)μ(dx ); i.e., for all Borel sets B ⊆ G,

Z

> G

b(x)K(x, B )dμ (x) = 

Z

> B

b(x)dμ (x).

(iv) (Weak Irreducibility) By letting K′ be the time-reversal of K with respect to the invariant measure bμ and ˜K := 12 (K + K′), for every Borel B ⊆ G

in which μ(B) > 0, there exists n in which ˜K(n)(o, B ) > 0; i.e., μ is mu-tually absolutely continuous with P 

> n

2−n ˜K(n)(o, ·). A simpler sufficient condition is ∀x, y ∈ G :  P  

> n

K(n)(x, ·) ∧  P  

> n

K(n)(y, ·)̸ = 0. 

Model 6. In Model 5, assume in addition that every ( G, o, μ ) ∈ E satisfies the one-endedness conditions of Model 4 and a similar weak aperiodicity condition obtained by replacing ∃x ∈ G with for a μ-non-null set of x ∈ G.

Example 10.10 (Generalized Strip Point-Map) . In this example, we show that the generalized strip point-map (Theorem 10.3) satisfies the conditions of Mod-els 5 and 6. We also generalize it beyond Rd and Hd.One-endedness can be proved similarly to that of the discrete strip point-map (see Section 10.2) using the partition {[t + u, t + 1 + u] × G : t ∈ Z} of G′, where 

u ∈ [0 , 1] is a uniform random number independent from everything else. Note that no i.i.d. marking is needed in this example. Denoting ( s, y ) := F ′(t, x ), one can let S(t, x ) := ( t, s ] × B1(x), which is a stopping set that determines F ′(t, x ). Also, if l := μ(B1(x)), then K(( t, x ), d (t′, x ′)) = 1 

> l

exp( −l(t′ −t)) d(t′, x ′) for t′ >t and x′ ∈ B1(x). One can see that K balances the function b(x) := μ(B1(x)). These definitions satisfy all conditions of Models 5 and 6. Beyond Rd and Hd, one can let [ G, o, μ] be an arbitrary unimodular random measured metric space with the following conditions. One needs that μ has not atoms a.s., μ(G) = ∞ a.s. and E [μ(B1(o))] < ∞. Also, for weak ir-reducibility, one needs that the Markov chain on G (not on G′) with kernel 

K0(x, dy ) := 1 /μ(B1(x))1 B1(x)(y)μ(dy ) is irreducible; i.e., μ is mutually ab-solutely continuous with respect to P 

> n

2−nK(n)0 . Under these conditions, the assumptions of Models 5 and 6 are satisfied. 

10.4.2 Proving Indistinguishability 

To prove indistinguishability for Models 5 and 6, we first establish Steps C3 and L3 in the following theorem, which extends Theorem 1.3 and is of indepen-87 dent interest. The ergodicity result generalizes Theorem 5.6 of [23], which is basically the case where μ and K(x, ·) are mutually absolutely continuous. 

Theorem 10.11 (Ergodicity and Tail Triviality of Markov Chains on Unimod-ular Spaces) . Let [G, o, μ] be an ergodic unimodular random measured metric space and let K be a factor Markov kernel. Let (Xn)n be the Markov chain on 

G with kernel K started from o.(i) If the balance and weak irreducibility conditions of Model 5 hold, then the Markov chain [G, Xn, μ; ( Xn+i)i≥0], n ∈ N, is ergodic. (ii) If, in addition, the weak aperiodicity condition of Model 6 holds, then the Markov chain [G, Xn, μ; ( Xn+i)i≥0] is tail-trivial. Proof. The first part can be proved similarly to Theorem 5.4 (see also the proof of Section 10.2) with the following modification. Consider the events E0 and 

E1 defined in the proof. The proof shows that P [E0 ∪ E1] = 1 and 1 Ej (o) = 1Ej (X1) a.s. Stationarity implies that 1 Ej (X−1) = 1 Ej (o) a.s. Now, by the weak irreducibility condition of Model 5, one can deduce that E0 and E1 are essentially invariant events. The rest of the proof of Theorem 5.4 is then valid. The second part can also be proved similarly to Theorem 5.11 with the following modifications. First, similarly to Theorem 5.5, one can show that almost surely, for μ-a.e. x ∈ G and every d0 ∈ N, there exists n ∈ N such that Kn(x, ·) ∧ Kn+d0 (x, ·)̸ ≡ 0. Then, to modify Theorem 5.13, the assumption should be Kl(o, ·) ∧ Kl+k(o, ·)̸ ≡ 0. Also, in the coupling mentioned in the proof of Theorem 5.13, one should use the set of x in which Kl(x, ·) ∧ Kl+k(x, ·) has total mass larger than ϵ. The rest of the proof of Theorem 5.11 remains the same. 

Proof of Theorem 1.2 (for Models 5 and 6). The proof of indistinguishability of these models is similar to that of Theorem 3.4 and that of the Bernoulli case (given in Section 10.2), and we only highlight the differences. Steps C3 and L3 are proved in Theorem 10.11. By the assumption EΦ [|Φ ∩ Z1(o)|] < ∞ and similarly to Theorem 10.6, the set {y ∈ Φ : x ∈ Z1(y)} is finite for all x ∈ Φ, a.s. This implies that deleting finitely many points from Φ, or changing their marks, results in a finite modification of F ′. Similarly, by the assumption 

EΦ [μ(Z1(o))] < ∞ and the exchange formula between Φ and μ (see Propo-sition 5.18 of [23]), one can show that, almost surely, for μ-a.e. x ∈ G, the set 

{y ∈ Φ : x ∈ Z1(y)} is finite. This implies that, for every k ∈ N and for μk-a.e. 

x1, . . . , x k ∈ G, adding {x1, . . . , x k} to Φ (with arbitrary marks) results in a finite modification of F ′.By the above observation, we redefine the tail sigma-fields as follows. An invariant point-map property A ⊆ ˜G∗ is called a tail point-map property if the following holds for all samples [ G, o, μ ; φ, m ]: For every k ∈ N, for μk-a.e. 

x1, . . . , x k ∈ G and for every finite set B ⊆ Φ, updating φ and m by adding 

x1, . . . , x k (with arbitrary marks) and deleting B (or changing the marks of the points of B) does not change 1 A[G, o, μ ; φ, m ]. In what follows, such updates are meant whenever the term almost all updates of (φ, m ) is used. We also fix the 88 set E′ of all [ G, o, μ ; φ, m ] in which almost all updates of ( φ, m ) result in a finite modification of F ′. Note that E′ is an (invariant and) tail point-map-property, and P [E′] = 1 by the previous paragraph. Define tail level-set-properties 

similarly to Theorem 6.1 by considering only those updates (defined above) that result in a finite modification of both F ′ and the level-set of the origin. Define 

tail branch-properties similarly. Now, Step C1 and Step L1 can be proved similarly to Theorem 6.6 and the Bernoulli case, by just replacing [ G, o ; f ] by [ G, o, μ ; φ, m ] everywhere and adding the condition [ G, o, μ ; φ, m ] ∈ E′ to the definitions of M ′ and M ′′ . The rest of the proof remains unchanged and Step C1 and Step L1 are proved. Step C2 and Step L2 can also be proved similarly to the Bernoulli case. For this, it is enough to replace conditioning on F ′(x′

> i

) = ( x′

> i+1

) in Section 10.2 by a regular conditional version of (Φ , m) conditionally on F ′(x′

> i

) (the condition 

PG

F ′(x′

> i

) = x′

> i+1

 > 0 is no longer necessary). Also, in the definitions of the sets M ′ and M ′′ , one adds the condition [ G, o, μ ; φ, m ] ∈ E′. The rest of the proof remains unchanged and Step C2 and Step L2 are proved. So, the proof is completed. 

# 11 Problems 

Problem 11.1. In Model 1, does there necessarily exist a Lyapunov cocycle? See Theorem 3.5. Or weaker, does there necessarily exit a factor preorder in such a way that F is decreasing with respect to the preorder? 

Recall that the stationarity lemma (Theorem 5.1) requires E [b(o)] < ∞.

Problem 11.2. Are the indistinguishability results in Theorems 1.10 and 3.4 valid without the assumptions E [b(o)] < ∞ and E [deg( o)] < ∞ respectively? 

If the weak aperiodicity condition of Model 2 is removed, then the indistin-guishability of level-sets might (or might not) fail as shown in Theorem 3.11. More generally, Theorem 5.12 studies the periodic case; i.e., when the largest common divisor in (3.2) is d0 < ∞. So, it remains to consider when d0 = ∞; i.e., when the set (3.2) is equal to {0}. In this case, Theorem 5.5 fails completely, which is the basis of the proof of Theorem 5.11. Recall also that another tech-nique was used in Theorem 3.11. 

Problem 11.3. Without the weak aperiodicity condition of Model 2, are there other simple necessary/sufficient conditions for the tail-triviality of the Markov chain (as in Theorem 1.3) and the indistinguishability of level-sets? 

Remark 11.4. Without the weak aperiodicity condition, the indistinguisha-bility of level-sets is equivalent to the tail-triviality of the Markov chain with kernel K. This is implied by Theorem 7.1. 

Problem 11.5. In Theorem 11.3, are either of the following conditions suffi-cient? 

89 (i) For all cycles in the graph with edge set K(·, ·) > 0, consider their di-rected length; i.e., the difference of the number of edges in the forward or backward direction. Is it enough that the largest common divisor of these directed lengths is 1? This would solve the problem in Theorem 3.20. (ii) Assume there is a Lyapunov cocycle h such that h(F (x)) = h(x) − 1

a.s. Can one say that the level-sets included in a common level-set of 

h are indistinguishable (which holds in Theorem 3.11 for non-bipartite graphs)? If not, is it enough in Theorem 11.3 that the level-sets of h are indistinguishable (e.g., in Theorems 3.11 and 3.19)? This would solve the problem in Theorem 3.19. 

Problem 11.6. For coalescing random walks (Theorem 3.11), when the degrees are unbounded, can F be two-ended? As an instance of the analogous problem for coalescing Markov chains (Theorem 3.15), assume (b(i)) i∈Z is a stationary process with b(·) > 1 a.s. For all i ∈ Z, let p(i, i ± 1) := 1 /(2 b(i)) and p(i, i ) := 1−1/(b(i)) . If b(0) has a sufficiently heavy tail under the condition E [b(0)] < ∞,will the resulting coalescing Markov chain model (on Z2) be two-ended a.s.? 

Problem 11.7 (LERW) . On a unimodular non-bipartite random graph [G, o],(i) If (Xn)n is the loop-erased random walk from o, is [G, Xn; ( Xn+i)i≥0]

tail-trivial (while it is not Markovian nor stationary)? (ii) Does WUSF( G) have indistinguishable level-sets? 

In fact, the first statement is Step L3 for proving the indistinguishability of level-sets (see Theorem 9.8 for Step C3). In the transient case, all other steps are established in Section 9. So, in the transient case, the first statement implies the second. In the recurrent case, Step L2 should also be proved. For the next problem, let Φ be a Poisson point process in Rd. For each 

x = ( t, y ) ∈ Φ, where t ∈ R and y ∈ Rd−1, let F (x) be the closest point of Φ ∩ (t, ∞) × Rd−1 to x. This is called the directional point-map [2]. 

Problem 11.8 (Directional Point-Map) . Are the connected components (resp. level-sets) of the directional point-map indistinguishable? 

Note that this model does not satisfy the condition of disjoint stopping sets of Model 5. Indeed, anc( x) is not a Markov chain. 

# A Measurability Lemmas 

In this appendix, we provide some measure-theoretic lemmas regarding null-event-augmentation (Theorem 2.4), which are essential in the proofs of indistin-guishability in this paper. We need the concept of Borel equivalence relations. Let M be a Polish space or a Borel subset of some Polish space. An equivalence relation R on M is Borel if it is a Borel subset of M ×M . If so, the R-invariant sigma-field I(R) is the set of Borel subsets A of M such that 1 A(x) = 1 A(y)for all ( x, y ) ∈ R . Also, R is called countable if every equivalence class in R is countable. 90 Lemma A.1. Each of the sigma-fields Ipm , T pm , Icomp , T branch , Ilevel and 

T level is of the form I(R) for some countable Borel equivalence relation R on 

G′∗. The same holds for the sigma-fields Ipath and T path on G∞.

In fact, similar claims hold for the sigma-field I on G∗ and for analogous sigma-fields when a base graph is fixed. 

Proof. For Ipath (resp. T path ), let ([ G, x 0; ( xi)i≥0], [G, x ′

> 0

; ( x′

> i

)i≥0]) ∈ R if ( xi)i

shift-couples (resp. successfully couples) with ( x′

> i

)i. For the other sigma-fields, in each of the following cases, we say ([ G, o ; f ], [G, o ′; f ′]) ∈ R if: 

• Case Ipm : If f = f ′.

• Case Icomp : If f = f ′ and o′ ∈ Cf (o). 

• Case Ilevel : If f = f ′ and o′ ∈ Lf (o). 

• Case T pm : If |{ f̸ = f ′}| < ∞.

• Case T branch : If either f = f ′ and o′ ∈ Cf (o) or o = o′, |{ f̸ = f ′}| < ∞

and Cf (o) has a common ancestral branch with Cf ′ (o). 

• Case T level : If either f = f ′ and o′ ∈ Lf (o) or o = o′, |{ f̸ = f ′}| < ∞ and 

|Lf (o)∆ Lf ′ (o)| < ∞.In all cases, R is an equivalence relation, except in the cases of T branch and T level .In these cases, we let R be the smallest equivalence relation that contains the mentioned relation. Then I(R) is the desired sigma-field in each case. All these equivalence relations are finer than that of T pm . So, all of them are countable. Checking that they are Borel is skipped for brevity. 

Lemma A.2. Let (M, P) be a probability space, R be a measurable equivalence relation on M , A ⊆ M be an event and g be a measurable function on M .In order to show that A and g are measurable with respect to the null-event-augmentation of I(R), it is enough to find a measurable subset M ′ ∈ I (R) of full measure, such that A ∩ M ′ ∈ I (R) and g M ′ ∈ I (R), or equivalently, 

∀(x, y ) ∈ (M ′ × M ′) ∩ R : 1A(x) = 1 A(y), g (x) = g(y).

Proof. The assumption M ′ ∈ I (R) implies that the last formula is indeed equiv-alent to A∩M ′ ∈ I (R) and g M ′ ∈ I (R). Also, since P [M ′] = 1, A is equivalent to A ∩ M ′ and g = g M ′ a.s. This implies the claim. 

Lemma A.3. Given a probability space (M, F0, P), let F ⊆ F 0 be a sub-sigma-field. In order to prove that an event A is in the null-event-augmentation of 

F, it is enough to show that for every ϵ > 0, there exists some F-measurable function g such that E [|1A − g|] < ϵ .

91 Proof. Let gn be such a function for ϵ := 1 /n . Since ( gn)n converges in L1, there exists a subsequence which converges a.s. We may assume gn is convergent a.s. from the beginning. Let g := lim n gn when the limit exists and g = 0 otherwise. Then, g is F-measurable and g = 1 A a.s. Now, let B be the event g = 1. So, 

B ∈ F and B is equivalent to A.

Lemma A.4. In the setting of Theorem A.3, let ˆF be the null-event-augmentation of F. Assume F′ is another sigma-field such that F ⊆ F ′ ⊆ F 0. In order to prove A ∈ ˆF, it is enough to prove that P [A |F ′ ] ∈ { 0, 1} a.s. and that P [A |F ′ ]

is ˆF-measurable; i.e., there is a version of the conditional probability P [A |F ′ ]

that is F-measurable. Proof. Let g be any version of P [A |F ′ ]. So, g(·) ∈ { 0, 1} a.s. By letting B be the event g = 1, one has B ∈ ˆF and 1 B is also a version of P [A |F ′ ]. One gets 

P [A ∩ B] = E [E [1 A1B |F ′ ]] = E [1 B P [A |F ′ ]] = E 12

> B

 = P [B] .

Similarly, one gets P [A ∩ Bc] = E [1 B 1Bc ] = 0. This implies that P [A∆B] = 0. So, A is in the null-event-augmentation of F.

# B Stopping Sets for Marked Poisson Point Pro-cesses 

Fix d ∈ N and ( G, o, μ ), where G is a boundedly-compact metric space, o ∈ G

and μ is a boundedly-finite measure on G. We assume that μ is diffuse and Φ is a Poisson point process with intensity measure λμ (where λ > 0 is fixed), and hence Φ is a simple point process a.s. Similarly, we may allow G to be discrete and Φ to be a Bernoulli point process on G, where each point x ∈ G belongs to Φ with probability pμ (x) (where p is fixed, and assuming pμ (·) ∈ [0 , 1]). In this appendix, we study stopping sets for the pair (Φ , m), where, condi-tionally on Φ, m is an i.i.d. marking of Φ d with an arbitrary compact mark space Ξ. So, m is a marking of d-tuples of points of Φ. This notion is used in Sections 10.3 and 10.4. Let N be the set of discrete subsets of G. Let also N ′ be the set of pairs (φ, m ), where φ ∈ N and m : φd → Ξ. These spaces are Borel subsets of some Polish spaces. 

Definition B.1. A stopping pair of sets for (Φ , m) is a pair Z = ( Z1, Z 2)which are functions of (Φ , m) such that: (i) Z1 ⊆ G and Z2 ⊆ Zd 

> 1

.(ii) If ( φ, m ) ∈ N ′ and ( φ′, m ′) ∈ N ′ satisfy φ′ ∩ Z1(φ, m ) = φ ∩ Z1(φ, m ) and 

m′ 

> Z2(φ,m )d

= m Z2(φ,m )d , then Z(φ′, m ′) = Z(φ, m ). (iii) The maps ( φ, m, y ) 7 → 1Z1(φ,m )(y) (where y ∈ φ) and ( φ, m, z ) 7 → 1Z2(φ,m )(z)(where z ∈ φd) are measurable. 92 In fact, if G is discrete, one can also let m be a marking of Gd and assume 

Z2 ⊆ Gd.As mentioned in Sections 10.3 and 10.4, in all of the examples of interest in this work, stopping sets are constructed by decision trees (similarly to [25]). In this case, Z1 denotes the subset of G revealed by the decision tree and Z2

denotes the revealed information from m.

Theorem B.2 (Marked Poisson Outside a Stopping Pair of Set) . Assume Z1 =(Z1, Z 2) is a stopping pair of sets for (Φ , m). Then, conditionally on (Φ ∩

Z1, m Z2 ) and on the event that Φ ∩ Z1 is finite, the rest of (Φ , m) is distributed as follows: Φ \ Z1 is a Poisson point process with distribution λμ G\Z1 and 

m Φd\Z2 is an i.i.d. marking of Φd \ Z2 with the same mark distribution. 

This generalizes Theorem A.3 of [25] for the Poisson point process only (where there is no m). In fact, when G is discrete, the proof of [25] works for i.i.d. markings of Gd as well (where there is no Φ). We use this in the following proof. We omit the measurability discussions for brevity. 

Proof. Let Ψ := Φ ∩ Z1, Ψ ′ := Φ \ Z1, m1 := m Ψd and m2 := m Φd\Ψd . Note that Z1 and Z2 are determined by (Φ ∩ Z1, m Z2 ), and hence, are determined by (Ψ , m1). Let E be the event that Ψ is finite. Conditionally on Φ, the set 

Z2 is a stopping set for m. This implies that, conditionally on (Φ , m Z2 ) and on the event E, the rest of m is an i.i.d. marking of Φ d \ Z2. So, it is enough to prove that, conditionally on (Ψ , m1) and on E, Ψ ′ is a Poisson point process with intensity measure λμ G\Z1 and m2 is an i.i.d. marking of (Ψ ∪ Ψ′)d \ Ψd.This will be proved by the same method as Theorem A.3 of [25]. In the next formula, x := ( x1, . . . , x k) ∈ Gk and Φ (k) is the k-th factorial measure of Φ; i.e., Φ k restricted to the set of x ∈ Gk with distinct coordinates. Also, ¯ x denotes the set {x1, . . . , x k}, and Ex denotes conditional expectation conditionally on Φ ⊇ ¯x. In addition, for a deterministic marking m1 of ¯ xd,

E(x,m 1) denotes conditional expectation conditionally on Φ ⊇ ¯x and m ¯xd = m1.Let g be any nonnegative measurable function on N ′ × N ′. One can show that (Ψ , m1, Ψ′, m2) is a measurable function of (Φ , m) (see Lemma A.1 of [25]). By the multivariate Mecke formula, one obtains 

I := E g(Ψ , m1, Ψ′, m2)1 {| Ψ|=k}



= 1

k! E

Z 

g(¯ x, m1Ψ′, m2)1 {Ψ=¯ x}Φ(k)(dx )



= 1

k!

Z

Ex

g(¯ x, m1, Ψ′, m2)1 {Ψ=¯ x}

 μ(k)(dx )= 1

k!

Z Z

> ¯xd

E(x,m 1)

g(¯ x, m 1, Ψ′, m2)1 {Ψ=¯ x}

 dm 1μ(k)(dx ).

By Slivnyak’s theorem, conditionally on Φ ⊇ ¯x and m1 = m1, Φ \ ¯x is a Poisson point process with intensity measure λμ and the rest of m is an i.i.d. 93 marking of Φ d \ ¯xd. Then, by the stopping set condition, one can show that Ψ = ¯ x is equivalent to ¯ x ∈ Z1(¯ x, m 1) and (Φ \ ¯x) ∩ Z1(¯ x, m 1) = ∅. This implies that, if Ψ ′′ is a Poisson point process with intensity measure λμ G\Z1

and m′ 

> 2

is an i.i.d. marking of (Ψ ∪ Ψ′′ )d \ Ψd (given Ψ and m1), 17 then 

E(x,m 1)

g(¯ x, m 1, Ψ′, m2)1 {Ψ=¯ x}

 = E(x,m 1) [g(Ψ , m1, Ψ′′ , m′

> 2

)]. By reversing the procedure mentioned above, one obtains I = E g(Ψ , m1, Ψ′′ , m′

> 2

)1 {| Ψ|=k}

.Summation over all k gives E [g(Ψ , m1, Ψ′, m2)1 E ] = E [g(Ψ , m1, Ψ′′ , m′

> 2

)1 E ]. This implies the claim. 

Remark B.3. If m1, . . . , mk are independent i.i.d. markings of Φ d1 , . . . , Φdk ,one can similarly define stopping tuples of sets for (Φ , m1, . . . , mk) and extend Theorem B.2. We omit this generalization for brevity. 

# Acknowledgements 

We thank Milad Barzegar for introducing to us the stochastic covering property of WUSF, which was essential in the proofs of Section 9. 

# References 

[1] D. Aldous and R. Lyons. Processes on unimodular random networks. Elec-tron. J. Probab. , 12:1454–1508, 2007. [2] F. Baccelli and C. Bordenave. The radial spanning tree of a poisson point process. The Annals of Applied Probability , 17(1):305–359, 2007. [3] F. Baccelli, M.-O. Haji-Mirsadeghi, and S. Khaniha. Coupling from the past for the null recurrent Markov chain. The Annals of Applied Probability ,34(4):3631–3664, 2024. [4] F. Baccelli, M. O. Haji-Mirsadeghi, and A. Khezeli. Eternal family trees and dynamics on unimodular random graphs. In Unimodularity in ran-domly generated graphs , volume 719 of Contemp. Math. , pages 85–127. Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 2018. [5] F. Baccelli, M.-O. Haji-Mirsadeghi, and A. Khezeli. Unimodular Haus-dorff and Minkowski dimensions. Electronic Journal of Probability , 26:1–64, 2021. [6] F. Baccelli and A. Sodre. Renewal processes, population dynamics, and unimodular trees. Journal of Applied Probability , 56(2):339–357, 2019. [7] I. Benjamini, H. Kesten, Y. Peres, and O. Schramm. Geometry of the uniform spanning forest: transitions in dimensions 4 , 8, 12 , . . . . Ann. of Math. (2) , 160(2):465–491, 2004.        

> 17 Similarly to Lemma A.1 of [25], one can show that (Ψ ,m1,Ψ′′ ,m1) makes sense as a random element of N′× N ′.

94 [8] I. Benjamini, R. Lyons, Y. Peres, and O. Schramm. Special invited paper: Uniform spanning forests. The Annals of Probability , 29(1):1–65, 2001. [9] D. J. Daley and D. Vere-Jones. An introduction to the theory of point processes: Vol. II: General theory and structure . Probability and its Ap-plications (New York). Springer, New York, second edition, 2008. [10] R. Durrett. Probability: theory and examples , volume 49. Cambridge uni-versity press, 2019. [11] D. Engelenburg and T. Hutchcroft. The number of ends in the uniform spanning tree for recurrent unimodular random graphs. The Annals of Probability , 52(6):2079–2130, 2024. [12] P. A. Ferrari, G. Landim, and H. Thorisson. Poisson trees, succession lines and coalescing random walks. Ann. Inst. Henri Poincar´ e Probab. Stat. ,40:141–152, 2004. [13] D. Gaboriau and R. Lyons. A measurable-group-theoretic solution to von Neumann’s problem. Inventiones mathematicae , 177(3):533–540, 2009. [14] S. Gangopadhyay, R. Roy, and A. Sarkar. Random oriented trees: A model of drainage networks. The Annals of Applied Probability , 14(3):1242 – 1266, 2004. [15] O. H¨ aggstr¨ om and Y. Peres. Monotonicity of uniqueness for percolation on Cayley graphs: all infinite clusters are born simultaneously. Probability Theory and Related Fields , 113:273–285, 1999. [16] O. H¨ aggstr¨ om, Y. Peres, and R. H. Schonmann. Percolation on transitive graphs as a coalescent process: relentless merging followed by simultaneous uniqueness . Springer, 1999. [17] M. Heveling and G. Last. Characterization of Palm measures via bijective point-shifts. The Annals of Probability , 33(5):1698–1715, 2005. [18] T. Hutchcroft. Wired cycle-breaking dynamics for uniform spanning forests. 

The Annals of Probability , 44(6):3879 – 3892, 2016. [19] T. Hutchcroft. Indistinguishability of collections of trees in the uniform spanning forest. Annales de l’Institut Henri Poincar´ e, Probabilit´ es et Statis-tiques , 56(2):917 – 927, 2020. [20] T. Hutchcroft and A. Nachmias. Indistinguishability of trees in uniform spanning forests. Probab. Theory Related Fields , 168(1-2):113–152, 2017. [21] V. A. Kaimanovich. Measure-theoretic boundaries of Markov chains, 0–2 laws and entropy. In Harmonic analysis and discrete potential theory , pages 145–180. Springer, 1992. 95 [22] A. Khezeli. A unified framework for generalizing the Gromov-Hausdorff metric. Probability Surveys , 20:837–896, 2023. [23] A. Khezeli. Unimodular random measured metric spaces and Palm theory on them. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.02863 , 2023. [24] G. Last, P. M¨ orters, and H. Thorisson. Unbiased shifts of brownian motion. 

The Annals of Probability , 42(2):431–463, 2014. [25] G. Last, G. Peccati, and D. Yogeshwaran. Phase transitions and noise sen-sitivity on the Poisson space via stopping sets and decision trees. Random Structures & Algorithms , 63(2):457–511, 2023. [26] T. Lindvall. A probabilistic proof of Blackwell’s renewal theorem. The Annals of Probability , 5(3):482–485, 1977. [27] R. Lyons and Y. Peres. Probability on trees and networks , volume 42 of 

Cambridge Series in Statistical and Probabilistic Mathematics . Cambridge University Press, New York, 2016. [28] R. Lyons and O. Schramm. Indistinguishability of percolation clusters. 

Ann. Probab. , 27(4):1809–1836, 1999. [29] J. T. Murphy III. Exact coupling of random walks on Polish groups. Journal of Theoretical Probability , 32(4):1729–1745, 2019. [30] B. G. Nguyen. Percolation of coalescing random walks. J. Appl. Probab. ,27(2):269–277, 1990. [31] R. Pemantle and Y. Peres. Concentration of Lipschitz functionals of deter-minantal and other strong Rayleigh measures. Combinatorics, Probability and Computing , 23(1):140–160, 2014. [32] F. Spitzer. Principles of random walk , volume 34. Springer, 1964. 96