Title: Inverting Neural Networks: New Methods to Generate Neural Network Inputs from Prescribed Outputs

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.20461v2

Published Time: Wed, 25 Mar 2026 01:19:55 GMT

Number of Pages: 4

Markdown Content:
# Inverting Neural Networks: New Methods to Generate Neural Network Inputs from Prescribed Outputs 

Rebecca Pattichis ∗, Sebastian Janampa †, Constantinos S. Pattichis ‡, and Marios S. Pattichis †∗Department of Electrical Engineering, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles CA, USA Email: rebeccapattichis2000@gmail.com 

†Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM, USA Emails: {sebasjr1966, pattichi }@unm.edu 

‡Department of Computer Science, University of Cyprus, Cyprus Email: pattichis.costas@ucy.ac.cy 

Abstract —Neural network systems describe complex mappings that can be very difficult to understand. In this paper, we study the inverse problem of determining the input images that get mapped to specific neural network classes. Ultimately, we expect that these images contain recognizable features that are associated with their corresponding class classifications. We introduce two general methods for solving the inverse problem. In our forward pass method, we develop an inverse method based on a root-finding algorithm and the Jacobian with respect to the input image. In our backward pass method, we iteratively invert each layer, at the top. During the inversion process, we add random vectors sampled from the null-space of each linear layer. We demonstrate our new methods on both transformer architectures and sequential networks based on linear layers. Unlike previous methods, we show that our new methods are able to produce random-like input images that yield near perfect classification scores in all cases, revealing vulnerabilities in the underlying networks. Hence, we conclude that the proposed methods provide a more comprehensive coverage of the input image spaces that solve the inverse mapping problem. 

Index Terms —Explainable AI, neural networks, inverse maps 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Neural network (NN) systems are used to represent complex mappings from inputs to outputs. For image classification problems, a NN system maps high-dimensional image data to a low-dimensional space of class probabilities. Understanding and interpreting such complex mappings requires that we also study the inverse problem: what types of images are mapped to specific classes (e.g., see [1]). Solutions to the inverse problem can provide great insights about the stability of the NN system. For example, by exam-ining the input images for a specific class, we hope to see that the system relies on reasonable image features. If not, then it would be possible to attack the network by using unrelated inputs that yield specific classes (e.g., see [2]). Furthermore, for classification problems, we may want to use undesirable input images that yield specific classes to retrain the network 

This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. 1949230. 

to classify them correctly (e.g., adversarial learning [3]). On the other hand, when we return desirable images, we can use the inverse map as an image generator. The paper studies the inverse problem of determining NN inputs that yield a specific output distribution, building on prior research [1]. In [1], we studied the use of vector spaces for understanding NN representations and inverting their outputs. Earlier work on inverting NNs using trainable input images was described in [4]. Notably, our methods do not require additional training (e.g., decoders). This paper makes several contributions over prior methods. First, we present a forward pass algorithm that uses random sampling and accelerated root-finding methods based on the Jacobian of the NN with respect to the input. We note that the forward pass algorithm can be applied to any NN architecture block. Second, we present a more sophisticated backward pass algorithm that can be applied to NN architecture blocks that consist of softmax , invertible activation functions (e.g., 

SELU ), and linear layers. Our backward pass algorithm inverts each layer sequentially and utilizes random sampling from the null spaces of the linear layers to generate sample images. Third, we demonstrate our methods on networks based on lin-ear layers as well as well as modern transformer networks. Our results expose network vulnerabilities by producing random-like images that yield near perfect classification scores. II. B ACKGROUND 

Earlier research on the use of vector spaces for understand-ing linear layers is based on [1]. In [1], we defined the null-space of a linear layer as the rejected signal space. Here, we will use random samples from the rejected signal space to generate sample outputs for the prior layer. In [1], we also considered two approaches for calculating input images for prescribed outputs. Our first method searched the training dataset to find the an input image that maximized our desired class probability. For our first method, we also computed the average of all images that fell within the lowest 25th percentile of distances to the desired (ideal) output values.   

> arXiv:2603.20461v2 [cs.CV] 24 Mar 2026 Fig. 1. Neural Network inversion using forward pass. 1:

function FORWARD PASS INV (NN, ClassDistr, Loss) 

▷ The function generates inputs for any given ClassDistr. 

▷ The method has no restrictions on the Neural Network. 

▷ It can be used with B ACK PASS INV (.). 

▷ Input: 

▷ NN represents the neural network model. 

▷ ClassDistr describes the desired output prob. distr. 

▷ Loss function describes the loss function to minimize. 

▷ Output: 

▷ x represents a random sample image so that: 

▷ NN(x) outputs ClassDistr  

> 2:

Sample a random initial guess for x0. 

> 3:

Compute Jacobian J for loss function wrt x.  

> 4:

x ← RootFinding (x0, J ) 

> 5:

Verify NN(x) generates ClassDistr  

> 6:

return x or error  

> 7:

end function 

This first method, however, is not able to search the entire space of possible images. Our second approach trained the image so as to minimize the mean squared error (e.g., see [4]). For this second method, we use the first method to initialize the search. A fundamental limitation of these prior approaches is that the generated images are close to the original training set. In the current paper, we will show that our proposed methods will generate random-like input images that are far from the training set. III. M ETHODS 

For our methods, we assume that the NN has been pre-trained for a specific problem. We describe two different methods below. 

A. Forward Pass Algorithm 

Our forward pass algorithm (Fig. 1) relies on the use of traditional root-finding methods for generating inputs (e.g., see [5]). We start with a random input vector x that is used as an initial guess in a root-finding algorithm. Root-finding algorithms solve the general problem of computing y = F (x)

for multidimensional inputs and outputs. To accelerate the convergence, we supply the algorithms with the Jacobian of the loss function used to train the NN. Provided that the root-finding algorithm starts sufficiently close to a solution, we can guarantee convergence [5]. In practice, by randomizing the initial guess image, we expect the root-finding algorithm to converge to different local solutions. 

B. Backward Pass Algorithm 

We summarize the algorithm in Fig. 2. For the example in Fig. 2, we consider a classification network given by: 

y = softmax (ϕn (. . . ϕ 2 (W2ϕ1 (W1x + b1) + b2))) (1) where: 

ϕ1, . . . , ϕ n are invertible activation functions ,W1, . . . , W n are the weight matrices, and 

b1, . . . , b n are the bias terms for the linear layers .

The algorithm works by inverting backwards from the 

softmax layer to layer n, down to layer 1.We invert the softmax layer (up to a constant) using: 

softmax −1(yi) = log( yi) − 1

c

> c

X

> j=1

log( yj )

where y is our desired class probability distributions, or 

ClassDistr in Figures 1 and 2, and c is the number of output classes in our classification model. We define an activation function ϕi to be invertible pro-vided that ϕi is one-to-one so that ϕ−1 

> i

(ϕi(y)) = y for any 

y ∈ Di. Examples of invertible activation functions include the LeakyRelu and SELU . Unfortunately, numerically, in-verting activation functions can be unstable for specific input-output values. For example, both activation functions can have relatively large condition numbers for vectors that contain positive and negative numbers for LeakyRelu and for large negative numbers for SELU . As a result, to avoid instability in the calculations, in cases where the inversion leads to an unbounded number (large number), we return an error message. For inverting x− 

> i

= Wixi−1 + bi to get xi−1, we use the Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) [6]. To avoid instability, we modify the relative condition number of the pseudoinverse 

A+ as follows. Let the SVD decomposition for Wi be Wi =

UiΣiV Ti . The pseudoinverse is then given by W + 

> i

= ViΣ+ 

> i

U Ti

where Σ+ 

> i

contains 1/σ i along the diagonal. The relative condition number κ is given by: κ = σ1/σ k, where σ1 denotes the largest singular value and σk denotes the smallest non-zero singular value. Large values for κ signify instability in the inversion process. To avoid instability, for large κ, we zero out the lowest singular values by a threshold representing a reasonable condition number maximum, such as 100 (line 7 in the algorithm). As a result, the new κ can be significantly reduced at the expense of computing a stable approximation to the inverse (see line 8 in the algorithm). A key innovation of our approach is that we use the null-space of Wi to generate all possible inputs xi−1 that can be used to generate x− 

> i

. This is accomplished by creating a vector of random coefficients, multiplying it by the Null (Wi) basis vectors, and then normalizing the output using the norm of the SVD inverse vector (lines 9 and 10 of the algorithm). The process is then repeated for each layer. At the end, the learned image is substituted back into the neural network to verify Fig. 2. Neural Network inversion using backward pass. 1: function BACK PASS INV (NN, ClassDistr, Std, CondNum) 

▷ The function generates inputs for any given ClassDistr. 

▷ The method is restricted to classification problems 

▷ using SoftMax, invertible activation functions, 

▷ and linear layers. It can be used with 

▷ FORWARD PASS INV (.). 

▷ Input: 

▷ NN represents the neural network model. 

▷ ClassDistr describes the desired output prob. distr. 

▷ Std controls the variance for drawing samples from 

▷ the Null-space. 

▷ CondNum is an optional threshold for 

▷ controlling the condition of the weight matrices. 

▷ Output: 

▷ x represents a random sample image so that: 

▷ NN(x) outputs ClassDistr  

> 2:

Invert SoftMax layer by  

> 3:

computing inputs xn from ClassDistr.  

> 4:

for layer i ← n, n − 1, . . . , 1 do  

> 5:

Invert the activation function ϕi to get x− 

> i

. 

> 6:

If x− 

> i

grows unbounded return error.  

> 7:

Stabilize W + 

> i

to CondNum maximum.  

> 8:

xi−1 ← W + 

> i

(x− 

> i

− bi). 

> 9:

Sample random null-space vector S using Std.  

> 10:

xi−1 ← xi−1 + Null (Wi)S.  

> 11:

end for  

> 12:

Verify NN(x) generates ClassDistr  

> 13:

return x or error  

> 14:

end function 

that it produces the given probability distribution. Otherwise, it returns an error. A key property of B ACK PASS INV (.) is that it generates all possible input images that can yield the given class distri-bution. On the other hand, F ORWARD PASS INV (.) relies on random input sampling to discover new inputs. 

C. Generalized Method 

Consider a general Neural Network (NN) form given by: NN (x) = NN n(. . . NN 2(NN 1(x))) 

where NN 1, NN 2, . . . , NN n denote neural network architecture blocks. Here, we note that each block operates on the output of the previous block as given by NN i(NN i−1(.)) . By using the mean-squared error loss function, we can clearly use the F ORWARD PASS INV (.) to invert each block. Furthermore, any block that consists of invertible activation functions and linear layers, with or without softmax , can be inverted using the methods described in B ACK PASS INV (.). Thus, while FORWARD PASS INV (.) generates a single input, a combination of F ORWARD PASS INV (.) and B ACK PASS INV (.) can be used to generate a distribution of random input samples. IV. R ESULTS 

A. FORWARD PASS INV Applied to Transformer Architectures 

We consider the application of the forward pass to trans-former architectures used in image classification. Here, we note that Vision Transformers (ViT) only pass the class em-bedding to the classification layers. We run our experiments on two different ViT models, tiny-ViT [7] and DINOv3-Base [8], fine-tuned on the MNIST dataset, achieving validation accuracy of 95.7% and 99.8%, respectively. The models specifications and training hyper-parameters are summarized in Table I. We use the timm library [9] and its FlexiViT [10] implementation to resize the patch embedding kernel to 

4 × 4. We use the Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm as the root-finding algorithm [5]. We apply up to 30 iterations and verify convergence of the algorithm.  

> TABLE I MODEL PARAMETERS ,TRAINING HYPER -PARAMETERS

ViT-tiny DINOv3-Base patch size 4 × 4 4 × 4

input channels 1 1hidden dim 192 768 num. of layers 12 12 epochs 32 32 batch size 32 32 EMA model True True EMA warm up iters 500 500 optimizer AdamW AdamW 

B. Backward Pass Algorithm Applications 

To test the backward pass algorithm, we train fully-connected neural networks (FCNN) with varying sizes, namely 1, 2, and 6 linear layers. Each Linear layer was followed by an SELU activation function, although any invertible activa-tion function can be used (e.g., Leaky ReLU). Each FCNN is trained with the SGD optimizer, learning rate of 0.001, momentum of 0.9, and 20 epochs, matching the hyperparam-eters from [1]. The 1-, 2-, and 6-layer FCNNs get 91.5%, 95.4%, and 96.9% validation accuracy, respectively. During the inversion process, we set Std to 0.1. 

C. Discussion 

We provide comparative results in Fig. 3. The first row displays sample images from the MNIST training set. From our prior work in [1], second row in Fig. 3, we can see that the previous algorithms gave images that were very close to the train-data [1]-1layer 1layer-NN 2layer-NN 6layer-NN ViT-tiny DINOV3 

Class 0 Class 1 Class 2 Class 3 Class 4 Class 5 Class 6 Class 7 Class 8 Class 9 

Fig. 3. Generated ideal input images using different algorithms. train-data row: reference images given in the MNIST training data for each class. [1]-1layer row: ideal images generated in [1]. 1layerNN, 2layerNN, and 6layer NN rows: ideal images generated B ACK PASS INV algorithm on FCNNs, with null-space noise added ( Std = 0 .1). ViT-tiny and DINOV3 rows: generated images using F ORWARD PASS INV (.). All generated images from new methods produce a probability score ≥ 0.9 for each digit class and ≤0.1 for the other ones. 

training dataset. Following, our new methods generate images that give ≥ 0.9 probability for the target class and ≤ 0.1

probability for the remaining digits. Our new methods provide random-like input images that ex-pose the vulnerabilities of the underlying networks. It is clear from our results that image randomness increases dramatically with the complexity of the network. For example, while the 1-layer images of the third row bear some resemblance to the training set images, 2 or more layer networks seem to be completely random-like. This is consistent with the bias-variance tradeoff that states that the variance of statistical models increases with model complexity, while the bias is reduced. This is also demonstrated for the two transformer networks in our bottom rows. The images for DINOV3 appear even more random than the images for ViT-tiny. V. C ONCLUSION 

We have introduced two new methods for generating input images that produce prescribed neural network outputs. The generated images expose the vulnerability of the underlying network architectures. Currently, we are working on expanding the coverage of B ACKWARD PASS INV (.) to use linear program-ming methods for generating images for neural networks with ReLU activations that are non-invertible. REFERENCES [1] R. Pattichis and M. S. Pattichis, “Understanding neural network systems for image analysis using vector spaces,” in 2024 IEEE Southwest Symposium on Image Analysis and Interpretation (SSIAI) . IEEE, 2024, pp. 73–76. [2] I. J. Goodfellow, J. Shlens, and C. Szegedy, “Explaining and harnessing adversarial examples,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6572 , 2014. [3] D. Lowd and C. Meek, “Adversarial learning,” in Proceedings of the eleventh ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery in data mining , 2005, pp. 641–647. [4] K. Simonyan, A. Vedaldi, and A. Zisserman, “Deep inside convolutional networks: Visualising image classification models and saliency maps,” 2014. [5] J. Nocedal and S. J. Wright, Numerical optimization . Springer, 2006. [6] L. N. Trefethen and D. Bau, Numerical linear algebra . SIAM, 2022. [7] A. Dosovitskiy, L. Beyer, A. Kolesnikov, D. Weissenborn, X. Zhai, T. Unterthiner, M. Dehghani, M. Minderer, G. Heigold, S. Gelly, J. Uszkoreit, and N. Houlsby, “An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale,” ICLR , 2021. [8] O. Sim´ eoni, H. V. Vo, M. Seitzer, F. Baldassarre, M. Oquab, C. Jose, V. Khalidov, M. Szafraniec, S. Yi, M. Ramamonjisoa, F. Massa, D. Haziza, L. Wehrstedt, J. Wang, T. Darcet, T. Moutakanni, L. Sentana, C. Roberts, A. Vedaldi, J. Tolan, J. Brandt, C. Couprie, J. Mairal, H. J´ egou, P. Labatut, and P. Bojanowski, “DINOv3,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.10104 [9] R. Wightman, “Pytorch image models,” https://github.com/huggingface/ pytorch-image-models, 2019. [10] L. Beyer, P. Izmailov, A. Kolesnikov, M. Caron, S. Kornblith, X. Zhai, M. Minderer, M. Tschannen, I. Alabdulmohsin, and F. Pavetic, “Flexivit: One model for all patch sizes,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.08013 , 2022.