Title: Bayesian calibration of adaptive-behavior SIR models for multi-wave COVID-19 incidence in New York City

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.27283v1

Published Time: Thu, 24 Sep 2026 00:30:15 GMT

Number of Pages: 28

Markdown Content:
# Bayesian calibration of adaptive-behavior SIR models for multi-wave COVID-19 incidence in New York City 

# Luis A. Barboza Carlos Pasquier Baltazar Espinoza Fabio Sanchez May 2025 

Abstract 

Epidemic incidence reflects both transmission dynamics and adaptive human behavior, yet these mechanisms may be difficult to distinguish from aggregate case data alone. We calibrated four susceptible–infected– recovered (SIR) specifications to weekly confirmed COVID-19 incidence in New York City from June to December 2020, comparing a single con-tinuous SIR trajectory, a wave-initialized SIR model, and two adaptive-behavior models with either shared or wave-specific transmission. In-ference was performed using rejection Approximate Bayesian Computa-tion (ABC), and in-sample reconstruction was assessed using root mean squared error (RMSE) and the weighted interval score (WIS). Reinitializ-ing the epidemic state by wave produced the largest structural improve-ment over the continuous SIR trajectory, reducing mean-based RMSE by 48.6% and WIS by 17.6%. Adding delayed prevalence-dependent be-havioral adaptation with shared transmission further reduced mean-based RMSE by 23.4%, but yielded essentially unchanged WIS relative to the wave-initialized SIR model. Allowing transmission to vary by wave did not provide a consistent additional advantage and produced strongly asym-metric posterior-simulation trajectories. Behavioral sensitivity, response midpoint, and delay remained only weakly to partially identified. The clearest posterior structure was a negative association between transmis-sion intensity and the behavioral midpoint, indicating that higher trans-mission could be compensated by behavioral responses activated at lower prevalence. Sensitivity to ordered behavioral priors further showed that reconstruction and behavioral inference depend materially on structural prior assumptions. These results suggest that adaptive mechanisms can improve multi-wave incidence reconstruction, while aggregate incidence alone is insufficient to sharply separate transmission from behavioral adap-tation. 

Keywords: COVID-19; adaptive human behavior; SIR model; Approximate Bayesian Computation; identifiability; behavioral epidemiology; New York City. 1arXiv:2609.27283v1 [stat.AP] 23 Sep 2026 1 Introduction 

Epidemic dynamics reflect more than pathogen transmission alone. They arise from a coupled system in which infection risk, public information, institu-tional interventions, and individual behavior can continually modify one an-other. Classical susceptible–infected–recovered (SIR) models, by contrast, rep-resent transmission through a fixed contact process governed by infection and recovery [10, 9]. Although this simplification is analytically useful, the COVID-19 pandemic made its limitations particularly visible: mobility, masking, social contact, and adherence to non-pharmaceutical interventions changed substan-tially in response to perceived risk and epidemic conditions, thereby altering effective transmission over time [15]. A substantial literature has therefore incorporated adaptive human behav-ior into epidemic models. Behavioral responses have been represented as func-tions of current or perceived prevalence, awareness transmitted through social contact, media and public-health information, or strategic responses to infec-tion risk [7, 6, 5, 16, 19]. When such responses feed back into contact rates, they can alter epidemic timing and generate plateaus, delayed peaks, oscil-lations, or successive waves that cannot be attributed to pathogen dynamics alone [4, 20]. Delays between changes in epidemiological conditions and behav-ioral responses provide an additional mechanism through which this feedback can shape epidemic trajectories. Mahmud et al. [12], for example, introduced a delayed prevalence-dependent contact-reduction function capable of generating recurrent epidemic waves through endogenous behavioral adaptation. The same coupling that makes adaptive models epidemiologically attractive also creates an inferential problem. Aggregate incidence does not directly reveal whether a change in epidemic growth was produced by transmission, behavioral adaptation, or some combination of the two. A model may compensate for higher transmission with stronger or earlier contact reduction, while a model that omits behavioral change may absorb behavioral effects into its transmission coefficient [4, 20]. Consequently, fitting an adaptive model successfully does not imply that its behavioral parameters are well identified. This distinction between trajectory reconstruction and mechanistic identifiability is particularly important when the fitted outcome is reported case incidence, because changes in ascertainment may introduce an additional source of variation that is not explicitly represented in the epidemic model. Multi-wave epidemics provide a useful setting in which to examine this prob-lem because they require a model to accommodate substantial changes in inci-dence over time. New York City offers a well-documented example. Following the severe initial COVID-19 outbreak in spring 2020, the city experienced a period of phased reopening followed by renewed epidemic growth later in the year, while public-health policies and population behavior continued to evolve [13, 14, 15]. We focus on weekly confirmed cases from June 7 through December 12, 2020. This interval captures several distinct changes in the observed inci-dence trajectory while ending immediately before COVID-19 vaccination began in the city, allowing the analysis to concentrate on a pre-vaccination period 2without introducing an explicit vaccination compartment. We use this setting to examine how progressively more flexible SIR spec-ifications reconstruct multi-wave incidence and what their fitted parameters can legitimately reveal about behavioral adaptation. Building on the delayed logistic contact-reduction mechanism of Mahmud et al. [12], we compare four models. The first is a classical SIR model initialized once and propagated contin-uously through the full study period. The second retains the non-adaptive SIR structure but independently initializes three fixed epidemic-wave windows. The remaining two models add delayed prevalence-dependent contact adaptation to these wave-specific windows, with transmission either shared across waves or allowed to vary by wave. This sequence of specifications allows us to distinguish the reconstruction gained from wave-specific initialization from that associated with an explicit behavioral mechanism, and to examine whether additional flex-ibility in transmission changes inference on the behavioral parameters. Because calibration of these nonlinear dynamical models is performed with-out an explicit observation likelihood, we use rejection Approximate Bayesian Computation (ABC), a simulation-based approach for inference when direct likelihood evaluation is unavailable or deliberately avoided [1, 3, 18]. Model reconstruction is compared on a common set of weekly observations using root mean squared error (RMSE) for central trajectories and the weighted interval score (WIS) to summarize the accuracy and sharpness of intervals induced by un-certainty in the ABC-accepted parameter distribution [8, 2]. These comparisons are explicitly in sample and are used descriptively rather than as out-of-sample forecasting or complexity-adjusted model-selection criteria. Our analysis addresses three related questions. First, how much of the multi-wave incidence pattern can be reconstructed by relaxing the requirement of a single uninterrupted SIR trajectory? Second, after accounting for wave-specific initialization, does a delayed adaptive-behavior mechanism provide additional improvement in reconstruction? Third, and most importantly, to what extent can aggregate incidence distinguish the parameters governing transmission from those governing prevalence-dependent behavioral adaptation? We examine the last question through prior-to-posterior updating, posterior dependence among transmission and behavioral parameters, and sensitivity to both the ABC ac-ceptance threshold and monotonic structural assumptions on the behavioral response. In this way, the objective is not only to determine whether adaptive behavior can reproduce multi-wave epidemic trajectories, but also to establish what the available incidence data can and cannot identify about the behavioral mechanisms used to explain them. 

# 2 Data 

The primary data source was the COVID-19: Data Trends and Totals portal maintained by the New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene, together with its underlying public repository [13, 14]. The dataset reports daily counts of confirmed and probable COVID-19 cases, hospitalizations, and 3deaths for New York City, with additional geographic disaggregation by bor-ough. Events are indexed by date_of_interest rather than by the date on which they were reported, and the complete daily series is publicly available in machine-readable form. We used CASE_COUNT as the observed incidence series. This variable records persons confirmed as COVID-19 cases according to their diagnosis date. Only confirmed cases were included in the calibration. Over the study period, the corresponding probable-case series contained 31,324 cases, approximately 23.8% of the confirmed-case total. We excluded probable cases because they were defined through a separate ascertainment category and combining the two series would introduce an additional observation process into a model that does not explicitly represent case ascertainment. Hospitalizations and deaths were also not used in the present incidence-only calibration. The analysis covered June 7 through December 12, 2020. This interval begins after the intense spring epidemic and around the beginning of New York City’s phased reopening, while ending immediately before COVID-19 vaccination be-gan in the city on December 14, 2020 [17, 11]. Restricting the analysis to this pre-vaccination interval avoids introducing an additional immunity mechanism that is absent from the SIR models considered here. Daily confirmed cases were aggregated into 27 consecutive Sunday–Saturday weekly totals. Weekly aggregation reduces the pronounced day-of-week varia-tion present in the diagnosis-date series and matches the one-week temporal res-olution of the discrete epidemic models. As a descriptive diagnostic, the ratio of daily confirmed cases to their centered seven-day mean averaged approximately 0.63 on Saturdays and Sundays and 1.14 from Monday through Friday over the study window. Aggregating over complete calendar weeks therefore reduces this short-period variation without requiring additional smoothing of the epidemic trajectory. The resulting weekly series contained 131,574 confirmed cases. Weekly counts ranged from 1,628 cases in the week beginning August 16 to 19,554 cases in the week beginning December 6, a ratio of approximately 12 between the largest and smallest observations. The substantial variation in incidence over the study period motivated the use of a logarithmic discrepancy for ABC calibration, as described in Section 3, so that the late-autumn high-incidence weeks did not dominate the lower-incidence summer period. The fixed parti-tion of this series into three epidemic-wave windows is described separately in Section 3; the wave boundaries are a modeling choice rather than an intrinsic feature of the source data. Confirmed cases represent an ascertained subset of infections rather than the latent infection process represented by the epidemic model. Testing availabil-ity, test-seeking behavior, and the probability that an infection was diagnosed may have changed during the study period. Because no reporting fraction or explicit observation model was estimated, such changes cannot be separated from changes in the fitted epidemic parameters. The model coefficients should therefore be interpreted as effective parameters calibrated to confirmed-case inci-dence rather than as direct estimates of biological transmission or true infection 4Quantity Value Study period June 7–December 12, 2020 Weekly observations 27 Total confirmed cases 131,574 Minimum weekly count 1,628 Maximum weekly count 19,554 Maximum-to-minimum ratio 12.0 Population, N 8,804,190 Table 1: Summary of the confirmed COVID-19 case series used in the analysis. Daily counts are indexed by diagnosis date and aggregated into consecutive Sunday–Saturday weeks. The population is the 2020 Decennial Census count for New York City used in the epidemic models. prevalence. The source series is also subject to retrospective revision as records are up-dated. To ensure internal reproducibility, a fixed extraction of the daily dataset and the derived weekly series were used consistently across all model specifica-tions. All analyses use publicly available aggregate data and no individual-level records. The processed data and analysis code are available at [REPOSITORY LINK] .

# 3 Methods 

# 3.1 Weekly SIR and adaptive-behavior models 

The classical Susceptible–Infected–Recovered (SIR) model partitions a closed population into susceptible ( S), infectious ( I), and recovered ( R) compart-ments and describes epidemic dynamics through transitions between these states [10, 9]. To represent adaptive changes in contact behavior, we use the frame-work proposed by Mahmud et al. [12], in which effective contacts are reduced according to a delayed population-level response to infection prevalence. In continuous time, the adaptive model can be written as 

dS dt = −



1 − r

 I(t − τ )

N

 

β S(t)I(t)

N ,dI dt =



1 − r

 I(t − τ )

N

 

β S(t)I(t)

N − γI (t), (1) 

dR dt = γI (t),

where β denotes transmission intensity, γ the recovery rate, τ the delay between the epidemiological signal and the behavioral response, and N = S + I + R the constant population size. Setting r ≡ 0 gives the corresponding classical SIR system. 5Following [12], the behavioral response is represented by the logistic function 

r(p) = 11 + exp[ −k(p − c)] , p = IN . (2) Here r(p) ∈ [0 , 1] is interpreted as the proportional reduction in effective contacts at prevalence p. The parameter c is the response midpoint, so that r(c) = 0 .5, while k controls the steepness of the prevalence–response relationship. The slope of the response at its midpoint is k/ 4, and larger values of k therefore generate a sharper, more threshold-like transition around c. Smaller k values produce a flatter response with weaker dependence on prevalence. In the limit k → 0, 

r(p) → 0.5 for all p; this removes prevalence dependence but does not recover the non-adaptive SIR model, which is defined separately by r ≡ 0. The continuous-time formulation provides the mechanistic basis of the model. Because both the observed incidence series and the behavioral delay are resolved at weekly frequency, however, all calibration and inference were performed using a discrete-time formulation with a one-week time step. Specifically, we used a forward-Euler discretization of the continuous system. For the models fitted to epidemic-wave windows, let w ∈ { 1, 2, 3} index the epidemic wave and let t index the weekly states within that wave. The number of incident cases generated in the transition from week t to week t + 1 is 

Cw,t +1 =



1 − rw

 Iw,t −τ

N

 

βw

Sw,t Iw,t 

N , (3) and the compartmental states evolve according to 

Sw,t +1 = Sw,t − Cw,t +1 ,Iw,t +1 = Iw,t + Cw,t +1 − γI w,t , (4) 

Rw,t +1 = Rw,t + γI w,t .

For delayed indices preceding the beginning of wave w, the infectious state was held at the wave-specific initialization parameter, 

Iw,t = Iinit  

> w

, t < 0. (5) The delay was restricted to integer numbers of weeks, consistent with the tempo-ral resolution of the model and data. In specifications with a global transmission coefficient, βw = β for all waves; in the non-adaptive models, rw(·) ≡ 0. The single-trajectory SIR benchmark uses the same weekly SIR update with 

r ≡ 0, but differs in that it is initialized only once, at the beginning of the full study period, and then propagated continuously through all 27 weeks without resetting S, I, or R at the wave boundaries. The population was fixed at N = 8 ,804 ,190 , the 2020 Decennial Census population of New York City. Initial infectious-state counts were treated as continuous model quantities rather than rounded to integers. No reporting fraction or explicit observation model was estimated. Simulated weekly incidence was compared directly with weekly confirmed-case counts. The 6fitted compartmental and transmission parameters should therefore be inter-preted as effective parameters of a simplified model calibrated to the observed-case process, rather than as direct estimates of true infection prevalence or purely biological transmission rates. In particular, changes in case ascertain-ment that are not represented explicitly can be absorbed by the fitted parame-ters. To preserve compartmental feasibility, the numerical implementation re-stricts simulated incident infections in a weekly step to the remaining susceptible population and checks conservation of S + I + R = N . Activation of this safe-guard was tracked as a numerical diagnostic and did not occur among the draws retained in the analyses reported below. 

# 3.2 Study period, wave partition, and initialization 

The weekly series comprised 27 observations covering June 7–December 12, 2020. For the three wave-based model specifications, the series was partitioned into three non-overlapping epidemic windows. Wave 1 contained eight weekly observations covering June 7–August 1; wave 2 contained eleven observations covering August 2–October 17; and wave 3 contained eight observations covering October 18–December 12. The wave boundaries were determined through exploratory inspection of the weekly case trajectory, using approximate changes in the epidemic pattern to delimit successive periods. They were not estimated by a changepoint model or defined from an external policy classification. The partition should therefore be viewed as a pragmatic modeling device rather than as a formal identification of epidemiologically unique wave boundaries, and all wave-specific inference is conditional on this fixed partition. The single-trajectory SIR benchmark does not use the wave boundaries to reset the epidemic state. It is initialized once at the beginning of the study period according to 

S0 = N − Iinit ,I0 = Iinit , (6) 

R0 = 0 ,

and the resulting SIR trajectory is propagated continuously through the full 27-week period. By contrast, the remaining three primary specifications are independently initialized within each epidemic-wave window. We denote by Iinit  

> w

the latent infectious-state count used to initialize wave w. The initial conditions are 

Sw, 0 = N − Iinit  

> w

,Iw, 0 = Iinit  

> w

, (7) 

Rw, 0 = 0 .

7For the adaptive models, the pre-initialization history required by the delayed response was held constant at Iinit  

> w

, as specified in Eq. (5). For the wave-based models, the first weekly entry of each wave is associated with the initialized compartmental state and with a zero-incidence placeholder rather than with incidence generated by a weekly transition. Consequently, the first observation of each wave was excluded from both the ABC discrepancy and the model-evaluation metrics, leaving 24 post-initialization observations. For comparability, the single-trajectory benchmark was evaluated on exactly the same set of 24 calendar weeks. Thus, the observations corresponding to the beginnings of waves 2 and 3 were excluded from its discrepancy and evaluation metrics even though they occur internally along the continuous SIR trajectory. These weeks were not removed from the state dynamics: their simulated tran-sitions contribute to the subsequent values of S, I, and R. All four primary specifications were therefore calibrated and evaluated against an identical set of observed weekly counts. 

# 3.3 Model specifications 

We compared four primary structural specifications that differ in whether the epidemic state is propagated continuously across the full study period or reini-tialized by wave, whether behavioral adaptation is included, and whether trans-mission is shared across waves. The two adaptive models use independent, identically distributed base priors for the wave-specific behavioral parameters in the primary analysis; no monotonicity relationship among waves is imposed. Table 2 summarizes the four specifications. 1. SIR (single trajectory). The non-adaptive benchmark with a single transmission coefficient β, recovery coefficient γ, and initialization param-eter Iinit . The model is initialized once at the beginning of the study period and propagated continuously through all 27 weeks. This specifica-tion assesses how much of the observed multi-wave incidence pattern can be reconstructed by a single static SIR trajectory without wave-specific resets or behavioral adaptation. 2. SIR (wave-specific initialization). The non-adaptive model with global 

β and γ but three independently initialized wave windows with separate initialization parameters 

Iinit 1 , Iinit 2 , Iinit 3 .

Relative to the single-trajectory benchmark, this specification introduces both wave segmentation and wave-specific reinitialization while retaining a common transmission and recovery structure. The comparison therefore measures the gain obtained by allowing each epidemic window to begin from its own latent infectious state, rather than isolating the effect of a single parameter change. 83. Adaptive ( β global). The adaptive model with global β, γ, and τ , to-gether with wave-specific behavioral sensitivities kw, behavioral midpoints 

cw, and initialization parameters Iinit  

> w

. In the primary specification, the three kw values and the three cw values are sampled independently from common base priors, with no ordering imposed across waves. 4. Adaptive ( β variable). The adaptive model with wave-specific trans-mission coefficients βw, behavioral parameters kw and cw, and initializa-tion parameters Iinit  

> w

, while γ and τ remain global. This specification tests whether additional wave-specific flexibility in transmission materi-ally changes reconstruction or inference on the behavioral component. Model Global parameters Wave-specific parameters Free parameters SIR (single trajectory) β, γ, I init none 3SIR (wave-specific initialization) β, γ Iinit  

> w

5Adaptive ( β global) β, γ, τ kw, c w, I init  

> w

12 Adaptive ( β variable) γ, τ βw, k w, c w, I init  

> w

14 Table 2: Structure of the four primary model specifications. The single-trajectory SIR is propagated continuously over the full study period, whereas the remaining three specifications use independently initialized epidemic-wave windows. Free-parameter counts include all global and wave-specific quantities sampled in the ABC calibration. The adaptive models are unrestricted with respect to ordering of kw and cw in the primary analysis. 

# 3.4 Priors and ABC calibration 

We assigned broad priors designed to span a wide range of weekly epidemic and behavioral dynamics rather than to encode precise external estimates. Parame-ters whose supports span multiple orders of magnitude were sampled uniformly on the log 10 scale, whereas β and γ were sampled uniformly on their natural weekly scale. Table 3 gives the complete specification. The support β ∈ [0 .4, 3.0] allows substantial variation in weekly transmission intensity, while γ ∈ [0 .05 , 0.6] allows between 5% and 60% of the current infec-tious compartment to leave that compartment during a weekly update. These ranges were intentionally broad because β and γ are effective coefficients of a simplified weekly model fitted to reported cases rather than externally fixed biological quantities. For the single-trajectory benchmark, the initialization parameter was as-signed log 10 Iinit ∼ U (2 .8, 4.8) .

For the wave-based models, each independently estimated initialization param-eter uses the corresponding base prior log 10 Iinit  

> w

∼ U (2 .8, 4.8) .

9This support corresponds to approximately 6 .3 × 10 2 to 6 .3 × 10 4 individuals, or approximately 0 .007%–0 .72% of the fixed New York City population, and permits substantial variation in the latent infectious state used to initialize a trajectory. For the behavioral parameters, log 10 k ∼ U (2 , 5) spans responses ranging from relatively gradual to sharply threshold-like, while log 10 c ∼ U  −4, log 10 (5 × 10 −2)

allows the 50% response midpoint to range from 0 .01% to 5% prevalence. The delay was assigned a discrete uniform prior on 

τ ∈ { 0, 1, 2, 3, 4} weeks ,

covering responses from no additional behavioral delay to approximately one month. Wave-specific copies of a parameter use the same base prior. Parameter Interpretation Support Sampling scale 

β weekly transmission coefficient [0 .4, 3.0] natural 

γ weekly recovery coefficient [0 .05 , 0.6] natural 

τ behavioral delay (weeks) {0, 1, 2, 3, 4} discrete 

k behavioral sensitivity [10 2, 10 5] log 10 

c behavioral midpoint (prevalence) [10 −4, 5 × 10 −2] log 10 

Iinit initial infectious-state count [10 2.8, 10 4.8] log 10 

Table 3: Base prior specifications used for ABC calibration. Priors are uniform over the stated support on the indicated sampling scale. Wave-specific quanti-ties, including Iinit  

> w

, use independent copies of the corresponding base prior in the primary analysis. We used rejection Approximate Bayesian Computation (ABC) to calibrate the deterministic weekly simulators without specifying an explicit observation likelihood [1, 3, 18]. For each model, candidate parameter vectors were drawn from the corresponding prior. The single-trajectory SIR was simulated contin-uously over the full 27-week period, whereas the remaining three specifications were simulated over their independently initialized epidemic-wave windows. The resulting weekly incidence was compared with the observed confirmed-case series using the same 24 calendar weeks for every model. The discrepancy was defined as the mean squared error on the log(1 + x) scale, 

d  bC(i), Y  = 1

|T | 

X

> t∈T

h

log 



1 + bC(i)

> t



− log (1 + Yt)

i2

, (8) where T contains the 24 retained calendar weeks. Every retained week con-tributes equally to the discrepancy. The logarithmic transformation reduces the 10 dominance of the largest weekly counts while retaining sensitivity to relative differences during the lower-incidence portions of the study period. For each primary model specification, we generated M = 500 ,000 candidate parameter vectors. Rather than fixing an absolute ABC tolerance in advance, candidates were ranked by discrepancy. The primary analysis retained the lowest-discrepancy q = 0 .005 fraction, corresponding to 2,500 accepted draws. The effective tolerance ε for each model is therefore the largest discrepancy among its 2,500 retained candidates and is model-specific. The retained draws constitute the empirical ABC approximation used for parameter summaries and posterior simulations. Algorithm 1 summarizes the calibration procedure. 

Algorithm 1 ABC rejection calibration used for the primary model specifica-tions  

> 1:

Input: observed weekly cases Y , model-specific prior π(θ), number of pro-posals M = 500 ,000, acceptance proportion q = 0 .005  

> 2:

for i = 1 , . . . , M do  

> 3:

Draw θ(i) ∼ π(θ) 

> 4:

Simulate either the full 27-week trajectory or the three wave windows, according to the model specification  

> 5:

Retain simulated incidence for the 24 common calendar weeks  

> 6:

Compute d(i) = d( bC(i), Y ) using Eq. (8)  

> 7:

end for  

> 8:

Rank the M proposals by d(i) 

> 9:

Retain the qM = 2 ,500 proposals with the smallest discrepancies  

> 10:

Set ε to the largest discrepancy in the retained set  

> 11:

Return: the 2,500 retained parameter vectors 

# 3.5 Sensitivity analyses 

We considered two sources of sensitivity: the ABC acceptance threshold and structural assumptions imposed on the behavioral priors. First, sensitivity to ABC tolerance was assessed by forming nested accepted sets corresponding to 

q ∈ { 0.0025 , 0.005 , 0.01 },

that is, the lowest-discrepancy 0.25%, 0.5%, and 1% of each pool of 500,000 proposals. These thresholds yield 1,250, 2,500, and 5,000 accepted draws, re-spectively. The 0.5% set is used for the primary results, while the other two sets assess whether substantive conclusions depend on a tighter or looser ABC approximation. Second, both adaptive models were re-estimated under ordered behavioral priors. The primary models allow kw and cw to vary independently across waves because the incidence data do not establish a direction of behavioral change a priori. Nevertheless, a progressively attenuated prevalence-dependent 11 response across successive waves is substantively plausible in this application. The restriction 

k1 ≥ k2 ≥ k3

requires the maximum slope of the logistic response, kw/4, not to increase across successive waves and therefore represents a progressively less steep response to changes in prevalence. The complementary restriction 

c1 ≤ c2 ≤ c3

requires the prevalence associated with a 50% contact reduction not to decrease, representing a progressively higher prevalence threshold for the same midpoint response. Taken jointly, these restrictions encode a structured hypothesis of progres-sively attenuated prevalence-responsive behavior over successive epidemic waves. Such a pattern could be compatible with mechanisms such as habituation to epi-demic risk, declining salience of case increases, or greater tolerance for maintain-ing contacts as the pandemic progressed. These mechanisms are not observed directly in the present data, however, and the ordered specification was therefore treated as a sensitivity analysis rather than as the primary behavioral model. Computationally, the ordered prior was generated by first drawing three independent values from the same base prior for each behavioral parameter and then sorting the k values in decreasing order and the c values in increasing order. The ordering therefore changes the wave-specific marginal priors before the data are observed. Consequently, an ordered posterior trajectory cannot by itself be interpreted as empirical evidence for monotonic behavioral change. We instead use these runs to determine how imposing this substantively motivated structure affects model reconstruction and posterior inference. 

# 3.6 Posterior simulation and model evaluation 

For each accepted ABC draw, the corresponding deterministic model was re-simulated according to its structural specification. The single-trajectory SIR was propagated continuously over all 27 weeks, whereas the remaining three models were re-simulated over their independently initialized epidemic-wave windows. The distribution of trajectories across accepted draws was summa-rized by the posterior-simulation mean, median, and central 50%, 90%, and 95% intervals. These intervals propagate uncertainty in the ABC-accepted parameter distribution only. Because the model contains no stochastic observation com-ponent, they do not represent full predictive intervals for variability in reported case counts. All evaluation metrics were computed on the same 24 calendar weeks used in the ABC discrepancy. For the single-trajectory SIR, the omitted observations at the wave boundaries remain part of the simulated state evolution even though their observed case counts do not contribute directly to the evaluation metrics. Point reconstruction was assessed using root mean squared error (RMSE) on the natural scale of weekly cases. We computed RMSE separately for the 12 posterior-simulation mean and median, RMSE s =

"

1

|T | 

X

> t∈T



Yt − bC(s)

> t

2

#1/2

, s ∈ { mean , median }. (9) Reporting both summaries reduces dependence of the comparison on a single measure of central tendency when the posterior-simulation distributions are asymmetric. We also used the weighted interval score (WIS) to summarize interval per-formance [8, 2]. For a central (1 − α) interval with lower and upper endpoints l

and u, the interval score is IS α(l, u ; y) = ( u − l) + 2

α (l − y)1{y < l } + 2

α (y − u)1{y > u }, (10) which combines interval width with penalties for observations falling below or above the interval. Given K central intervals and median m, the WIS is WIS( F, y ) = 1

K + 1 /2

 12 |y − m| +

> K

X

> j=1

wj IS αj (lj , u j ; y)

 , wj = αj

2 . (11) We used the K = 3 central intervals at 50%, 90%, and 95%, corresponding to 

α ∈ { 0.50 , 0.10 , 0.05 },

and averaged the weekly WIS over the 24 retained observations. Lower values indicate better combined interval accuracy and sharpness. Because WIS is formally a proper scoring rule for predictive distributions, its interpretation here requires qualification. In this analysis it is applied to the dis-tribution of trajectories induced by ABC parameter uncertainty alone, without an observation-level stochastic model. We therefore use WIS as a descriptive measure of in-sample interval performance rather than as a formal assessment of out-of-sample probabilistic forecast calibration. As complementary diagnostics, we computed empirical coverage of the cen-tral 50%, 90%, and 95% posterior-simulation intervals over the same 24 obser-vations. These coverage values were interpreted descriptively and jointly with interval width and WIS. Finally, all reported comparisons are in sample: the same weekly series is used for ABC calibration and model evaluation. RMSE, WIS, and coverage therefore assess reconstruction of the fitted data rather than out-of-sample fore-casting skill. Moreover, the four specifications differ substantially in param-eter dimension and structural flexibility, and the reported metrics contain no explicit penalty for model complexity. Differences among models should conse-quently be interpreted as descriptive comparisons of fitted reconstruction and parameter-induced interval performance, rather than as complexity-adjusted model-selection criteria. 13 4 Results 

# 4.1 In-sample reconstruction across primary models 

The four primary model specifications differed substantially in their ability to reconstruct the observed weekly case trajectory (Table 4; Figure 1). All com-parisons reported here use the primary ABC acceptance proportion, q = 0 .005, and the same 24 retained calendar weeks.                                 

> Model RMSE (mean) RMSE (median) WIS Cov. 50% Cov. 90% Cov. 95% SIR (single trajectory) 2638.3 2857.5 781.0 25.0 83.3 83.3 SIR (wave-specific initialization) 1355.5 1326.5 643.8 87.5 100.0 100.0 Adaptive ( βglobal) 1038.3 1209.6 653.1 95.8 100.0 100.0 Adaptive ( βvariable) 2102.6 1067.7 831.1 100.0 100.0 100.0

Table 4: In-sample reconstruction performance of the four primary model spec-ifications at the main ABC acceptance proportion q = 0 .005. RMSE, WIS, and empirical interval coverage were computed over the same 24 retained cal-endar weeks. For the single-trajectory SIR, all 27 weeks contributed to state propagation, but the same three observations excluded from scoring in the wave-initialized models were omitted from the evaluation metrics to ensure a common comparison set. The adaptive models use unrestricted wave-specific behavioral priors in the primary analysis. Lower RMSE and WIS indicate better recon-struction. Coverage is reported descriptively and should not be interpreted as out-of-sample predictive calibration. The SIR single-trajectory benchmark provided the poorest point reconstruc-tion among the simpler SIR specifications, with an RMSE of 2,638.3 cases for the posterior-simulation mean and 2,857.5 for the median. Its WIS was 781.0, while empirical coverage of the central 50%, 90%, and 95% posterior-simulation intervals was 25 .0%, 83 .3%, and 83 .3%, respectively. As shown in Figure 1A, a single SIR trajectory with constant transmission and recovery parameters was unable to reproduce the successive changes in incidence observed across the study period. Allowing the epidemic state to be reinitialized separately for each wave pro-duced a marked improvement. The SIR model with wave-specific initializa-tion reduced the mean-based RMSE to 1,355.5 and the median-based RMSE to 1,326.5, corresponding to reductions of 48 .6% and 53 .6%, respectively, relative to the single-trajectory benchmark. WIS decreased by 17 .6%, from 781.0 to 643.8. Coverage also increased to 87 .5% for the central 50% interval and 100% for both the 90% and 95% intervals. Thus, the largest structural improvement among the non-adaptive models was associated with replacing a single continu-ous SIR trajectory by independently initialized epidemic-wave windows. Adding adaptive behavior while retaining a global transmission coefficient further improved point reconstruction. The Adaptive ( β global) model achieved the lowest mean-based RMSE among the four primary specifications, 1,038.3 14 Figure 1: Posterior-simulation summaries for the four primary model specifi-cations fitted to weekly COVID-19 case incidence in New York City. Panel (A) shows the SIR single-trajectory benchmark, panel (B) the SIR model with wave-specific initialization, panel (C) the Adaptive ( β global) model, and panel (D) the Adaptive ( β variable) model. In each panel, observed weekly incidence is shown together with the posterior-simulation mean, posterior-simulation me-dian, and central 50% interval. The single-trajectory SIR is propagated continu-ously across the full 27-week study period, whereas the other three specifications are independently initialized within each epidemic-wave window. Vertical dot-ted lines indicate the fixed wave boundaries. The three observations excluded from the common set of 24 weeks used for ABC calibration and model-evaluation metrics are marked separately; for the single-trajectory SIR, these observations remain part of the state propagation despite being excluded from scoring. 15 cases, a 23 .4% reduction relative to the wave-specific SIR model. Its median-based RMSE was 1,209.6, an 8 .8% reduction. In contrast, its WIS was 653.1, only 1 .4% higher than the 643.8 obtained by the wave-specific SIR model. The two models therefore differed more clearly in point reconstruction than in inter-val performance. The adaptive global-β specification covered 95 .8% of obser-vations with its central 50% interval and all retained observations with its 90% and 95% intervals. Allowing β to vary across waves did not produce a uniform improvement. The Adaptive ( β variable) model had the lowest median-based RMSE, 1,067.7, but its mean-based RMSE increased to 2,102.6 and its WIS to 831.1. Relative to the Adaptive ( β global) model, this corresponds to an 11 .7% improvement in median-based RMSE but a 102 .5% increase in mean-based RMSE and a 27 .3% increase in WIS. The large difference between mean- and median-based RMSE indicates substantial asymmetry in the distribution of reconstructed trajectories under this more flexible specification. Its central 50%, 90%, and 95% intervals covered all 24 retained observations. Overall, the model comparison identifies two distinct patterns. First, replac-ing a single continuous SIR trajectory with wave-specific initialization produced a large improvement in reconstruction. Second, adding adaptive behavior with a shared transmission coefficient further improved central trajectory reconstruc-tion, but did not improve WIS relative to the simpler wave-specific SIR model. Additional wave-specific flexibility in β did not yield a consistent advantage across the evaluation criteria. Because these metrics are calculated on the same data used for ABC calibration and do not penalize model complexity, these re-sults describe relative in-sample reconstruction rather than out-of-sample fore-casting performance or formal model selection. 

# 4.2 Behavioral-parameter inference and identifiability 

Despite the ability of the adaptive specifications to reconstruct the observed incidence trajectories, the behavioral parameters were only weakly to partially identified by the incidence data. Figure 2 compares the prior and posterior medians and central 95% intervals of kw and cw on the log 10 scale. Across both adaptive specifications, the posterior intervals remained close in width to their corresponding prior intervals, with only modest contraction. Thus, good reconstruction of weekly incidence did not translate into precise estimation of the parameters governing the behavioral response. Under the Adaptive ( β global) specification, the posterior medians of k1,

k2, and k3 were approximately 1,180, 1,147, and 1,476, respectively. There was consequently no descriptive decline in the posterior medians across waves. The posterior probability of the complete ordering 

k1 ≥ k2 ≥ k3

was 0.183, close to the probability 1 /6 ≈ 0.167 assigned to any specific order-ing of three exchangeable continuous quantities under the unrestricted prior. 16 Figure 2: Prior-to-posterior updating of the behavioral parameters in the two primary adaptive model specifications. Panels (A) and (B) show the behav-ioral sensitivity kw and response midpoint cw, respectively, for the Adaptive (β global) model; panels (C) and (D) show the corresponding quantities for the Adaptive ( β variable) model. Parameters are displayed on the log 10 scale. Points denote prior and posterior medians, and horizontal segments denote the corresponding central 95% intervals. The limited contraction of most posterior intervals relative to their prior supports indicates weak to partial identification of the behavioral parameters from weekly incidence alone. 17 The behavioral midpoints showed somewhat greater differentiation: posterior medians were approximately 0.00104, 0.00107, and 0.00699 for c1, c2, and c3,respectively. Consistent with this shift, the posterior probabilities that c3 ex-ceeded c1 and c2 were approximately 0.77. However, the corresponding posterior intervals remained broad, and c1 and c2 showed essentially no ordering prefer-ence. These results are therefore more consistent with a possible upward shift in the third-wave behavioral midpoint than with a well-resolved monotonic pro-gression across all three waves. Allowing transmission to vary by wave did not eliminate the uncertainty in the behavioral parameters. Under the Adaptive ( β variable) specification, posterior median values of k1, k2, and k3 were approximately 1,457, 1,413, and 595, respectively. Although this indicates a posterior shift toward lower k3, the central 95% intervals remained broad and strongly overlapping (Figure 2C). The probability of the full ordering k1 ≥ k2 ≥ k3 was 0.250, while the corresponding probability for c1 ≤ c2 ≤ c3 was 0.249. Thus, the unrestricted adaptive models provide at most limited support for systematic monotonic changes in behavioral sensitivity or response midpoint across successive waves. Detailed pairwise and joint ordering probabilities are reported in the Supplementary Material. A more consistent feature of the posterior distributions was the dependence between transmission intensity and the behavioral midpoint cw (Figure 3). In the Adaptive ( β global) model, the Spearman correlations between the shared transmission coefficient and the wave-specific behavioral midpoint were 

ρS (β, log 10 c1) = −0.44 , ρS (β, log 10 c2) = −0.52 , ρS (β, log 10 c3) = −0.36 .

The negative association was stronger when transmission was allowed to vary by wave: 

ρS (β1, log 10 c1) = −0.54 , ρS (β2, log 10 c2) = −0.63 , ρS (β3, log 10 c3) = −0.60 .

This posterior geometry is consistent with a trade-off in which higher fitted transmission intensity can be compensated within the model by behavioral adap-tation becoming substantial at a lower prevalence. Transmission intensity and the prevalence midpoint of the behavioral response are therefore not sharply separable from aggregate incidence alone. The wave-specific transmission coefficients themselves were also only moder-ately differentiated in the Adaptive ( β variable) specification. Posterior medians and central 95% intervals were 

β1 = 0 .983 (0 .429 , 2.808) , β2 = 0 .995 (0 .434 , 2.730) , β3 = 1 .398 (0 .493 , 2.898) .

Although the median for β3 was higher, the intervals overlapped extensively, and the posterior probabilities 

P (β3 > β 1) = 0 .640 , P (β3 > β 2) = 0 .666 provide only limited support for a distinct third-wave transmission regime. 18 Figure 3: Posterior dependence between transmission intensity and the behav-ioral response midpoint in the two primary adaptive model specifications. The upper row shows the shared transmission coefficient β against log 10 (cw) for waves 1–3 under the Adaptive ( β global) model. The lower row shows the cor-responding wave-specific pairs βw and log 10 (cw) under the Adaptive ( β variable) model. Hexagonal bins represent the density of the 2,500 ABC-accepted draws at q = 0 .005, and ρS denotes the Spearman rank correlation. The consistently negative associations indicate that higher fitted transmission intensity can be offset by a behavioral response reaching its midpoint at lower prevalence, re-vealing confounding between transmission and behavioral adaptation. 19 The behavioral delay τ was similarly weakly resolved. For the Adaptive ( β

global) model, P (τ = 0) = 0 .284, with the remaining posterior mass distributed across delays of one to four weeks. Under the Adaptive ( β variable) specification, 

P (τ = 0) increased to 0.417, but most posterior mass still remained distributed across positive delays. The weekly incidence series therefore did not identify a specific behavioral-response delay within the temporal resolution considered here. Taken together, these results show that the adaptive mechanism can con-tribute to accurate incidence reconstruction without yielding uniquely deter-mined behavioral parameters. The data provide little evidence for a smooth monotonic evolution of kw or cw, while the clearest and most reproducible fea-ture of the posterior geometry is the dependence between transmission intensity and the behavioral midpoint. We therefore interpret kw, cw, and τ as partially identified effective parameters of the incidence-calibrated model rather than as direct measurements of population behavior. 

# 4.3 Sensitivity analyses 

The main conclusions were broadly robust to the ABC acceptance propor-tion, although the absolute interval-score values varied with the tolerance. For 

q = 0 .0025, 0 .005, and 0 .01, respectively, WIS was 947.3, 781.0, and 795.8 for the SIR single-trajectory benchmark; 555.5, 643.8, and 784.9 for the SIR model with wave-specific initialization; 560.5, 653.1, and 779.3 for the Adaptive ( β

global) model; and 711.3, 831.1, and 1030.4 for the Adaptive ( β variable) model. Across all three acceptance proportions, the SIR model with wave-specific ini-tialization and the Adaptive ( β global) model remained the two specifications with the lowest WIS. Their differences were small, and their ordering reversed at q = 0 .01, where the adaptive model had a slightly lower WIS. Thus, the primary conclusion that adaptive behavior with shared transmission improves point reconstruction without providing a clear WIS advantage over the simpler wave-specific SIR model was not dependent on the specific choice q = 0 .005. The Adaptive ( β variable) specification remained less favorable in terms of interval performance across the tested tolerances, and its WIS increased as the accepted set was broadened. More generally, variation in q changed the absolute performance metrics but did not provide evidence that the additional wave-specific transmission flexibility yielded a consistent advantage over the global-β adaptive specification. The sensitivity analysis therefore supports using 

q = 0 .005 as the primary approximation while interpreting small differences between the wave-specific SIR and Adaptive ( β global) models cautiously. A stronger sensitivity was observed when monotonic structure was imposed on the behavioral priors (Table 5). For the Adaptive ( β global) model, imposing 

k1 ≥ k2 ≥ k3, c1 ≤ c2 ≤ c3

reduced the mean-based RMSE from 1,038.3 to 876.7, the median-based RMSE from 1,209.6 to 1,051.5, and WIS from 653.1 to 556.3. These correspond to 20 reductions of 15.6%, 13.1%, and 14.8%, respectively. The improved reconstruc-tion therefore shows that constraining the behavioral trajectories can materially regularize the adaptive model. Model Behavioral prior RMSE (mean) RMSE (median) WIS Adaptive ( β global) Unrestricted 1038.3 1209.6 653.1 Adaptive ( β global) Ordered 876.7 1051.5 556.3 Adaptive ( β variable) Unrestricted 2102.6 1067.7 831.1 Adaptive ( β variable) Ordered 2350.1 774.6 724.9 Table 5: Sensitivity of in-sample reconstruction to the behavioral prior struc-ture at the primary ABC acceptance proportion q = 0 .005. Unrestricted spec-ifications use independent wave-specific base priors for kw and cw. Ordered specifications impose k1 ≥ k2 ≥ k3 and c1 ≤ c2 ≤ c3. Lower RMSE and WIS indicate better reconstruction. Because the ordering constraints alter the prior distribution before observing the data, differences between unrestricted and or-dered specifications quantify sensitivity to behavioral regularization rather than evidence in favor of monotonic behavioral change. The effect of ordering was less uniform for the Adaptive ( β variable) model. Under unrestricted behavioral priors, its mean-based RMSE, median-based RMSE, and WIS were 2,102.6, 1,067.7, and 831.1, respectively. With ordered priors, the mean-based RMSE increased to 2,350.1, whereas the median-based RMSE decreased to 774.6 and WIS decreased to 724.9. Relative to the unrestricted specification, this represents an 11.8% increase in mean-based RMSE but re-ductions of 27.5% and 12.8% in median-based RMSE and WIS. The opposing changes in mean- and median-based RMSE again indicate sensitivity to asym-metric posterior-simulation trajectories in the more flexible model. These improvements under ordered priors should not be interpreted as evi-dence that the behavioral response actually evolved monotonically across waves. The ordering is imposed before observing the data and changes the wave-specific marginal prior distributions. Moreover, the unrestricted analyses in Section 4.2 provided only limited posterior support for the corresponding complete order-ings. The ordered analyses therefore demonstrate that behavioral regularization can materially affect both reconstruction and posterior inference, rather than establishing a data-driven monotonic decline in behavioral sensitivity or increase in response midpoint. Taken together, the two sensitivity analyses lead to different conclusions. Model-performance comparisons were relatively stable to moderate changes in the ABC acceptance proportion, particularly with respect to the close WIS performance of the wave-specific SIR and Adaptive ( β global) specifications. In contrast, inference and reconstruction in the adaptive models were meaningfully affected by imposing monotonic behavioral structure. We therefore treat the unrestricted adaptive specifications as the primary analyses and the ordered models as sensitivity analyses illustrating the dependence of behavioral inference 21 on prior structural assumptions. 

# 5 Discussion and Conclusions 

We compared four SIR-based specifications for reconstructing weekly confirmed COVID-19 incidence in New York City during June–December 2020, with par-ticular attention to whether a delayed prevalence-dependent behavioral response improves reconstruction and whether its parameters can be identified from ag-gregate incidence. The results do not support a simple ranking in which increas-ing model flexibility consistently improves performance. Instead, they highlight two related features of multi-wave calibration: substantial gains can be obtained by allowing different epidemic windows to begin from different latent states, while the additional decomposition of incidence dynamics into transmission and behavioral components remains only partially identifiable. The largest structural improvement occurred when the single continuous SIR trajectory was replaced by independently initialized epidemic-wave win-dows. Relative to the SIR single-trajectory benchmark, the wave-initialized SIR model reduced the mean- and median-based RMSE by 48.6% and 53.6%, respectively, and reduced WIS by 17.6% (Table 4; Figure 1). This comparison should not, however, be interpreted as isolating the effect of the initialization parameter alone. The wave-initialized specification simultaneously partitions the time series and resets the epidemic state at the beginning of each wave. Its improved reconstruction therefore indicates that a single uninterrupted SIR trajectory with fixed transmission and recovery coefficients is too restrictive for the observed multi-wave pattern, but it does not establish a specific biological mechanism responsible for the improvement. In this sense, wave-specific initial-ization is best viewed as a pragmatic representation of between-wave dynamics that are absent from the simplified SIR structure. Adding adaptive behavior while retaining a shared transmission coefficient produced a more modest and metric-dependent improvement. Relative to the wave-initialized SIR model, the Adaptive ( β global) specification reduced the mean-based RMSE by 23.4% and the median-based RMSE by 8.8%, whereas its WIS was 1.4% higher. Thus, the adaptive mechanism improved the reconstruc-tion of the central trajectory but did not provide a clear advantage in inter-val performance. This distinction is important because the models were fitted and evaluated on the same observations and differ substantially in parameter dimension. The reported RMSE and WIS values therefore quantify in-sample reconstruction rather than out-of-sample forecasting performance or complexity-adjusted model preference. Moreover, because the posterior-simulation intervals arise from ABC parameter uncertainty without a stochastic observation model, WIS should be interpreted here as a descriptive measure of parameter-induced interval performance rather than as evidence of formal probabilistic forecast calibration. Additional wave-specific flexibility in transmission did not resolve this trade-off. The Adaptive ( β variable) model attained the lowest median-based RMSE 22 among the four specifications, but its mean-based RMSE and WIS were sub-stantially higher than those of the Adaptive ( β global) model (Table 4). The pronounced difference between its mean- and median-based reconstructions in-dicates an asymmetric distribution of posterior-simulated trajectories. Conse-quently, allowing β to vary by wave does not provide a consistent reconstruction advantage across the criteria considered here. More generally, these results il-lustrate that additional parameter flexibility can improve one summary of fit while simultaneously increasing posterior uncertainty or asymmetry, particu-larly when several parameters can compensate for one another. This compensation is central to the interpretation of the behavioral param-eters. Across both adaptive specifications, the posterior distributions of kw and 

cw showed only modest contraction relative to their broad priors (Figure 2). The unrestricted primary analyses provided little support for a complete mono-tonic progression in either behavioral sensitivity or behavioral midpoint. Under the global-β specification, the posterior probability of k1 ≥ k2 ≥ k3 was close to that expected for a particular ordering under three exchangeable continu-ous quantities. Although c3 tended to exceed c1 and c2, its posterior remained broad. Under wave-specific transmission, the posterior median of k3 was lower than those of the first two waves, but the corresponding intervals strongly over-lapped and the probability of the complete ordering remained limited. The behavioral delay τ was also weakly resolved across its discrete support. The incidence data therefore do not justify interpreting the fitted behavioral param-eters as precise measurements of changing population behavior or as evidence for a monotonic decline in behavioral responsiveness. The clearest indication of the underlying identifiability problem is instead the posterior dependence between transmission intensity and the behavioral midpoint (Figure 3). Across waves and adaptive specifications, larger trans-mission coefficients were systematically associated with smaller values of cw.Within the model, a larger β can therefore be compensated by a behavioral response that becomes substantial at lower prevalence. The stronger negative associations observed when transmission was wave-specific show that introduc-ing additional transmission flexibility does not automatically separate the two mechanisms. This posterior geometry is consistent with a broader difficulty in behavioral epidemic models: changes in aggregate incidence can often be re-produced through different combinations of intrinsic transmission and feedback from adaptive contact behavior [4, 20]. Our analysis illustrates the converse problem as well: including an explicit behavioral mechanism does not by itself make that mechanism identifiable from incidence alone. The fitted coefficients should consequently be interpreted as effective pa-rameters of the incidence-calibrated system rather than as direct estimates of biological transmissibility or population risk response. This qualification is par-ticularly important because confirmed cases are only an ascertained subset of infections and the model contains no explicit observation process. Changes over time in testing availability, healthcare-seeking behavior, or the infection-to-confirmation relationship can therefore be absorbed by β, Iinit  

> w

, or the behavioral parameters. The somewhat higher posterior median of β3 in the wave-specific 23 transmission model is compatible with greater effective transmission during the final epidemic window, but the broad and overlapping posterior intervals and only moderate posterior probabilities for β3 > β 1 and β3 > β 2 do not establish a distinct third-wave transmission regime. Its interpretation should therefore remain descriptive rather than biological or causal. The sensitivity analyses reinforce this cautious interpretation. Varying the ABC acceptance proportion over the examined range changed the absolute val-ues of the reconstruction metrics but left the principal comparison relatively stable: the wave-initialized SIR and Adaptive ( β global) specifications remained close in WIS, while the Adaptive ( β variable) specification did not acquire a consistent advantage. In contrast, imposing the ordered behavioral priors 

k1 ≥ k2 ≥ k3 and c1 ≤ c2 ≤ c3 materially changed reconstruction (Table 5). For the global-β adaptive model, for example, ordering reduced both RMSE and WIS. This improvement is evidence that structured behavioral priors can act as effective regularization, not that the data independently demonstrate monotonic behavioral change. Because sorting alters the wave-specific prior distributions before observing the data, posterior monotonicity under this specification is partly imposed by construction. The contrast between unrestricted and or-dered analyses therefore provides direct evidence that behavioral inference is sensitive to structural prior assumptions. Several additional limitations determine the scope of these conclusions. First, the epidemic-wave boundaries were selected through exploratory inspection rather than estimated statistically, and all wave-specific results are conditional on that partition. Independent reinitialization also sacrifices epidemiological continuity across wave boundaries by resetting the compartmental states and should be understood as a modeling approximation rather than as a literal description of population turnover. Second, the deterministic SIR backbone omits latent infection, asymptomatic transmission, reinfection, heterogeneous mixing, and other processes that may contribute to the observed trajectory. Third, weekly aggregation and the integer-valued delay restrict the temporal resolution at which behavioral feedback can be identified. Fourth, rejection ABC provides an approximation that depends on the chosen priors, discrepancy, and acceptance threshold, even though the tolerance sensitivity considered here suggests that the main model-performance comparison is not driven by the primary value of 

q. Finally, all performance comparisons are in sample and contain no explicit adjustment for the substantial differences in model complexity. These limitations also indicate where additional information would be most valuable. In particular, identifiability is unlikely to be solved simply by adding further flexibility to the incidence model. Auxiliary information on mobility, testing intensity, seroprevalence, or survey-based precautionary behavior could provide independent constraints on either the behavioral or observation pro-cesses and thereby reduce the transmission–behavior trade-off. An explicit ob-servation model linking latent infections to confirmed cases would be especially useful for separating changes in transmission from changes in ascertainment. Held-out or cross-validated evaluation would in turn be required to determine whether the improved in-sample reconstruction of more flexible specifications 24 translates into predictive benefit. More efficient sequential ABC methods could facilitate such extensions [18], although computational efficiency alone would not resolve structural non-identifiability. In conclusion, the adaptive-behavior formulation can improve the central re-construction of multi-wave COVID-19 incidence relative to a non-adaptive SIR model with the same wave-specific initialization, but the aggregate incidence se-ries does not uniquely determine the behavioral response that generated that im-provement. Allowing transmission to vary by wave adds flexibility but does not produce a consistent gain in reconstruction or resolve the uncertainty in the be-havioral parameters. The most robust inferential result is therefore not a specific trajectory of behavioral sensitivity, but the evidence of substantial confounding between transmission intensity and prevalence-dependent contact adaptation. Multi-wave incidence is compatible with a coupled behavioral–epidemiological process, but incidence alone is insufficient to separate its components sharply. Recognizing that limitation is essential when adaptive epidemic models are used not only to reconstruct observed trajectories, but also to interpret changes in population behavior. 

# References 

[1] Mark A. Beaumont, Wenyang Zhang, and David J. Balding. Approximate Bayesian computation in population genetics. Genetics , 162(4):2025–2035, 2002. [2] Johannes Bracher, Evan L. Ray, Tilmann Gneiting, and Nicholas G. Reich. Evaluating epidemic forecasts in an interval format. PLOS Computational Biology , 17(2):e1008618, 2021. [3] Katalin Csill´ ery, Michael G. B. Blum, Oscar E. Gaggiotti, and Olivier Fran¸ cois. Approximate Bayesian computation (ABC) in practice. Trends in Ecology & Evolution , 25(7):410–418, 2010. [4] Ceyhun Eksin, Keith Paarporn, and Joshua S. Weitz. Systematic biases in disease forecasting: The role of behavior change. Epidemics , 27:96–105, 2019. [5] Eli P. Fenichel, Carlos Castillo-Chavez, M. Graziano Ceddia, Gerardo Chowell, Paula A. Gonzalez Parra, Graham J. Hickling, Garth Holloway, Richard Horan, Benjamin Morin, Charles Perrings, Michael Springborn, Leticia Velazquez, and Cristina Villalobos. Adaptive human behavior in epidemiological models. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences ,108(15):6306–6311, 2011. [6] Sebastian Funk, Erez Gilad, Chris Watkins, and Vincent A. A. Jansen. The spread of awareness and its impact on epidemic outbreaks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 106(16):6872–6877, 2009. 25 [7] Sebastian Funk, Marcel Salath´ e, and Vincent A. A. Jansen. Modelling the influence of human behaviour on the spread of infectious diseases: A review. Journal of the Royal Society Interface , 7(50):1247–1256, 2010. [8] Tilmann Gneiting and Adrian E. Raftery. Strictly proper scoring rules, prediction, and estimation. Journal of the American Statistical Association ,102(477):359–378, 2007. [9] Herbert W. Hethcote. The mathematics of infectious diseases. SIAM Re-view , 42(4):599–653, 2000. [10] William Ogilvy Kermack and Anderson G. McKendrick. A contribution to the mathematical theory of epidemics. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series A , 115(772):700–721, 1927. [11] Lisa Lambert, Gabriella Borter, and Jonathan Allen. ‘Race Against Time’: First Americans vaccinated as U.S. death toll passes 300,000. Reuters. 

https://www.reuters.com/business/healthcare-pharmaceuticals/ race-against-time-first-americans-vaccinated-us-death-toll-passes-300000-2020-12-14/ ,December 2020. Updated December 15, 2020; accessed 2026-04-17. [12] Md Shahriar Mahmud, Solomon Eshun, Baltazar Espinoza, and Claus Kadelka. Adaptive human behavior and delays in information availabil-ity autonomously modulate epidemic waves. PNAS Nexus , 4(5):pgaf145, 2025. [13] New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene. COVID-19: Data trends and totals. https://www.nyc.gov/site/doh/covid/ covid-19-data-totals.page , 2025. Accessed 2026-04-17. [14] New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene. 

data-by-day.csv . GitHub repository nychealth/coronavirus-data ,file trends/data-by-day.csv . https://github.com/nychealth/ coronavirus-data , 2025. Accessed 2026-04-17. [15] Nicola Perra. Non-pharmaceutical interventions during the COVID-19 pan-demic: A review. Physics Reports , 913:1–52, 2021. [16] Timothy C. Reluga. Game theory of social distancing in response to an epidemic. PLOS Computational Biology , 6(5):e1000793, 2010. [17] Reuters. New York City to enter phase two of re-opening on June 22 — mayor. https://www.reuters. com/article/health-coronavirus-usa-new-york-city/ new-york-city-to-enter-phase-two-of-reopening-on-june-22-mayor-idUKL1N2DU165/ ,June 2020. Reporting by Maria Caspani; accessed 2026-04-17. [18] Tina Toni, David Welch, Natalja Strelkowa, Andreas Ipsen, and Michael P. H. Stumpf. Approximate Bayesian computation scheme for parameter inference and model selection in dynamical systems. Journal of the Royal Society Interface , 6(31):187–202, 2009. 26 [19] Frederik Verelst, Lander Willem, and Philippe Beutels. Behavioural change models for infectious disease transmission: A systematic review. Journal of the Royal Society Interface , 13(125):20160820, 2016. [20] Joshua S. Weitz, Sang Woo Park, Ceyhun Eksin, and Jonathan Dushoff. Awareness-driven behavior changes can shift the shape of epidemics away from peaks and toward plateaus, shoulders, and oscillations. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 117(51):32764–32771, 2020. 27 A Supplementary Material 

Posterior event Adaptive ( β global) Adaptive ( β variable) 

P (k1 ≥ k2) 0.499 0.508 

P (k1 ≥ k3) 0.481 0.618 

P (k2 ≥ k3) 0.487 0.627 

P (k1 ≥ k2 ≥ k3) 0.183 0.250 

P (c1 ≤ c2) 0.510 0.513 

P (c1 ≤ c3) 0.770 0.629 

P (c2 ≤ c3) 0.772 0.631 

P (c1 ≤ c2 ≤ c3) 0.329 0.249 Table 6: Posterior probabilities of pairwise and joint ordering of the wave-specific behavioral parameters under the two unrestricted adaptive model spec-ifications. Probabilities were computed from the 2,500 ABC-accepted draws at 

q = 0 .005. The wave-specific behavioral parameters were assigned independent exchangeable base priors in the primary analyses, so no monotonic ordering was imposed a priori. 28