Title: 2603.21815v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.21815v1

Published Time: Tue, 24 Mar 2026 02:08:53 GMT

Number of Pages: 23

Markdown Content:
Eskişehir Osmangazi Üniversitesi 

Sosyal Bilimler Dergisi Mart 2026 (1), 698-720 

DOI: 10.17494/gusbd.1588792 

698 

> Makale Gönderim Tarihi: 20.11.2024 Makale Kabul Tarihi: 05.03.2026

# Can Renewable Energy Mitigate Inflationary Pressures from Energy Imports? Evidence from Türkiye 

## Emre AKUSTA 1

Yenilenebilir Enerji, Enerji İthalatından Kaynaklanan Enflasyonist Baskıları Azaltabilir mi? Türkiye'den Kanıtlar 

Öz 

Bu çalışma, yenilenebilir enerjinin Türkiye'de enerji ithalatından kaynaklanan enflasyonist baskıları 

azaltma potansiyelini analiz etmektedir. Çalışmada, birim kök analizi kapsamında yapısal kırılmaları 

dikkate alan Zivot & Andrews ile Lee & Strazicich 

testleri kullanılmıştır. Eşbütünleşme ilişkisi Johansen 

ve Hatemi-J eşbütünleşme testleri aracılığıyla incelenmiştir. Uzun dönem katsayıları DOLS ve 

FMOLS yöntemleri kullanılarak tahmin edilmiştir. Elde edilen bulguların sağlamlığı ise ayrıca ARDL yaklaşımı ile test edilmiştir. Ayrıca, enerji ithalatından kaynaklanan enflasyonist baskıları 

hafifletmede yenilenebilir enerjinin etkisini ölçmek 

için bir etkileşim terimi oluşturulmuştur. Sonuçlar, enerji ithalatı ve döviz kurunun enflasyon üzerinde artırıcı bir etkiye sahipken, yenil enebilir enerji ve 

etkileşim teriminin azaltıcı bir etkiye sahip olduğunu 

göstermektedir. DOLS, FMOLS ve ARDL sonuçları birbirini desteklemektedir. Ayrıca, her iki modelde de yenilenebilir enerjinin enerji ithalatından kaynaklanan enflasyonist baskıları hafifletme etkisi, yenilenebilir enerjinin doğrudan enflasyonu düşürücü etkisinden daha güçlüdür. 

Anahtar Kelimeler: Yenilenebilir enerji, Enerji ithalatı, Enflasyon, Etkileşim terimi, Yapısal kırılmalar 

Can Renewable Energy Mitigate Inflationary Pressures from Energy Imports? Evidence from Türkiye 

Abstract 

This study analyses the potential of renewable energy to reduce inflationary pressures arising from energy imports in Türkiye. Annual data for the period 1980-2022 are used in the analysis. In this study, unit root properties are examined using the Zivot-Andrews and Lee-Strazicich tests, both of which explicitly account for structural breaks. Cointegration is investigated via the Johansen and Hatemi-J cointegration tests. Long-run coefficients are subsequently estimated using the DOLS and FMOLS estimators. The robustness of the empirical findings is further assessed using the ARDL approach. In addition, an interaction term is constructed to measure the impact of renewable energy in alleviating inflationary pressures arising from energy imports. The results show that energy imports and exchange rate have an increasing impact on inflation, while renewable energy and the interaction term have a decreasing impact. DOLS, FMOLS, and ARDL results support each other. Moreover, in both models, the impact of renewable energy in mitigating inflationary pressures stemming from energy imports is stronger than the direct disinflationary impact of renewable energy. 

Keywords : Renewable energy, Energy imports, Inflation, Interaction term, Structural breaks 

Makale Türü: Araştırma Makalesi Paper Type: Research Article  

> 1

Assoc. Prof. Dr., Kırklareli University, Faculty of Economics and Administrative Sciences, Department of 

Economics. E-mail: emre.akusta@klu.edu.tr. ORCID ID: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-6147-5443 

Citation: Akusta, E. (2026). Can Renewable Energy Mitigate Inflationary Pressures from Energy Imports? Evidence from Türkiye. Eski şehir Osmangazi University Journal of Social Sciences, 27 (1), 698-720. https:// doi.org/ 10.17494/ogusbd.1588792 Eskişehir Osmangazi Üniversitesi Sosyal Bilimler Dergisi 

## 699 

1. Introduction 

Energy is essential for modern economies. Energy plays a vital role in both industrial production 

and the sustainability of daily life. However, the unequal distribution of energy resources around the 

world leads to serious differences between countries. I n particular, countries with insufficient energy 

resources are becoming dependent on foreign sources to meet their energy needs (Herbstreuth, 

2014). Türkiye, as a country with limited resources in terms of energy production, meets most of its 

energy needs through imports. This situation causes Türkiye to be more affected by fluctuations in 

international energy markets and sudden changes in global energy prices. These changes in energy 

prices directly impact the prices in Türkiye's domestic market and create a serious pressure on inflation 

(Demirbas & Bakis, 2004; Uslu, 2008). 

Energy imports have a significant impact on Türkiye's macroeconomic indicators. Especially the 

increase in energy prices is one of the most important factors triggering cost inflation. Energy is a basic 

input in many areas from industrial production to the service sector. Therefore, increases in energy 

prices are directly reflected in production costs. This leads to an increase in final product prices (Batten, 

Mo, & Pourkhanali, 2024). In countries with limited energy resources, such as Türkiye, the imbalan ce 

between energy demand and supply increases demand inflation. Dependence on energy imports, 

combined with exchange rate fluctuations, increases inflationary pressures. 

The relationship between energy imports and exchange rates is particularly evident in developing 

countries. Türkiye is rapidly affected by exchange rate fluctuations due to its dependence on energy 

imports. This puts direct pressure on prices in the domest ic market. In recent years, uncertainties and 

fluctuations in global markets have caused energy prices and exchange rates to fluctuate rapidly. These 

fluctuations have further triggered inflation in Türkiye's economic structure (Yorucu, 2016). Türkiye is 

one of the countries most affected by fluctuations in global energy prices due to its external energy 

dependence. Increases in energy prices directly increase production and transportation costs, which 

in turn are reflected in final product prices. Especia lly high oil prices increase transportation costs. As 

a result, prices of basic consumption goods, particularly food prices, have skyrocketed. This situation 

has severely reduced the purchasing power of households. As a result, additional measures had to b e

taken to fight inflation (Uslu, 2008). However, while such measures offer short -term solutions, more 

comprehensive structural steps need to be taken to reduce inflation permanently. 

Renewable energy could be an important opportunity to reduce Türkiye's dependence on energy 

imports and alleviate inflationary pressures. The use of renewable energy sources can reduce external 

dependence by reducing energy imports. This can, in turn, alle viate pressure on the exchange rate and 

reduce inflationary impacts. Renewable energy can also contribute to Türkiye's long -term energy 

strategies by increasing environmental sustainability (Dogan & Muhammad, 2019; Katircioglu, 

Katircioglu, & Altinay, 2017 ). However, more research is needed on the economic consequences of this 

transition and its impacts on inflation. The costs of the transition to renewable energy, infrastructure 

investments and policy changes are factors that need to be considered for this process to be successful. 

The potential of renewable energy to alleviate inflationary pressures from energy imports is an 

important research subject. Therefore, this study analyzes this potential for Türkiye using annual data 

for the period 1980 -2022. Moreover, an interaction term is constructed to measure the impact of 

renewable energy on mitigating inflationary pressures from energy imports. The interaction term is 

used in statistical modeling to examine the joint impact of two or more independent variables on the 

dependent variab le. With this method, in addition to the independent impacts of energy imports and 

renewable energy use on inflation, the combined impact of these two factors is also measured. 

This study can contribute to the literature in at least five ways: (1) This study analyzes the potential 

of renewable energy to reduce inflationary pressures arising from energy imports. To the best of our Emre AKUSTA 

## 700 

knowledge, no empirical study has investigated this potential for Türkiye. This study aims to fill this 

gap in literature. (2) Unlike other studies, this study uses the interaction term. The interaction term 

aims to measure the independent impacts of energ y imports and renewable energy use on inflation as 

well as the combined impact of these two factors. This allows for a more in -depth analysis. (3) Instead 

of traditional unit root tests, unit root tests that take structural breaks into account are used. Th is 

method allows for a better analysis of the dynamic structure of time series. It also increases the 

robustness of the results. (4) In addition to cointegration relationships, the study also estimates long -

run coefficients. These estimates contribute to a n in -depth analysis of the long -term impacts of energy 

imports and renewable energy use. (5) DOLS and FMOLS methods are used in the analysis and the 

results are compared. The use of these two methods improved the accuracy of the estimation results 

and stre ngthened the reliability of the analysis. 

The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 reviews the literature, Section 3 describes 

the data and methodology, Section 4 presents the empirical findings, Section 5 reports the robustness 

checks, Section 6 contains policy implications, and f inally Section 7 presents the conclusions. 

2. Literature Review 

This study examines the relationship between energy imports and inflation. It also analyzes the 

potential of renewable energy in Türkiye to reduce inflationary pressures from energy imports. Energy 

plays a central role for economies. This has continuously increased the number and scope of studies 

on energy. Therefore, the literature review was conducted in three stages. In the first stage, studies 

analyzing the impact of energy imports on macroeconomic indicators are discussed. In the second 

stage, studies analyzing the relationship between energy imports and inflation were evaluated. In the 

third stage, the literature analyzing the relationship between inflation and exchange rates is reviewed. 

2.1. Research on Energy Imports and Macroeconomic Indicators 

There are many studies in literature analysing the relationship between energy consumption, 

economic growth and other macroeconomic indicators. Among these studies, Asafu -Adjaye (2000) 

analysed the relationship between energy consumption, real income and c onsumer price index in 

Indonesia, India, Philippines and Thailand. In the analyses he conducted, he found that there is a 

reciprocal causality relationship between energy, income and consumer price index. Paul and 

Bhattacharya (2004) analysed the relations hip between energy consumption and economic growth in 

India. Based on the data for the period 1950 -1996, they found that there is a bidirectional causality 

relationship. Guttormsen (2007) analysed the relationship between energy consumption and 

economic gr owth in various countries such as France, Germany and Greece for the period 1960 -2002. 

The results show that energy consumption and economic growth affect each other. Tsani (2010) 

analysed the relationship between energy consumption and economic growth in Greece on a sectoral 

basis. The results show that there is a unidirectional causality from total energy consumption to 

economic growth. However, there is no relationship between energy consumption in transport and 

economic growth. 

Similar findings are also found in studies conducted in the Middle East and South American 

countries. Sadorsky (2011) analysed the relationship between energy consumption, economic growth 

and foreign trade in 8 Middle Eastern countries in the period 1980 -2007. The results of the study show 

that there is a bidirectional causality between energy consumption and imports. Sadorsky (2012), 

meanwhile, found that there are both short -run and long -run relationships between energy 

consumption and foreign trade in So uth American countries. Aimer and Dilek (2021) analysed the 

relationship between energy consumption and economic growth in 16 Middle Eastern and North Eskişehir Osmangazi Üniversitesi Sosyal Bilimler Dergisi 

## 701 

African countries. The results revealed that there is a long -run relationship between economic growth 

and energy consumption. 

In Türkiye -specific studies, Yanar and Kerimoğlu (2011) analysed the relationship between energy 

consumption, current account deficit and economic growth in Türkiye for the period 1975 -2009. The 

results show that there is a long -run relationship between en ergy consumption and economic growth. 

Sancar and Polat (2015) also conducted a similar study for Türkiye. They found that there is 

unidirectional causality between energy consumption and economic growth and bidirectional causality 

between imports and energ y consumption. Yılmaz and Altay (2016) analysed the relationship between 

energy consumption and inflation in Türkiye for the period 1970 -2014. They found that the impact of 

energy consumption on inflation is negative in the long run. In addition, causality analyses revealed a 

causality relationship from inflation to energy consumption. Finally, Kızıldere (2020) analysed the 

impact of energy consumption and economic growth on the current account deficit in Türkiye for the 

period 1974 -2015. The study found th at these two variables create causality towards the current 

account deficit. 

2.2. Research on Energy Imports and Inflation 

Studies analyzing the relationship between energy imports and inflation evaluate this relationship 

in different countries in different periods. Among these studies, Ziaei (2012) analyzed the relationship 

between energy consumption, inflation, investment an d public debt in 15 European countries. The 

study found a positive correlation between energy consumption and these variables. In addition, the 

study indicated that the major impact on energy consumption is due to investments. Iyke (2024) 

analyzed the rela tionship between energy consumption, economic growth and inflation in the case of 

Nigeria. Inflation was found to be the cause of energy consumption in the short run. 

In studies conducted from a broader geographical perspective, the impacts of oil prices and energy 

consumption on inflation differ across countries. Abbas, Saeed, Manzoor, Arshad, and Bilal (2015) 

analysed the relationship between energy consumption, infla tion and economic growth in Pakistan, 

China, India, Malaysia and South Africa. They concluded that there is no direct relationship between 

energy consumption and inflation in these countries. However, Yurtkur and Bahtiyar (2017) analysed 

Türkiye, India, Br azil, South Africa and Indonesia and found that shocks to economic growth positively 

impact energy consumption. However, they find that changes in energy consumption in Brazil, Türkiye 

and India are largely associated with fluctuations in economic growth. Alagöz, Alacahan, and Akarsu 

(2017) conducted a panel data analysis covering various countries such as Türkiye and China. They find 

that a one -unit increase in oil prices increases inflation by 0.04 units. Hammoudeh and Reboredo 

(2018) analysed the relatio nship between oil prices and inflation in the US. Since the US is an oil -

exporting country, they concluded that the increase in oil prices has a different inflationary impact in 

the US compared to developing countries. In addition to oil prices, the relati onship between energy 

consumption and inflation has also produced different results in various countries. Yakut, Yazgan, 

Bacaksız and Fikir (2021) find that there is no significant relationship between energy consumption and 

inflation in Türkiye and simila r countries. This result indicates that the relationship between energy 

consumption and inflation may not be in the same direction for all countries. The impact of energy 

imports on inflation has also been extensively analyzed in the Türkiye perspective. U sing a VAR model, 

Öksüzler and İpek (2011) finds that an increase in oil prices increases inflation in Türkiye. In a similar 

study, Yaylalı and Lebe (2012) analyzed the impact of oil prices on the Turkish economy. They find that 

imported oil prices have a causal impact on inflation. These two studies emphasize the role of oil price 

fluctuations on inflationary pressures in Türkiye. Kargi (2014) argues that oil prices are a cause of 

inflation in Türkiye. Moreover, it is supported by an empirical analysis tha t increases in oil prices 

significantly increase inflation in Türkiye. Emre AKUSTA 

## 702 

2. 3. Research on Inflation and Exchange Rate 

There are many studies analyzing the relationship between exchange rates, inflation and interest 

rates. Ca’ Zorzi, Hahn, and Sanchez (2007) analyzed 12 emerging economies and found that exchange 

rate pass -through to prices is significant. In the same perio d, Saha and Zhang (2013) analyzed the pass -

through of the exchange rate to import, producer and consumer prices in Asia Pacific economies. The 

results show that the pass -through of the exchange rate to prices is higher in Australia than in China 

and India. Studies conducted in Africa and the Middle East show that the impact of exchange rates on 

inflation yields similar results in different geographies. Sheefeni and Ocran (2014) found that the 

exchange rate has a long -run causal impact on inflation in the Na mibian economy. Helali and Rekik 

(2014) analyzed the direct impact of exchange rate on prices in Tunisian economy using SVAR and 

VECM methods. The results show that the exchange rate has a strong impact on prices. Syzdykova 

(2016) analyzed the relationship between nominal exchange rate and inflation in BRIC countries. A 

long -run relationship was found in all countries except China. Another study on Iran was conducted by 

Monfared and Akin (2017). The results of the study revealed that exchange rate and infla tion have a 

linear relationship with each other. Moreover, the increase in money supply impacts inflation more 

than the exchange rate. 

Studies analyzing the relationship between exchange rates, inflation and interest rates in Türkiye 

are also noteworthy. Sever and Mızrak (2007) analyzed the causal relationship between exchange 

rates, inflation and interest rates using VAR method. Data for the period 1987 -2006 were used in the 

study. It is concluded that the increase in the exchange rate has a strong causal impact on inflation and 

interest rates. Similarly, Gül and Ekinci (2006) evaluated the relationship between exchange rate and 

inflation using Granger causality analysis. They find a unidirectional causality relationship from 

exchange rate to inflation. In Türkiye, Güneş (2013) analyzed the long -run interaction between 

exchange rate and inflation using cointegration and VECM methods. The s tudy revealed that there is 

a causality relationship between exchange rate to inflation. Türk (2016) analyzed the relationship 

between exchange rate and inflation in Türkiye. In the study, it is stated that the exchange rate has a 

significant impact on inf lation, but the impact of inflation on the exchange rate is not significant. 

Yenice and Yenisu (2019) find a unidirectional causality relationship from exchange rates to 

inflation and interest rates using data for the period 2003 -2018. Similarly, Duman and Sağdıç (2019) 

find that the increase in inflation is associated with changes in the real effective exchange rate. They 

argue that the Turkish economy should develop short and long -term policies to solve these problems. 

Among the recent studies, Demez (2021) stated that there is a long -run relationship between the 

exchange rate and inflation and that interest rates are effective on the exchange rate. Şeker (2022) 

found a causality relationship from exchange rate to inflation. Moreover, changes in exchange rates 

have a significant impact on inflation. Şanlı (2022) analyzed the impact of exchange rate and economic 

growth on inflation. The results show that a 1% increase in the exchange rate leads to a 0.5% increase 

in inflation. Konak and Peçe (2023) analyzed the relationship between exchange rate, interest rate and 

inflation in Türkiy e for the period 2011 -2021. As a result of the study, it was found that there is a 

cointegrated relationship between these variables in the long run. Moreover, there is a bidirectional 

causality between the exchange rate and inflation. 

2. 4. General Review on the Literature 

There are various studies in the literature on the relationship between energy prices, exchange 

rates, inflation and energy consumption. Especially the impact of energy prices on inflation has been 

frequently analyzed by researchers. Studies such as İpek ( 2011), Yaylalı and Lebe (2012), Kargi (2014), 

Alagöz et al. (2017), and Hammoudeh and Reboredo (2018) show that increases in oil prices have a 

significant impact on inflation. These studies generally conclude that increases in energy prices Eskişehir Osmangazi Üniversitesi Sosyal Bilimler Dergisi 

## 703 

increase inflationary pressures. Studies focusing on the relationship between exchange rates and 

inflation have also provided similar results. Studies such as Sever and Mızrak (2006), Gül and Ekinci 

(2006), Güneş (2013), Türk (2016), Monfared and Akın (201 7), and Yenice and Yenisu (2019) have 

shown that changes in exchange rates have a significant impact on inflation. In these studies, a 

causality relationship from the exchange rate to inflation is generally found. 

The relationship between energy consumption and economic growth is another area of intensive 

research. Studies such as Paul and Bhattacharya (2004), Guttormsen (2007), and Yanar and Kerimoğlu 

(2011) argue that there is an interaction between energy consump tion and economic growth. These 

studies show that energy consumption moves together with economic growth. These two variables 

affect each other. Moreover, the relationship between energy consumption and macroeconomic 

variables such as imports and current a ccount deficit has also been analyzed by many studies such as 

Sadorsky (2011, 2012), Sancar and Polat (2015). Studies examining the relationship between inflation 

and energy consumption have analyzed the impacts of energy consumption on inflation. Research ers 

such as Asafu -Adjaye (2000), Yılmaz and Altay (2016), and Hadi and Campbell (2020) analyzed the 

impact of energy consumption on inflation and concluded that energy prices generally increase 

inflationary pressures. These findings suggest that the relati onship between energy consumption and 

inflation is an important issue that needs to be carefully analyzed. 

In conclusion, there are many studies in literature analyzing the relationship between energy 

prices, exchange rates, energy consumption and inflation. However, this study makes a different 

contribution to literature. This study also analyzes the potential of renewable energy in Türkiye to 

reduce inflationary pressures arising from energy imports. Most of the studies in the literature 

analyzing the relationship between energy prices, consumption and inflation do not focus on 

renewable energy. The impacts of renewable energy on inflation in an energy import -dependent 

economy like Türkiye are evaluated. In this regard, this study is expected to make an important 

contribution to literature. 

3. Data and Methodology 

3.1. Model Specification and Data 

The empirical analysis of this study examines whether renewable energy can alleviate inflationary 

pressures stemming from energy imports in the case of Türkiye. The study uses annual data for the 

period 1980 -2022. This period was chosen based on the availa bility and suitability of the dataset for 

the analysis. Inflation (INF) is used as the dependent variable. Energy imports (IMP), renewable energy 

use (REN) and exchange rate (EXC) are included in the model as independent variables. In addition, an 

interact ion term 2 is constructed to measure the impact of renewable energy in mitigating inflationary 

pressures from energy imports. The interaction term is a method used in statistical modeling to 

examine the combined impact of two or more independent variables on the dep endent variable 

(Adedoyin, Ozturk, Bekun, Agboola, & Agboola, 2021; Hossain et al., 2022). This term, especially in 

multivariate regression analyses, is used to show how independent variables interact with each other 

to create an interaction beyond their direct impact on the dependent variable. In other word s, it 

measures the independent impacts of energy imports and renewable energy use on inflation as well 

as the combined impact of these two factors.   

> 2The interaction term has been constructed as 𝑅𝐸𝑁 ×𝐼𝑀𝑃 . A statistically significant negative coefficient on the
> interaction term indicates that higher renewable energy use mitigates the inflationary effect of energy imports,
> and the opposite case is also valid.

Emre AKUSTA 

## 704 

The model of the research is given in the functional form in Equation 1: 

𝐼𝑁𝐹 𝑡 = 𝛽 0 + 𝛽 1𝐼𝑀𝑃 𝑡 + 𝛽 2𝑅𝐸𝑁 𝑡 + 𝛽 3𝐸𝑋𝐶 𝑡 + 𝛽 4𝑇𝐸𝑅𝑀 𝑡 + 𝜖 𝑡  (1) 

In this model,  𝛽 0 represents the constant term, while the coefficients  𝛽 1 to  𝛽 4 measure the impact 

of each independent variable on exports.  𝜖 𝑡  is the error term with zero mean and constant variance 

and  𝑡  is the time interval. 

The indicators used in our study and their descriptive statistics are shown in Table 1. 

Table 1 . Descriptive statistics 

Variables  Symbol  Description  Obs.  Mean  SD  Min.  Max.  Source 

Inflation  INF  Consumer prices (%)  39.39  29.89  6.251  105.22  39.39  WB 

Energy imports  IMP  Net (% of energy use)  62.1  11.71  43.04  76.285  62.1  EIA 

Renewable energy  REN  Net (% of energy use)  19.88  6.491  8.475  35.734  19.88  EIA 

Exchange rate  EXC  Dollar exchange rate  1.762  3.016  0.001  16.594  1.762  EVDS 

> Note: (1) WB, EIA, and EVDS indicate World Bank -World Development Indicators, U.S. Energy Information Administration -
> International Energy Statistics database, and Central Bank of the Republic of Türkiye -EVDS data central, respectively. (2) The
> abbreviatio ns N, Obs, SE, Min and Max denote the number of observations, standard deviation, standard error, minimum
> and maximum values, respectively.

Table 1 shows the descriptive statistics of the variables used in the study. Since the variables used 

are proportional and percentage, their logarithms are not taken. INF denotes inflation. The average 

value of INF is calculated as 39.39%. With a standard deviati on of 29.89%, inflation experienced 

significant fluctuations throughout the period. The lowest value was recorded as 6.25% and the highest 

value as 105.22%. This shows that inflation in Türkiye was quite high in some years. IMP shows the 

share of im ported energy in energy use. The average IMP is 62.1%. This means that a large portion of 

Türkiye's energy needs are met by imports. With a standard deviation of 11.71%, energy imports range 

from a minimum of 43.04% to a maximum of 76.285%. REN refers to t he portion of energy use derived 

from renewable resources. With an average of 19.88%, this variable shows that the contribution of 

renewable energy to Türkiye's energy production is limited. However, it varied between a minimum of 

8.475% and a maximum of 3 5.734% over the period. EXC represents the value of the Turkish Lira 

against the dollar. With a mean value of 1.762, the exchange rate fluctuated widely with a standard 

deviation of 3.016. The lowest exchange rate value was recorded at 0.001 and the highes t at 16.594. 

This reflects the massive exchange rate movements in Türkiye over the period. 

3. 2. Unit Root Analysis 

Stationarity means that the mean, variance and autocorrelation of the series remain constant over 

time. Models may give biased results in non -stationary series (Granger & Newbold, 1974). Therefore, 

unit root tests are used to determine whether a time series is stationary. Series with unit roots are 

non -stationary and exhibit a random walk. Structural breaks or exogenous shocks are common in 

economic and financial series (Jo hansen & Juselius, 1990). In such cases, conventional unit root tests 

that assume a s table data -generating process may yield misleading inferences. The Zivot and Andrews 

(1992) test was developed to solve this problem. This test provides more accurate results by 

considering possible structural breaks in the series. Similarly, the Lee and S trazicich (2003) test extends 

the analysis by allowing for endogenous breaks within an LM testing framework. Breaks can be caused 

by events such as economic crises, policy changes or sudden shocks. Eskişehir Osmangazi Üniversitesi Sosyal Bilimler Dergisi 

## 705 

The Zivot and Andrews (1992) test was applied in this study to evaluate the stationarity properties 

of time series. Since traditional unit root tests assume fixed structures in data series, they may ignore 

possible structural breaks in the series and may produce misleading results. Th e Zivot & Andrews test, 

on the other hand, aims to improve the accuracy of the stationarity test by endogenously detecting a 

single structural break that may occur in the time series. Accordingly, the test is implemented under 

three specifications: Model A allows a break in the intercept (level), Model B allows a break in the 

trend, and Model C allows breaks in both the intercept and the trend (Zivot & Andrews, 1992). 

The Lee and Strazicich (2003) LM unit root test is additionally employed as a complementary 

approach that allows for one or two endogenous structural breaks in the level and/or trend. A key 

advantage of this methodology is that breaks are permitted under both the null and the a lternative 

hypotheses, which mitigates spurious rejections that may arise in break -augmented tests. Break dates 

are selected endogenously by searching over admissible partitions and choosing the specification that 

yields the most nega tive (minimum) LM test statistic, and inference is then conducted using the 

corresponding critical values. 

3.3. Cointegration Test 

In this study, Johansen (1988) and Hatemi -J (2008) cointegration test is employed to determine 

the long -run relationships among variables. Given that long -run relationships may be affected by 

regime shifts, policy changes, or crisis episodes, applying a br eak -augmented approach alongside a 

standard system -based test helps to strengthen the robustness of inference. 

The Johansen (1988) cointegration test builds on the cointegration concept introduced by Engle 

and Granger (1987). It is designed for a multivariate setting. It tests whether multiple time series share 

a common long -run equilibrium relationship. The Johansen procedure is estimated via maximum 

likelihood and relies primarily on two statistics: the Trace test and the Maximum Eigenvalue test. The 

Trace test evaluates cointegration by starting from the null hypothesis of no cointegration and then 

proc eeding seq uentially to assess whether additional cointegrating relations exist in the system. The 

Maximum Eigenvalue test complements this by focusing on the incremental contribution of the next 

potential cointegrating relation (e.g., comparing the hypothesis of no cointegration against the 

hypothesis of at least one cointegrating relation), based on the largest eigenvalue (Johansen, 1988). 

The Hatemi -J (2008) cointegration test is additionally applied to avoid overlooking potential 

structural breaks in the long -run relationship. Hatemi -J (2008) extends conventional cointegration 

testing by allowing for up to two endogenous structural breaks in the cointegration equation, which i s

particularly relevant in the presence of regime shifts, policy changes, or crisis periods. In this approach, 

break dates are not imposed a priori; instead, they are determined endogenously by searching over 

admissible break combinations and selecting the dates that provide the strongest evidence against the 

null of no cointegration. The resulting test statistic is then compared with the Hatemi -J (2008) critical 

values to evaluate whether cointegration holds once structural changes in the intercept and/or slope 

are considered .

3.4. Long -Run Coefficient Estimates 

In this study, the Dynamic Ordinary Least Squares (DOLS) and Fully Modified Ordinary Least 

Squares (FMOLS) methods were used to estimate long -run coefficients. Additionally, the 

Autoregressive Distributed Lag (ARDL) method was used for robustness checks. These methods are 

powerful tools for estimating cointegration vectors. They are characterized by efficient estimation, 

especially for small sample sizes. 

The DOLS method was developed by Saikkonen (1991) and Stock and Watson (1993). DOLS 

addresses the problems of autocorrelation and possible endogeneity by adding the differences and Emre AKUSTA 

## 706 

lagged terms of the series to the model when estimating the cointegration relationship. This method 

provides a robust estimation of the long -run coefficients with the added difference terms and future 

values. 

The FMOLS method was developed to correct for possible autocorrelation and small sample bias 

when estimating cointegration vectors. This method was proposed by Phillips and Hansen (1990). It 

provides more accurate and consistent estimates by addressing endogeneity and aut ocorrelation in 

the cointegration relationship. The FMOLS model is more complex than the traditional ordinary least 

squares (OLS) method and corrects for bias in the estimates. FMOLS corrects for autocorrelation in the 

error term. It reveal s the cointegration relationship in the series more reliably. Moreover, FMOLS 

improves coefficient consistency by eliminating potential endogeneity problems. 

The ARDL method was developed by Pesaran and Shin (1999) and later refined through the bounds 

testing approach by Pesaran, Shin, and Smith (2001). It is a single -equation framework that captures 

both short -run dynamics and long -run relationships by including lags of the d ependent and 

explanatory variables. A key advantage of ARDL is its applicability when regressors are a mix of I(0) and 

I(1), provided none are I(2). The existence of a long -run relationship is typically assessed using the 

bounds test based on the joint significance of lagged level terms. Once cointegration is supported, the 

model is re -parameterized into an error -correction form to estimate long -run coefficients and short -

run adjustments. Lag orders are generally selected using standard info rmation criteria. 

In this study, long -run relationships have been estimated using multiple forecasting methods. 

These forecasters are widely used in cointegration settings to reduce endogeneity and serial 

correlation issues and improve small sample performance. The main discussion is based on the implied 

long -run coefficients. Moreover, since FMOLS may become problematic when the regressors are 

cointegrated among themselves, FMOLS results are interpreted with caution and greater weight is 

placed on DOLS/ARDL -base d evidence, consistent with Yahyaoui and Bouchoucha (20 21 ). The findings 

from both approaches are reported comparatively. 

4. Empirical Findings 

Prior to the cointegration analysis and the estimation of long -run coefficients, the stationarity 

properties of the series were examined. To account for potential structural changes, unit root testing 

was conducted using the Zivot & Andrews and Lee & Straz icich structural -break unit root tests. The 

unit root test results are reported in Table 2 and Table 3. 

Table  2. Zivot & Andrews  structural break unit root test results                                                            

> Variable
> Level First difference
> Model
> Breakpoints t-Statistic Breakpoints t-Statistic
> INF
> INF
> 2003 -3.818 1995 -6.953*** Model A
> INF 2002 -3.471 2002 -6.710*** Model C
> IMP 1995 -3.466 2006 -7.862*** Model A
> IMP 2000 -3.332 2004 -7.816*** Model C
> REN 2015 -4.482 2015 -8.870*** Model A
> REN 2007 -4.802 2007 -9.070*** Model C
> EXC 2015 -4.330 2002 -6.120*** Model A
> EXC 2016 -2.799 2016 -7.756*** Model C
> Critical value Model A →%10: -4.58 %5: -4.93 %1: -5.34
> Model C →%10: -4.82 %5: -5.08 %1: -5.57 Eskişehir Osmangazi Üniversitesi Sosyal Bilimler Dergisi

## 707 

> Note: The superscripts ***, **, and * denote the significance at a 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

Tabl e 3. Lee & Strazicich structural break unit root test results                                                              

> Variable Level First difference Model
> Breakpoints t-Statistic Breakpoints t-Statistic
> INF (1988, 2003) -2.902 (1990, 1994) -3.864** Model A
> INF (1993, 2010) -4.999* (1985, 1994) -6.539*** Model C
> IMP (2008, 2012) -3.294 (2001, 2008) -5.834*** Model A
> IMP (1989, 2008) -4.944 (1999, 2009) -7.632*** Model C
> REN (2001, 2015) -3.806* (1988, 2010) -9.495*** Model A
> REN (1987, 2007) -5.020* (1987, 2010) -9.643*** Model C
> EXC (1985, 1990) -0.324 (2001, 2018) -5.068*** Model A
> EXC (1995, 2011) -3.720 (2007, 2018) -7.316*** Model C
> Critical value Model A →%10: -3.504 %5: -3.842 %1: -4.545
> Model C →%10: -4.989 %5: -5.286 %1: -5.823
> Note: The superscripts ***, **, and * denote the significance at a 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

Table 3 shows that INF is not stationary at level. However, it became stationary at first difference 

with the structural breaks in (1990, 1994) under Model A and (1985, 1994) under Model C. These 

breaks, particularly the 1994 break, coincide with a major c risis in Türkiye's economic history. The 1994 

economic crisis led to a rapid depreciation of the Turkish Lira and a rapid increase in inflation. The 

additional break in the early -1990s window (captured as 1990/1985 depending on the specification) 

can be re ad as reflecting the build -up to, and immediate adjustment around, this episode. In addition, 

the level specifications identify breaks around 2003 (Model A) and 2010 (Model C), which are 

consistent with the post -2001 disinflation period and subsequent macr o-financial regime shifts. The 

year 2003 coincides with the immediate aftermath of the 2001 economic crisis in Türkiye. The 2001 

crisis was a serious crisis triggered by problems in the banking sector and fluctuations in exchange 

rates. During this period, inflation increased rapidly. However, with the economic reforms 

implemented after the crisis and the transition to the floating exchange rate regime, inflation started 

to be brought under control (Özlale & Yeldan, 2004; Atasoy & Saxena, 2006; Ardan, 2023) .

Also, the Lee & Strazicich test indicates that IMP becomes stationary at first difference, implying 

that shocks to energy imports have persistent effects in levels. The break points for energy imports are 

determined as (2001, 2008) under Model A and (1999, 2009) under Model C. These periods are closely 

related to Türkiye's energy dependence and pronounced shifts in global energy markets. The early -

2000s break (around 1999 -2001) is consistent with the domestic crisis environment and subsequent 

policy reorien tation, while the 2008 -2009 breaks align with the global financial crisis period and the 

associated sharp swings in energy prices and external demand. These breaking points support the view 

that energy imports are sensitive to both global energy shocks and Türkiye's evolving ene rgy demand 

(Celik, 2006; Hepbasli, 2005; Kucukali, 2010; Kucukali & Baris, 2009). 

The results of the Lee & Strazicich test show that REN is weakly stationary at level once two breaks 

are allowed (with breaks in (2001, 2015) for Model A and (1987, 2007) for Model C), and it becomes 

clearly stationary at first difference with the breaks i n (1988, 2010) for Model A and (1987, 2010) for 

Model C. The year 2007 was a time when the global interest in renewable energy started to increase. 

In parallel with this global trend, Türkiye also accelerated its renewable energy investments. 2015 was 

a pe riod in which incentives and regulations for renewable energy intensified in Türkiye. In this period, 

investments in renewable resources such as solar and wind energy increased. Therefore, renewable Emre AKUSTA 

## 708 

energy has started to play an important role in Türkiye's energy policies. The additional breaks around 

2010 and the earlier regime -shift dates (late -1980s/early -2000s, depending on the model) suggest that 

the renewables series reflects both the later acce leration phase and earlier structural changes that 

shaped the long -run trajectory of renewable energy in Türkiye. This result reveals that the shift towards 

renewable energy in Türkiye's energy policies has been evident since 2007 in line with global trend s

(Salvarli & Salvarli, 2017; Yüksel, 2008). 

Moreover, the results show that EXC is not stationary at level, but becomes stationary at first 

difference with the breaks in (2001, 2018) under Model A and (2007, 2018) under Model C. The year 

2001 is the period when Türkiye switched to a floating exchang e rate regime after the 2001 crisis. This 

period represents significant changes in the foreign exchange market. This transition resulted in the 

exchange rate being determined under free market conditions. As a result, the value of the Turkish 

Lira fluctuat ed significantly. The 2018 break is consistent with the pronounced exchange -rate 

turbulence and sharp depreciation observed in that period, while the 2007 break can be interpreted 

as capturing pre -global -crisis macro -financial conditions and the ensuing sh ift in external financing 

dynamics. These findings suggest that structural changes in the exchange rate are closely related to 

Türkiye's economic reforms and global market conditions (Akyurek, 2006; Dağlaroğlu, Demirel, & 

Mahmud, 2018; Özlale & Yeldan, 200 4). 

Overall, the Lee & Strazicich results are broadly consistent with your earlier Zivot & Andrews 

interpretation, in that the series are predominantly non -stationary in levels but become stationary 

after first differencing once structural breaks are accounted for (with some variables showing only 

weak evidence of level stationarity under specific model choices). 

Table 4 . Johansen  cointegration test results                         

> H0Trace statistics Critical
> values (5%)
> Maximum eigenvalue
> statistics
> Critical
> values (5%)
> r = 0 53.586 47.856*** 39.815 27.584***
> r133.770 29.797*** 44.508 21.131**
> r219.262 15.495*** 18.455 14.265**
> r36.807 3.841*** 6.807 3.841***
> Note: The superscripts ***, **, and * denote the significance at a 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

Table 4 shows the results of the Johansen cointegration test. This test uses the Trace and Maximum 

Eigenvalue statistics to determine the existence of cointegration vectors between variables. First, with 

respect to the null hypothesis r = 0 (no cointegrati on), the Trace test statistic is 53.586 and the critical 

value is 47.856. The Maximum Eigenvalue statistic is 39.815, which is above the critical value (27.584). 

This result indicates that the null hypothesis should be rejected and there is at least one co integration 

vector. Second, when the hypothesis r ≤ 1 is tested, the Trace test statistic is 33.770, which exceeds 

the critical value of 29.797. The Maximum Eigenvalue statistic is 44.508, which is higher than the critical 

value of 21.131. This indicates the existence of two cointegration vectors. Third, the Trace statistic for 

the hypothesis r ≤ 2 is 19.262, which is above the critical value (15.495). The Maximum Eigenvalue 

statistic is 18.455 and exceeds the critical value (14.265). This indicates that t here are three 

cointegration vectors. Finally, according to the hypothesis r ≤ 3, both the Trace and Maximum 

Eigenvalue statistics are 6.807 and exceed the critical value (3.841). This indicates the existence of a 

fourth cointegration vector. Eskişehir Osmangazi Üniversitesi Sosyal Bilimler Dergisi 

## 709 

Table 5.  Hatemi -J cointegration test results 

Test  t-Statistic  Breakpoints 

Critical value 

1%  5%  10% 

ADF  -7.198***  (1990, 2001)  -6.503  -6.015  -5.653 

Zt  -9.458***  (2001, 2010)  -6.503  -6.015  -5.653 

Za  -89.178**  (1987, 2008)  -90.794  -76.003  -52.232 

> Note: The superscripts ***, **, and * denote the significance at a 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

Table 5 reports the results of the Hatemi -J cointegration test, which examines the existence of a 

long -run relationship among the variables while allowing for two endogenous structural breakpoints. 

For the ADF statistic, the test value is −7.198 with break points at (1990, 2001). Since this statistic is 

lower than the 1% critical value (−6.503), the null hypothesis of no cointegration is rejected at the 1% 

significance level. Similarly, the Zt statistic is −9.458 with breakpoints at (2001, 2010), and it is a lso 

more negative than the 1% critical value (−6.503), providing further evidence against the null of no 

cointegration. Finally, the Za statistic is −89.178 with breakpoints at (1987, 2008). This value is more 

negative than the 5% critical value (−76.003), but not more negative than the 1% critical value 

(−90.794), indicating rejection of the null at the 5% level. Overall, the Hatemi -J test results strongly 

support the presence of cointegration, implying a robust long -run equilibrium relationship even after 

accounting for two structural breaks. 

Overall, the empirical evidence is consistent across both cointegration approaches. Specifically, 

the Johansen test results indicate the presence of cointegration vectors among the variables, while the 

Hatemi -J test statistics (ADF, Zt, and Za) similarly r eject the null hypothesis of no cointegration when 

structural breaks are endogenously taken into account. Hence, based on both the Johansen and 

Hatemi -J cointegration tests, it can be concluded that a stable long -run equilibrium relationship exists 

among t he variables. 

Table 5 . DOLS and FMOLS l ong -run estimates 

Dependent variable: INF  Coefficient 

Variables  DOLS  FMOLS 

IMP  1.642***  1.188*** 

REN  -1.145**  -1.983*** 

EXC  3.228***  3.702** 

TERM  -1.346**  -2.193*** 

C -12.731**  -7.230*** 

Diagnostic tests  P value  P value 

2 (Serial correlation)  0.314  0.237 

2 (Heteroskedasticity)  0.672  0.589 

2 (Normality)  0.934  0.764 

2 (Functional form)  0.221  0.311 

CUSUM  Stable  Stable 

CUSUMSQ  Stable  Stable 

> Note: The superscripts ***, **, and * denote the significance at a 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively. Emre AKUSTA

## 710 

Table 5 presents both DOLS and FMOLS results. DOLS results show that a one -unit increase in the 

exchange rate (EXC) increases the inflation rate by 3.228 units. This result is quite significant for an 

import -dependent economy such as Türkiye's. An increase in the exchange rate increases import costs. 

Especially in energy import -dependent countries like Türkiye, increases in exchange rates cause 

inflationary pressures by increasing energy costs. Türkiye's energy and raw material imports directly 

affect the i nflation. In this case, exchange rate increases lead to a significant pressure on inflation. 

Similarly, energy imports (IMP) also have an inflationary impact. The DOLS model reveals that a one -

unit increase in energy imports increases inflation by 1,642 un its. Türkiye's energy needs are largely 

met by imports. Increases in the prices of energy resources such as oil and natural gas trigger inflation 

by increasing the cost of energy imports. These factors increase Türkiye's sensitivity to fluctuations in 

glob al energy prices. It shows that Türkiye is vulnerable to exogenous shocks due to its energy 

dependence. 

Renewable energy use (REN) has a mitigating impact on inflation. DOLS results show that a one -

unit increase in REN reduces inflation by 1.145 units. This shows that reducing Türkiye's energy imports 

has a beneficial impact on inflation. Renewable energy so urces play an important role in controlling 

inflation by reducing energy costs through the use of domestic resources. This result reveals the 

stabilizing effect of renewable energy investments on energy prices. Finally, the TERM variable refers 

to the inte raction term. This term measures the impact of renewable energy on mitigating inflationary 

pressures from energy imports. The DOLS model shows that the interaction term has a negative effect. 

A one -unit increase in TERM reduces the inflation rate by 1.346 units. This result reveals that 

renewable energy mitigates inflationary pressures stemming from energy imports. Renewable energy 

reduces energy costs by reducing the use of imported fossil fuels. Thus, the pressure of energy imports 

on prices decreases. Th is shows how important Türkiye's investments in renewable energy are in 

controlling inflation. The findings of the study are consistent with studies that conclude that energy 

imports increase inflationary pressures (see, for example, Yılmaz & Altay, 2016; Hadi & Campbell, 

2020). It is also consistent with studies that find that the relationship between exchange rate and 

inflation is significant (see, for example, Sever & Mızrak, 2006; Gül et al. 2006; Güneş, 2013; Türk, 2016; 

Monfared & Akın, 2017; Yenice & Yenisu, 2019). 

FMOLS results also support the DOLS results. In both models, renewable energy sources have a 

disinflationary impact. Moreover, in both models, the impact of renewable energy on mitigating 

inflationary pressures stemming from energy imports is stronger than the direct disinflationary impact 

of renewable energy. This suggests that renewable energy investments will play a critical role in 

containing inflation in Türkiye in the long run. It is evident that renewable energy has the potential to 

reduce energy cos ts and stabilize inflation by reducing external dependence. These results indicate 

that shifting Türkiye's energy policy towards renewable energy is of strategic importance for both the 

economy and inflation management. 

5. Robustness Check 

To further assess robustness, additional checks have been conducted for both (i) cointegration 

inference and (ii) long -run coefficient estimates. Cointegration has been re -tested under endogenous 

structural breaks to avoid potentially biased conclusions in the presence of regime shifts. The Hatemi -

J test results are reported in Table 6. Long -run and short -run dynamics have also been re -estimated 

within an ARDL error -correction framework. The ARDL short -run and long -run results are presented in 

Table 7. Eskişehir Osmangazi Üniversitesi Sosyal Bilimler Dergisi 

## 711 

Table  6. ARDL l ong -run estimates              

> Dependent variable: INF Coefficient
> Variables Short -run Long -run
> IMP 2.548 *** 2.429 ***
> REN -2.209 *-2.504 ***
> EXC 2.876 *** 3. 237 **
> TERM -2.203 -2. 999 **
> C-3.526 **
> Diagnostic tests P value

2 (Serial correlation)  0. 247 

2 (Heteroskedasticity)  0. 443 

2 (Normality)  0. 349 

2 (Functional form)  0. 121   

> CUSUM Stable
> CUSUMSQ Stable
> Note: The superscripts ***, **, and * denote the significance at a 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.

Table 6 reports the ARDL estimates as a robustness check by decomposing the relationship into 

short -run dynamics and long -run equilibrium effects. The ARDL long -run coefficients are broadly 

consistent with the DOLS and FMOLS findings in Table 5. In particular, the exchange rate (EXC) remains 

inflationary and statistically significant. Energy imports (IMP) also continue to exert a positive and 

signifi cant effect on inflation. These results confirm the relevance of external cost channels for an 

import -depende nt economy such as Türkiye. Renewable energy (REN) retains a negative and 

statistically significant long -run coefficient. This implies that higher renewable energy utilization is 

associated with lower inflation by reducing reliance on imported energy input s. With respect to the 

interaction term (TERM), it is constructed to capture the role of renewable energy in mitigating 

inflationary pressures arising from energy imports. The ARDL results indicate that TERM is statistically 

insignificant in the short run. However, it becomes negative and significant in the long run. This pattern 

suggests that the buffering role of renewable energy materializes mainly through longer -horizon 

adjustments, such as capacity expansion, substitution away from imported fossil fuel s, and gradual 

cost pass -through. Finally, diagnostic statistics and stability tests indicate no major specification 

concerns. They also support parameter stability. Overall, the evidence reinforces the conclusion that 

the core results are robust across al ternative long -run estimators and within an ARDL framework. 

6. Policy Implications 

The analysis results demonstrate that renewable energy resources can mitigate the inflationary 

pressures stemming from energy imports in Türkiye. In line with these findings, shifting Türkiye's 

energy policy towards renewable energy is of strategic importa nce for both economic and inflation 

management. Renewable energy can alleviate the pressure on energy costs by reducing dependence 

on energy imports. This would provide Türkiye with a more sustainable solution in the fight against 

inflation. Moreover, rene wable energy sources not only ensure economic stability but also support 

environmental sustainability. Renewable energy plays an important role in stabilizing energy prices by 

reducing external dependence. In this respect, a number of policy recommendation s have been 

developed to reduce dependence on energy imports and combat inflation: Emre AKUSTA 

## 712 

[1] Promote renewable energy use and investments: Türkiye should develop a comprehensive 

policy package for this purpose. This package should include incentives such as tax breaks, subsidies, 

low -interest loans and direct investment support. Tax exemptions and customs duty reductions could 

be applied to companies investing in renewable energy projects. In addition, domestic production of 

technological equipment used in power generation plants should be encouraged. The government 

should offer grants to suppo rt R&D efforts. It should reduce capital costs by providing low -interest 

loans for renewable energy investments. Establish a long -term and stable regulatory framework to 

boost investor confidence. Price guarantees to energy producers should be stabilized a nd secured. 

[2] Long -term strategies to reduce energy dependence: Türkiye should adopt long -term energy 

policies to reduce dependence on energy imports. Projects to increase energy efficiency should be 

prioritized. Policies that encourage energy savings in the public and private sectors should be 

implemented. In addition, investments in energy storage systems should be increased. Given the 

intermittent generation structure of renewable energy sources, these systems are critical for ensuring 

energy supply security. 

[3] Transformation and incentive programs in energy -intensive sectors: Türkiye should implement 

programs to increase the use of renewable energy in energy -intensive sectors such as industry, 

agriculture and transportation. Policies should be developed to e ncourage the transition to renewable 

energy to reduce fossil fuel use. Tax reductions and incentives should be provided to support the use 

of energy efficient technologies. Reducing energy costs, especially in the industrial sector, will also 

reduce produc tion costs and alleviate inflationary pressures. 

[4] Establish a mechanism to monitor the relationship between energy and inflation: Türkiye 

should establish a mechanism that regularly monitors and evaluates the impacts of energy use on 

inflation. This mechanism would measure the short and long -term impa cts of energy policies and allow 

for policy adjustments when necessary. Thus, flexible and sustainable solutions can be developed to 

combat energy market volatility. Such monitoring and evaluation systems are important to minimize 

the impact of energy pric es on inflation. This will help policymakers make more informed decisions. 

[5] Supporting domestic production in renewable energy technology: Importing technologies to be 

used in renewable energy power plants is a problem that increases Türkiye's external dependency. 

Supporting domestic production in renewable energy investments is critical for reducing Türkiye's 

external dependence in the energy sector. Domestic production of these technologies should be 

encouraged. The state should offer tax advantages, grant programs and low -interest loans to the 

private sector for domestic tec hnology development and production. In addition, R&D efforts should 

be supported. Domestic producers' access to renewable energy technologies should be increased. 

These steps would lower energy costs, reduce Türkiye's dependence on energy imports and ease 

inflationary pressures. This would reduce import dependency in both raw materials and technology. 

As a result, a stronger domestic infrastructure will be built in the energy sector. Eskişehir Osmangazi Üniversitesi Sosyal Bilimler Dergisi 

## 713 

7. Conclusion 

This study analyzes the potential of renewable energy to mitigate inflationary pressures stemming 

from energy imports in Türkiye. Annual data for the period 1980 -2022 are used in the study. Unit root 

properties are examined using the Zivot -Andrews and Lee -Strazicich tests, both of which explicitly 

account for structural breaks. Cointegration is investigated via the Johansen and Hatemi -J

cointegration tests. Long -run coefficients are subsequently estimated using the DOLS and FMOLS 

estimators, and the robustn ess of the empirical findings is further assessed using the ARDL approach. 

In addition, an interaction term is added to analyze the impact of renewable energy use on energy 

import -driven inflation. This interaction term is constructed to capture the extent to which renewable 

energy alleviates the inflationary effects of energy imports, rather than merely reflecting a generic 

combined effect of two variables. 

The findings show that an increase in the exchange rate has an inflationary impact in Türkiye. DOLS 

results indicate that a one -unit increase in the exchange rate increases the inflation rate by 3.228 units. 

Similarly, energy imports also have a significan t pressure on inflation. A one -unit increase in energy 

imports increases inflation by 1.642 units. Conversely, the findings indicate that renewable energy has 

a negative impact on inflation. DOLS results reveal that a one -unit increase in renewable energy use 

reduces inflation by 1.145 units. Similarly, the interaction term also has a negative impact on inflation. 

DOLS results indicate that a one -unit increase in the interaction term decreases inflation by 1.346 units. 

FMOLS results also support the DOLS re sults. In addition, the ARDL estimates, included as a robustness 

check, yield broadly consistent long -run results. In both models, renewable energy sources have a 

disinflationary impact. Moreover, in both models, the impact of renewable energy on mitigatin g

inflationary pressures stemming from energy imports is stronger than the direct disinflationary impact 

of renewable energy. This conclusion is also reinforced by the ARDL long -run estimates, which indicate 

that the disinflationary role of renewable energ y operates more strongly through its moderating effect 

on import -driven inflation. 

Although this study provides important findings, it has some limitations. Future studies can address 

these limitations and move the study forward. First, the pressure on inflation is explained by energy 

imports, exchange rate and renewable energy use. In t he future, factors such as global energy prices, 

energy supply and geopolitical risks can also be included in the model. Second, this study is limited to 

the case of Türkiye. In future studies, developed and developing countries can also be analyzed to 

com pare how the results vary across different countries. Finally, the study uses data from 1980 to 

2022. The consistency of the findings can be tested with longer -term data sets and different analysis 

techniques. These limitations may inspire future studies. 

Ethics approval and consent to participate 

Not applicable. 

Authors contribution statement 

The contribution of the 1st author to the article is 100%. 

Funding Statement 

No financial support was received from any institution for this research. 

Competing interest 

The author declares no competing interests. Emre AKUSTA 

## 714 

References 

Abbas, N., Saeed, S., Manzoor, S., Arshad, M. U., & Bilal, U. (2015). The relationship between electricity 

consumption, employment rate, inflation and economic growth in five developing countries. British 

Journal of Economics, Management & Trade, 5(2), 164 –171. 

https://doi.org/10.9734/BJEMT/2015/10569 

Adedoyin, F. F., Ozturk, I., Bekun, F. V., Agboola, P. O., & Agboola, M. O. (2021). Renewable and non -

renewable energy policy simulations for abating emissions in a complex economy: Evidence from 

the novel dynamic ARDL. Renewable Energy, 177 , 1408 –1420. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2021.06.018 

Aimer, N., & Dilek, S. (2021). Toda -Yamamoto causality test between energy consumption and 

economic growth: Evidence from a panel of Middle Eastern countries. Journal of Empirical 

Economics and Social Sciences, 3 (1), 56 –78.  https://doi.org/10.46959/jeess.651976 

Akyurek, C. (2006). The Turkish crisis of 2001: A classic? Emerging Markets Finance and Trade, 42 (1), 

5–32.  https://doi.org/10.2753/REE1540 -496X420101 

Alagöz, M., Alacahan, N. D.,  & Akarsu, Y. (2017). Petrol fiyatlarının makro ekonomi üzerindeki etkisi -

ülke karşılaştırmaları ile panel veri analizi.  Karamanoğlu Mehmetbey Üniversitesi Sosyal ve 

Ekonomik Araştırmalar Dergisi,  19 (33), 144 –150.  https://doi.org/10.18493/kmusekad.400722 

Ardan, M. (2023). 1994 financial crisis in Turkey. In B. Açıkgöz (Ed.), Black Swan: Economic Crises, 

Volume II (pp. 95 –126). Singapore: Springer Nature Singapore.  https://doi.org/10.1007/978 -981 -

99 -2318 -2_7 

Asafu -Adjaye, J. (2000). The relationship between energy consumption, energy prices and economic 

growth: Time series evidence from Asian developing countries. Energy Economics, 22 (6), 615 –625. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140 -9883(00)00050 -5

Atasoy, D., & Saxena, S. C. (2006). Misaligned? Overvalued? The untold story of the Turkish lira. 

Emerging Markets Finance and Trade, 42 (3), 29 –45.  https://doi.org/10.2753/REE1540 -496X420302 

Batten, J. A., Mo, D., & Pourkhanali, A. (2024). Can inflation predict energy price volatility? Energy 

Economics, 129 , 107158.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eneco.2023.107158 

Ca’ Zorzi, M., Hahn, E., & Sanchez, M. (2007, March 1). Exchange rate pass -through in emerging 

markets [SSRN Scholarly Paper]. Rochester, NY: Social Science Research Network. 

https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.970654 

Celik, A. N. (2006). Present status of photovoltaic energy in Turkey and life cycle techno -economic 

analysis of a grid -connected photovoltaic -house. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 10 (4), 

370 –387.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2004.09.007 

Dağlaroğlu, T., Demirel, B., & Mahmud, S. F. (2018). Monetary policy implications of short -term capital 

flows in Turkey. Empirica, 45 (4), 747 –763.  https://doi.org/10.1007/s10663 -017 -9388 -0

Demez, S. (2021). Türkiye’de döviz kuru ve enflasyonla mücadelede faiz oranlarının etkinliği: Fourier 

eşbütünleşme analizi.  Karamanoğlu Mehmetbey Üniversitesi Sosyal ve Ekonomik Araştırmalar 

Dergisi, 23 (40), 132 –144. 

Demirbas, A., & Bakis, R. (2004). Energy from renewable sources in Turkey: Status and future direction. 

Energy Sources, 26 (5), 473 –484.  https://doi.org/10.1080/00908310490429759 Eskişehir Osmangazi Üniversitesi Sosyal Bilimler Dergisi 

## 715 

Dogan, E., & Muhammad, I. (2019). Willingness to pay for renewable electricity: A contingent valuation 

study in Turkey. The Electricity Journal, 32 (10), 106677.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tej.2019.106677 

Duman, Y. K., & Sağdıç, A. (2019). Türkiye’de döviz kuru ve enflasyon ilişkisi: Ekonometrik bir analiz 

(2003: 1 –2017: 3). Sakarya İktisat Dergisi, 8 (1), 1 –16. 

Engle, R. F., & Granger, C. W. (1987). Co -integration and error correction: Representation, estimation, 

and testing. Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society , 251 –276. 

https://doi.org/10.2307/1913236 

Granger, C. W., & Newbold, P. (1974). Spurious regressions in econometrics. Journal of Econometrics, 

2(2), 111 –120.  https://doi.org/10.1016/0304 -4076(74)90034 -7

Guttormsen, A. G. (2007). Causality between energy consumption and economic growth. The Journal 

of Energy and Development, 33 (1), 1 –22. 

Gül, E.,  & Ekinci, A. (2006). Türkiye’de reel döviz kuru ile ihracat ve ithalat arasındaki nedensellik ilişkisi: 

1990 -2006.  Dumlupınar Üniversitesi Sosyal Bilimler Dergisi, 16 (1), 165 –190. 

Güneş, Ş. (2013). Türkiye’de kur rejimi uygulaması ve enflasyon ilişkisi üzerine bir analiz.  Ekonomik ve 

Sosyal Araştırmalar Dergisi , 9(2), 65 –77. 

Hadi, M., & Campbell, G. (2020). Relationship among energy consumption, inflation, human capital 

and economic growth: Evidence from Indonesia. International Journal of Applied Economics, 

Finance and Accounting, 6 (2), 85 –92.  https://doi.org/10.33094/8.2017.2020.62.85.92 

Hammoudeh, S., & Reboredo, J. C. (2018). Oil price dynamics and market -based inflation expectations. 

Energy Economics, 75 , 484 –491.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eneco.2018.09.011 

Helali, K., & Rekik, M. (2014). A re -estimation of the impact of the subprime crisis on the economic 

growth of some emerging countries: Vector -error correction model. E3 Journal of Business 

Management and Economics, 5 (3), 63 -70. 

Hepbasli, A. (2005). Development and restructuring of Turkey’s electricity sector: A review. Renewable 

and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 9 (4), 311 –343.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2004.05.004 

Herbstreuth, S. (2014). Constructing dependency: The United States and the problem of foreign oil. 

Millennium: Journal of International Studies, 43 (1), 24 –42. 

https://doi.org/10.1177/0305829814523327 

Hossain, M. E., Rej, S., Saha, S. M., Onwe, J. C., Nwulu, N., Bekun, F. V., & Taha, A. (2022). Can energy 

efficiency help in achieving carbon -neutrality pledges? A developing country perspective using 

dynamic ARDL simulations. Sustainability, 14 (13), 7537.  https://doi.org/10.3390/su14137537 

Iyke, B. N. (2024). Climate change, energy security risk, and clean energy investment. Energy 

Economics, 129 , 107225.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eneco.2023.107225 

Johansen, S. (1988). Statistical analysis of cointegration vectors. Journal of Economic Dynamics and 

Control, 12 (2 -3), 231 -254.  https://doi.org/10.1016/0165 -1889(88)90041 -3

Johansen, S., & Juselius, K. (1990). Maximum likelihood estimation and inference on cointegration —

With applications to the demand for money. Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, 52 (2), 169 –

210.  https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468 -0084.1990.mp52002003.x 

Kargi, B. (2014). The effects of oil prices on inflation and growth: time series analysis in Turkish 

economy for 1988: 01 -2013: 04 period. International Journal of Economics and Research , 5(2), 29 -

36. Emre AKUSTA 

## 716 

Katircioglu, S., Katircioğlu, S., & Altinay, M. (2017). Interactions between energy consumption and 

imports: Empirical evidence from Turkey. Journal of Comparative Asian Development, 16 (2), 161 –

178.  https://doi.org/10.1080/15339114.2017.1319285 

Kızıldere, C. (2020). Türkiye’de cari açık sorununun enerji tüketimi ve ekonomik büyüme açısından 

değerlendirilmesi: Ampirik bir analiz.  Business & Management Studies: An International Journal, 

8(2), 2121 –2139.  https://doi.org/10.15295/bmij.v8i2.1493 

Konak, A.,  & Peçe, M. A. (2023). Türkiye’de faiz oranı, enflasyon oranı ve döviz kuru arasındaki 

nedensellik analizi.  Türkiye Sosyal Araştırmalar Dergisi, 27 (1), 171 –186. 

Kucukali, S. (2010). Municipal water supply dams as a source of small hydropower in Turkey. 

Renewable Energy, 35 (9), 2001 –2007.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2010.01.032 

Kucukali, S., & Baris, K. (2009). Assessment of small hydropower (SHP) development in Turkey: Laws, 

regulations and EU policy perspective. Energy Policy, 37 (10), 3872 –3879. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2009.06.023 

Monfared, S., & Akin, F. (2017). The relationship between exchange rates and inflation: The case of 

Iran. European Journal of Sustainable Development, 6(4), 4015 -4032. 

https://doi.org/10.14207/ejsd.2017.v6n4p329 

Öksüzler, O.,  & İpek, E. (2011). Dünya petrol fiyatlarındaki değişimin büyüme ve enflasyon üzerindeki 

etkisi: Türkiye örneği.  Uluslararası Yönetim İktisat ve İşletme Dergisi, 7 (14), 15 -34. 

Özlale, Ü., & Yeldan, E. (2004). Measuring exchange rate misalignment in Turkey. Applied Economics, 

36 (16), 1839 –1849.  https://doi.org/10.1080/0003684042000279735 

Paul, S., & Bhattacharya, R. N. (2004). Causality between energy consumption and economic growth in 

India: A note on conflicting results. Energy Economics, 26 (6), 977 –983. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eneco.2004.07.002 

Phillips, P. C., & Hansen, B. E. (1990). Statistical inference in instrumental variables regression with I(1) 

processes. The Review of Economic Studies, 57 (1), 99 –125.  https://doi.org/10.2307/2297545 

Sadorsky, P. (2011). Trade and energy consumption in the Middle East. Energy Economics, 33 (5), 739 –

749.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eneco.2010.12.012 

Sadorsky, P. (2012). Energy consumption, output and trade in South America. Energy Economics, 34 (2), 

476 –488.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eneco.2011.12.00 

Saha, S., & Zhang, Z. (2013). Do exchange rates affect consumer prices? A comparative analysis for 

Australia, China and India. Mathematics and Computers in Simulation, 93 , 128 –138. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matcom.2012.11.002 

Saikkonen, P. (1991). Asymptotically efficient estimation of cointegration regressions. Econometric 

Theory, 7 (1), 1 -21.  https://ddoi.org/10.1017/S0266466600004217 

Salvarli, H., & Salvarli, M. S. (2017). Trends on energy policy and sustainable development in Turkey. 

Energy Sources, Part B: Economics, Planning, and Policy, 12 (6), 512 –518. 

https://doi.org/10.1080/15567249.2016.1217284 

Sancar, C.,  & Polat, M. A. (2015). Türkiye’de ekonomik büyüme, enerji tüketimi ve ithalat ilişkisi. 

Gümüshane University Electronic Journal of the Institute of Social Science, 6 (12). 

Sever, E.,  & Mızrak, Z. (2007). Döviz kuru, enflasyon ve faiz oranı arasındaki ilişkiler: Türkiye uygulaması. 

Sosyal Ekonomik Araştırmalar Dergisi, 7 (13), 264 –283. Eskişehir Osmangazi Üniversitesi Sosyal Bilimler Dergisi 

## 717 

Sheefeni, J., & Ocran, M. (2014). Exchange rate pass -through to domestic prices in Namibia: SVAR 

evidence. Journal of Economic and Financial Sciences, 7(1), 89 –102. 

https://doi.org/10.10520/EJC154328 

Stock, J. H., & Watson, M. W. (1993). A simple estimator of cointegrating vectors in higher order 

integrated systems. Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society , 3(5), 783 –820. 

https://doi.org/10.2307/2951763 

Syzdykova, A. (2016). Döviz kuru ve enflasyon arasındaki ilişki: BRİC ülkeleri örneği.  Uluslararası 

Yönetim ve Sosyal Araştırmalar Dergisi, 3 (6), 1 –14. 

Şanlı, O. (2022). Döviz kuru dalgalanmalarının enflasyona etkisi: Türkiye örneği.  Ordu Üniversitesi 

Sosyal Bilimler Enstitüsü Sosyal Bilimler Araştırmaları Dergisi, 12 (3), 2487 –2514. 

https://doi.org/10.48146/odusobiad.1082470 

Şeker, H. (2022). Türkiye’de kur -enflasyon geçişkenliği üzerine ekonometrik bir analiz.  Finans Ekonomi 

ve Sosyal Araştırmalar Dergisi, 7 (1), 131 –142.  https://doi.org/10.29106/fesa.1068026 

Tsani, S. Z. (2010). Energy consumption and economic growth: A causality analysis for Greece. Energy 

Economics, 32 (3), 582 –590.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eneco.2009.09.007 

Türk, E. (2016). Döviz kuru enflasyon ilişkisi “Türkiye örneği”.  Ufuk Üniversitesi Sosyal Bilimler Enstitüsü 

Dergisi, 5 (9), 81 –102. 

Uslu, T. (2008). Turkey’s foreign dependence on energy. Energy Sources, Part B: Economics, Planning, 

and Policy, 3 (2), 113 –120.  https://doi.org/10.1080/15567240601057115 

Yahyaoui, I., & Bouchoucha, N. (2021). The long‐run relationship between ODA, growth and 

governance: An application of FMOLS and DOLS approaches. African Development Review , 33 (1), 

38 -54.  https://doi.org/10.1111/1467 -8268.12489 

Yakut, S. G., Yazgan, S., Bacaksız, E.,  & Fikir, H. (2021). Enerji kullanımı ve başlıca makroekonomik 

göstergeler etkileşimi ve bu etkileşim bağlamında Türkiye’nin dünya içindeki yeri.  Selay Journal of 

Life Economics, 8 (2), 247 –261.  https://doi.org/10.15637/jlecon.8.2.09 

Yanar, R.,  & Kerimoğlu, G. (2011). Türkiye’de enerji tüketimi, ekonomik büyüme ve cari açık ilişkisi. 

Ekonomi Bilimleri Dergisi, 3 (2), 191 –201. 

Yaylalı, M.,  & Lebe, F. (2012). İthal ham petrol fiyatlarının Türkiye’deki makroekonomik aktiviteler 

üzerindeki etkisi.  Marmara Üniversitesi İktisadi ve İdari Bilimler Dergisi, 32 (1), 43 –68. 

Yenice, S.,  & Yenisu, E. (2019). Türkiye’de döviz kuru, enflasyon ve faiz oranlarının etkileşimi.  Dokuz 

Eylül Üniversitesi Sosyal Bilimler Enstitüsü Dergisi, 21 (4), 1065 –1086. 

https://doi.org/10.16953/deusosbil.467312 

Yılmaz, A.,  & Altay, H. (2016). Türkiye’de enerji tüketimi ile enflasyon arasındaki ilişkinin incelenmesi. 

Dumlupınar Üniversitesi Sosyal Bilimler Dergisi, (49) , 214 –232. 

Yorucu, V. (2016). Price modeling of imported natural gas in Turkey. Journal of Renewable and 

Sustainable Energy, 8 (1), 45 –72.  https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4942408 

Yurtkur, A. K.,  & Bahtiyar, B. (2017). Enerji tüketimi, ekonomik büyüme, enflasyon ve ticari açıklık 

arasındaki ilişki: Kırılgan Beşli ekonomileri için bir analiz.  International Journal of Research in 

Business and Social Science, 6 (6),  https://doi.org/21 –41. 10.20525/ijrbs.v6i6.785 

Yüksel, I. (2008). Global warming and renewable energy sources for sustainable development in 

Turkey. Renewable Energy, 33 (4), 802 –812.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2007.05.040 Emre AKUSTA 

## 718 

Ziaei, S. M. (2012). Energy consumption in relation to government debt, inflation and investment in 

selected European countries. International Journal of Energy, Environment and Economics, 20 (5), 

389. 

Zivot, E., & Andrews, D. W. K. (1992). Further evidence on the great crash, the oil -price shock, and the 

unit -root hypothesis. Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 20 (1), 25 –44. 

https://doi.org/10.1198/073500102753410372 

Lee, J., & Strazicich, M. C. (2003). Minimum Lagrange multiplier unit root test with two structural 

breaks. Review of economics and statistics , 85 (4), 1082 -1089. 

https://doi.org/10.1162/003465303772815961 

Hatemi -j, A. (2008). Tests for cointegration with two unknown regime shifts with an application to 

financial market integration. Empirical economics , 35 (3), 497 -505. 

https://doi.org/10.1007/s00181 -007 -0175 -9

Pesaran, M. H., Shin, Y., & Smith, R. J. (2001). Bounds testing approaches to the analysis of level 

relationships. Journal of applied econometrics , 16 (3), 289 -326.  https://doi.org/10.1002/jae.616 

Pesaran, M. H. and Shin, Y. (1999). An Autoregressive distributed -lag modelling approach to 

cointegration analysis. Econometrics and Economic Theory in the 20th Century , 371 -413. 

https://doi.org/10.1017/ccol521633230.011 Eskişehir Osmangazi Üniversitesi Sosyal Bilimler Dergisi 

## 719 

Extended Summary 

Can Renewable Energy Mitigate Inflationary Pressures from Energy Imports? Evidence from 

Türkiye 

Renewable energy could be an important opportunity to reduce Türkiye 's dependence on energy 

imports and alleviate inflationary pressures. The use of renewable energy sources can reduce external 

dependence by reducing energy imports. This in turn can alleviate pressure on the exchange rate and 

reduce inflationary effects. R enewable energy can also contribute to Türkiye 's long -run energy 

strategies by improving environmental sustainability. However, more research is needed on the 

economic implications of this transition and its effects on inflation. Therefore, this study anal yzes the 

potential of renewable energy to alleviate inflationary pressures from energy imports. 

The study uses annual data for the period 1980 -2022. This period was chosen on the basis of the 

availability and accessibility of the dataset for analysis. Inflation (INF) is used as the dependent variable. 

Energy imports (IMP), renewable energy use (REN) and exchange rate (EXC) are included in the model 

as independent variables. In addition, an interaction term is constructed to measure the impact of 

renewable energy in reducing inflationary pressures from energy imports. The interaction term is a 

method u sed in statistical modeling to examine the combined effect of two or more independent 

variables on the dependent variable. In this study, the interaction term measures the combined effect 

of these two factors in addition to the independent effects of energ y imports and renewable energy 

use on inflation. 

DOLS results show that a one unit increase in the exchange rate increases the inflation rate by 3.228 

units. This result is quite significant for a foreign currency dependent economy like Türkiye . An increase 

in the exchange rate increases import costs. Especially in energy import -dependent countries like 

Türkiye , increases in exchange rates cause inflationary pressures by increasing energy costs. Since 

Türkiye 's energy and raw material imports directly affect the general level of prices, exchange rate 

incr eases put significant pressure on inflation. Similarly, energy imports (IMP) also have an inflationary 

impact. According to the DOLS model, a one -unit increase in energy imports increases inflation by 

1,642 units. Türkiye 's energy needs are largely met by imports. These reasons increase Türkiye 's 

sensitivity to fluctuations in global energy prices. Increases in the prices of energy resources such as 

oil and natural gas trigger inflation by increasing the cost of energy imports. This shows that Türkiye is 

vu lnerable to external shocks due to its energy dependence. Renewable energy utilization (REN), on 

the other hand, has a downward impact on inflation. DOLS results show that a 1 -unit increase in REN 

reduces inflation by 1.145 units. This suggests that reduci ng Türkiye 's dependence on energy imports 

has a positive impact on inflation. Renewable energy sources play an important role in controlling 

inflation by reducing energy costs, especially through the use of domestic resources such as solar and 

wind energy. This result reveals the stabilizing effect of renewable energy investments on energy 

prices. Finally, the TERM variable refers to the interaction term. This term measures the effect of 

renewable energy in mitigating inflationary pressures from energy impo rts. According to the DOLS 

model, the interaction term has a negative effect. A 1 -unit increase in TERM reduces the inflation rate 

by 1.346 units. This result suggests that renewable energy alleviates inflationary pressures stemming 

from energy imports. Re newable energy reduces energy costs by reducing the use of imported fossil 

fuels. Thus, the pressure of energy imports on prices decreases. This shows how important Türkiye 's 

investments in renewable energy are in controlling inflation. 

FMOLS results also support the DOLS results. In both models, the use of renewable energy sources 

has a disinflationary effect. Moreover, in both models, the effect of renewable energy in alleviating 

inflationary pressures stemming from energy imports is st ronger than the direct disinflationary effect 

of renewable energy. This suggests that renewable energy investments play a critical role in containing 

inflation in Türkiye in the long run. Renewable energy reduces energy costs and stabilizes inflation by Emre AKUSTA 

## 720 

reducing external dependence. The robustness of these long -run findings is further confirmed by the 

ARDL approach, which yields broadly consistent long -run coefficients. 

While this study provides important findings, it has some limitations. Future studies can address 

these limitations and conduct more comprehensive analyses. First, the pressure on inflation is 

explained by energy imports, exchange rate and renewable energy use. In the future, factors such as 

global energy prices, energy supply and geopolitical risks can also be included in the model. Second, 

this study is limited to the case of Türkiye . In future studies, developed and developing countries can 

also be analy zed to compare how the results vary across different countries. Finally, the study uses 

data from 1980 to 2022. The consistency of the findings can be tested with longer -term data sets and 

different analysis techniques. These limitations may give future st udies the opportunity to provide 

more in -depth and robust results. 

The results of the analysis suggest that the use of renewable energy resources can alleviate the 

inflationary pressures stemming from energy imports in Türkiye. In line with these findings, Türkiye's 

energy policy shift towards renewable energy has strateg ic importance for both economic 

performance and inflation management. Renewable energy can ease exchange rate and energy cost 

pressures by reducing dependence on energy imports, thereby supporting more sustainable anti -

inflation strategies. Moreover, the e fficient use of renewable energy sources not only enhances 

economic stability but also supports environmental sustainability; accordingly, a set of policy 

recommendations is proposed for reducing import dependence and combating inflation. 

First, various supports such as tax breaks, subsidies, low -interest loans, and R&D grants are 

proposed to encourage renewable energy investments, alongside policies that promote domestic 

technology production to reduce external dependence and lower energy costs in the long run. 

Secondly, it is emphasized that energy efficiency projects should be prioritized and investments should 

be made in energy storage systems to reduce energy dependency and ensure supply security. Third, 

policies that encourage the use of renewable energy in energy -intensive sectors should be developed, 

while incentives for energy -efficient technologies can reduce industrial costs and alleviate inflationary 

pressures. Fourth, a mechanism that regularly monitors the relationship between e nergy and inflation 

is proposed to evaluate short - and long -term policy effects and adjust instruments when needed. 

Finally, it is emphasized that domestic technology production should be supported and import 

dependency in the energy sector should be reduc ed to strengthen Türkiye’s domestic energy 

infrastructure and mitigate inflationary pressures. 

This study contributes to the literature in at least five ways: (1) This study analyzes the potential of 

renewable energy to reduce inflationary pressures arising from energy imports. The study aims to fill 

an important gap in the literature by addressing the relationship between energy imports, renewable 

energy and inflation. (2) Unlike other studies, this study uses the interaction term to analyze the 

relationship between energy imports and renewable energy use. The interaction term aims to measure 

the in dependent effects of energy imports and renewable energy use on inflation as well as the 

combined effect of these two factors. This allows for a more in -depth analysis. (3) Instead of traditional 

unit root tests, unit root tests that take structural breaks into account are also used. Specifically, the 

Zivot –Andrews and Lee –Strazicich tests are employed. This method allows for a better analysis of the 

dynamic structure of time series. It also increases the robustness of the results. (4) In addition to long -

run relationships, the study also estimates long -run coefficients. These estimates contribute to a better 

understanding of the long -run effects of energy imports and renewable energy use. (5) DOLS and 

FMOLS methods are used in the analysis and the results are compared. The use of these two methods 

improved the accuracy of the estimation results and strengthened the reliability of the anal ysis. In 

addition, cointegration is assessed via the Johansen and Hatemi -J tests, and the robustness of the long -

run evide nce is further evaluated using the ARDL approach.