Title: Build-Authorized Evidence for Opaque Calls: A Fail-Closed Rewrite-Authority Boundary

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.18949v1

Published Time: Wed, 22 Jul 2026 00:50:07 GMT

Number of Pages: 38

Markdown Content:
# Build-Authorized Evidence for Opaque Calls: A Fail-Closed Rewrite-Authority Boundary 

ZHONGHUA YI, Toka Language Research Group, China Detached semantic facts about an opaque native provider do not by themselves justify a compiler rewrite. Authority must be restricted to the accepted fact, selected provider and build, actual caller, relevant callback environment, and exact observation. The reviewed systems provide library annotations, summaries, compiler assumptions, contract carriers, and build attestations in close combinations, but we found no evaluated realization of the residual integration below. We use one-hop topology-load reuse as a minimal observable witness of rewrite authority, not as the paper’s optimization target: authorization removes one reload, while rejection has an explicit neutral behavior. We present a build-authorized path-effect interface for that deployment boundary. An authorization-receipt/link-receipt chain binds an accepted detached artifact to the unoptimized caller IR, selected provider snapshot, optimizer entry, caller object, and link inputs; the trusted driver passes accepted facts through a narrow internal LLVM API. The design separates three non-interchangeable authorization failures: receipt closure rejects the wrong provider or build inputs, callback-environment closure accounts for independently supplied code, and projection identity confines authority to the exact selected field. A conservative consumer reuses one-hop pointer observations from a noalias root or one constant nonzero projection. Rocq proves conditional refinement and authority non-amplification in bounded abstract models; applying them to LLVM additionally assumes asserted-effect soundness, alias admission, and compiler/ABI adequacy. Dynamic-provider routes also assume that the protected call resolves at execution to the receipt-bound provider. As one producer instantiation, we select Toka for its checked distinction between payload access and root-topology mutation, ordinary LLVM/native output, and exportable function/root evidence. A frozen build supplies a conservative source-summary gate and exact unoptimized LLVM 20 IR. A separately implemented exact-IR checker scans every instruction in the selected function and accepts only a bounded topology-preserving subset; only that exact accepted IR is passed to a fixed llc invocation to produce the receipt-bound final provider object. Its decision is source-summary-independent: it does not use the source-summary verdict or authorization metadata as evidence. This does not imply organizational or third-party independence; the checker remains trusted. Rocq proves that acceptance of a bounded action list implies topology-store identity and hence the existing ProducerSound obligation. LLVM parsing, correspondence between the C++ checker and that action list, and semantic preservation by the fixed backend remain external premises. For one Darwin/arm64 embedded-object profile instantiated by three final images, a post-link checker additionally attributes each protected definition to its staged provider, excludes a protected dynamic import, decodes the caller’s direct branch target, and binds those facts and the final executable into a second receipt. This closes the runtime-target premise for one protected direct call edge per image, not for the dynamic native-library routes or a general loader. Receipt controls leave provider substitution and mismatched build inputs unauthorized. Across three issuer-declared real native boundaries, with one frozen fixture per boundary—prebuilt Darwin readv and recvmsg ,and a Homebrew Cairo projection from a second positive native library—authorized caller IR retains the opaque call, reduces the relevant loads from two to one, and preserves the observed results. A real jpeg_read_header 

probe is rejected because its callback environment remains open, whereas an independently bound synthetic callback singleton demonstrates the supported closure rule. The receipt-authenticated, issuer-declared Cairo stable-slot effect is accepted while a synthetic distinct-offset projection control and unsupported GEPs remain neutral. A receipt-gated lowering to LLVM’s existing invariant.group mechanism matches the custom consumer on the registered straight-line projection, while a real Clang noescape redeclaration leaves both loads. Graded coordinates and run-length exact paths produce identical code in their common fragment. The synthetic checked-producer route consumes three Toka provider objects produced from exact IR accepted by 

Zhonghua Yi, Toka Language Research Group, China; yizhonghua@ustc.edu. arXiv:2607.18949v1 [cs.PL] 21 Jul 2026 2 Zhonghua Yi       

> that checker, retains each call, and reduces two loads to one. The contribution is the checked deployment– compiler boundary and its explicit trust/applicability frontier, not a uniquely expressive effect encoding or load-elimination algorithm. CCS Concepts: •Software and its engineering →Compilers ;Formal software verification ;Software libraries and repositories .Additional Key Words and Phrases: effect systems, separate compilation, native interfaces, Mod/Ref analysis, load elimination, LLVM

1 Introduction 

An effect fact about an opaque native provider is not yet authority to rewrite a particular caller. A compiler-facing mechanism must establish which fact was accepted, which provider and build it names, whether caller-supplied code extends the effect, and which observation may be reused. This authorization problem is especially sharp at a stable native application binary interface (ABI): the provider body may be in a prebuilt dynamic library, importing bitcode may be impossible, and replacing the interface changes the program’s public contract. We use one-hop topology-load reuse as a minimal observable witness of this authority boundary, rather than as the optimization target of the paper. A callee that rewrites pointer topology makes reuse incorrect; one that only mutates descendant payload permits it; rejection has a concrete neutral outcome. The following consumer illustrates that boundary:           

> int consume( struct iovec *restrict root, int fd) {
> void *cached = root->iov_base; ssize_t n = readv(fd, root, 1);
> if (n != 1 || root->iov_base != cached) return -1;
> return *( unsigned char *)cached; }

The public signature of readv exposes that the iovec array is read through a const pointer, while the operation writes through the descendant iov_base buffer. The declaration alone does not give LLVM the root-relative Mod/Ref fact needed to establish stability of the iov_base slot across the call. Stock LLVM therefore retains its second load when the provider body is unavailable. In the evaluated order-two model, that slot is the selected inner topology layer; resolving it depends on the outer root link, whereas writes through its pointer reach descendant payload. Precompiled summaries transport effects, compiler metadata carries trusted assumptions, build attestations bind materials, and callback metadata records argument forwarding; all are prior art (Guyer and Lin 1999, 2005; Le et al . 2005; Li et al . 2010; LLVM Project 2025; Rountev and Ryder 2001; The Clang Team 2025a; Torres-Arias et al . 2019). A detached effect alone is nevertheless insufficient: the build may select a different provider, caller-supplied code may extend the effect, and authority for one observation must not spread to another. Among the concrete systems reviewed in Section 6, we found no evaluated path from a detached assertion about an unchanged, build-selected native provider through a receipt-gated internal optimizer API and then through applicable callback-and projection-specific scope checks. We investigate that residual integration, not effect transport or a new path language. Broadway evaluates real PLAPACK applications, and the Jikes RVM attribute pipeline reports SPECjvm98 speedups; our bounded authorization microfixtures provide no comparable application- or workload-performance evidence (Guyer and Lin 2005; Le et al . 2005). One non-amplification principle organizes the design: an accepted effect may authorize only the receipt-bound provenance, relevant executable environment, and observation identity named by its evidence. Receipt closure binds the provider, caller, pass, and receipt-listed link inputs. We call a callback route closed when every external implementation that can affect the selected observation Build-Authorized Evidence for Opaque Calls: A Fail-Closed Rewrite-Authority Boundary 3

is independently bound. The implemented rule checks this condition only for one direct, sequential callback. A callback-open route therefore additionally uses callback-environment closure to determine which separately asserted callback effects must be composed, under a truthful-forwarding premise. A projected observation additionally uses projection identity to restrict authority to one pointer-valued aggregate slot rather than merely one root. The LLVM consumer separately requires alias admission as an external safety gate. These route-specific obligations are not interchangeable: identity checks do not prove an issuer assertion true, a provider-only effect does not summarize an unbound callback, and authority for one field does not extend to its siblings. The evaluated provider-substitution, callback-rebinding, and synthetic distinct-offset controls exercise three failure modes for which evidence in one dimension cannot discharge the others. Our interface realizes this factoring as a checked deployment–compiler transaction. A trusted integrator, acting as contract issuer, publishes a small path-effect contract. In the general route this is a trusted manual assertion; one additional route combines a conservative Toka (Yi 2026) source-summary gate with a separately implemented exact-IR checker. The source gate checks the producer language’s source-level effect policy and the provenance inputs later bound by the receipt; it does not establish topology preservation of the final backend input. The exact-IR checker instead classifies the unoptimized LLVM IR used to build the final provider object. A validator authenticates and normalizes the contract, snapshots the provider file selected by the trusted build resolver, and issues an authenticated authorization receipt over the effect, unoptimized caller IR, provider snapshot, pass schema/plugin, toolchain, environment, and command. After code generation, a link receipt additionally binds the caller object and revalidated link inputs. The contract remains detached and the prebuilt provider binary is not rewritten. Our custom LLVM 20 passes accept effects only through the driver’s narrow internal API; the public pipeline cannot trigger the rewrite. The consumers preserve pointer-valued one-hop observations either directly from a noalias root or through one receipt-bound, constant, nonzero aggregate projection. The link gate revalidates the receipt and sidecar and links staged snapshot bytes. Rejection withholds rewrite authority: unsupported IR remains neutral, while receipt or link-input failure may abort the build. For one deliberately static Darwin/arm64 deployment profile, a post-link checker also verifies ownership of the embedded provider definition, absence of a protected import, and the direct branch target, then binds the final image and certificate into a second receipt. 

Contributions. This paper makes three bounded claims: (1) We factor opaque-call rewrite authority into receipt closure and the applicable callback-environment and projection-identity gates. Their fail-closed rules prevent evidence in one dimension from discharging another; authentication establishes provenance and scope, while semantic truth remains an issuer obligation for the general/manual route. (2) We give conservative LLVM New-PM consumers and mechanize conditional refinement, autho-rization non-amplification, neutral fallback, singleton callback closure, and selected-projection separation for bounded sequential fragments. We additionally instantiate the producer premise for one bounded Toka route: a source-summary gate rejects disallowed language effects, an exact-IR checker accepts only a bounded topology-preserving subset, and a fixed llc compiles only that accepted IR to the final receipt-bound object. The corresponding Rocq action-list model establishes acceptance-to-topology-identity-to-ProducerSound . A bounded post-link profile closes the selected-runtime premise for one protected direct edge per image in three embedded-provider executables; dynamic-library routes retain that premise. (3) We evaluate stock compilation, direct-target API splitting, real ThinLTO, exact paths, and graded coordinates at prebuilt readv and recvmsg boundaries; an open-callback libjpeg rejection and receipt-bound callback singleton; and a nonzero Cairo projection from a second positive 4 Zhonghua Yi 

provider. The matrices expose both the useful points and their applicability boundaries. A protocol ablation lowers the same accepted fact to fresh LLVM invariant.group identities and matches the custom consumer on the registered straight-line projection; a real external 

noescape annotation is too weak for that reuse. A paired micro-build measurement reports the full current transaction cost rather than treating authorization as free. A synthetic cross-language route consumes three frozen Toka provider objects produced from exact IR accepted by that checker, while source summary, checker certificate, backend, final-object, sidecar, and alias controls remain fail closed. A bounded deterministic IR corpus and a checked-producer phase/size measurement expose checker coverage and prototype cost without claiming checker correctness or scalability. 

Claim boundary. Graded coordinates and exact paths are extensionally equal in the evaluated layer-only consumer, and receipt-gated invariant.group matches the custom lowering in the straight-line control. The claim is therefore the checked authorization boundary, not a unique encoding or load-elimination algorithm. The proofs and executable results are bounded and condi-tional on effect soundness, alias, and compiler/ABI adequacy. Linker and runtime-target adequacy remain premises for the dynamic-library routes; the static profile checks one embedded-provider executable and call edge but is not general loader enforcement. The results establish no workload-scale speedup. The bounded C/C++ census found five syntactic reuse shapes among 34 direct calls but admitted no unchanged client; a separate Rust IR search likewise found no complete accepted window. These are bounded applicability results, not ecosystem-prevalence estimates. The checked Toka route narrows the manual premise for one synthetic fragment, while checker/model, backend, and full-compiler correspondence remain external. 

2 Validated Path-Effect Interface 2.1 Deployment and threat model 

We target a trusted integrator that has obtained an out-of-scope audit or specification basis for a fixed provider binary but cannot rewrite it. Acting as issuer, that integrator normally makes a manual effect assertion about the provider build; the bounded checked-producer instantiation below instead combines conservative object-bound Toka source evidence with direct instruction-level inspection of the exact unoptimized LLVM IR used to build the final provider object. A trusted resolver selects a provider pathname for the current build. The validator, controlled driver, registered optimizer entry, link gate, and hash-based message-authentication-code (HMAC) key form the trusted computing base. Detached artifacts, selected pathnames, caller modules, intermediate receipts, and receipt-listed link inputs may be stale, mismatched, or modified before their respective gates; code already executing inside the trusted computing base is not an adversary. The guarantee is authorization non-amplification: no unaccepted or mismatched input acquires rewrite authority. It is not a proof that the asserted effect is true. For example, a same-symbol, ABI-compatible replacement that mutates the selected slot must not inherit an artifact issued for the original provider. Snapshot and receipt binding make that mismatch neutral or abort the controlled build. Linker definition ownership and the later runtime resolution of a protected dynamic call to the receipt-bound provider remain explicit adequacy premises for the dynamic-library routes. A separate bounded profile embeds the selected provider object and checks one protected direct call in the final image; it is not a general loader reference monitor. 

2.2 Authorization factoring and trusted boundary 

Figure 1 separates provenance, executable-environment scope, and observation identity from semantic truth. Receipt closure is a property of measured build inputs and the internal optimizer Build-Authorized Evidence for Opaque Calls: A Fail-Closed Rewrite-Authority Boundary 5

Semantic and deployment obligations 

effect soundness; caller noalias ; registered fragment/alias and LLVM/ABI adequacy; dynamic routes assume target equality; the bounded static profile checks it 

⇓

provenance inputs: detached artifact + selected snapshot + unoptimized caller IR 

⇓ exact schema/identity validation and receipt-input equality 

receipt-closed provenance authority 

⇓ applicable route-specific scope gate, if any callback-environment closure; projection identity 

⇓

narrow LLVM rewrite, or neutral IR/build rejection 

Fig. 1. Authorization flow and trust boundary. The checked path prevents registered authority amplification and receipt-input substitution; callback and projection gates apply only when the call is callback-open or the observation is projected. The flow consumes the remaining semantic and compiler-adequacy premises. The bounded checked-producer route discharges effect soundness in its abstract fragment, and the bounded static profile operationally discharges target equality for one registered call edge. 

entry. Callback-environment closure and projection admission refine the scope of an already authenticated claim. The general soundness theorem assumes the asserted effect and alias premises; neither an HMAC nor a provider digest discharges them. The checked-producer and static-target subprofiles separately replace one bounded effect or target premise with executable evidence; they do not establish the remaining obligations. 

2.3 Base artifact and transaction 

The base layered-effect artifact binds the normalized effect defined below to: 

> callee, ABI digest, semantic fragment, root argument/order, normalized effect, issuer, selected-provider digest, HMAC

The selected provider is read once into a content-bound snapshot. The validator checks its digest, sidecar, and identity, then issues an authorization receipt binding the neutral-module digest, canonical effect, provider snapshot, sidecar, pass schema/plugin, environment/toolchain, and command template. Code generation adds the caller-object digest to a link receipt. The link gate revalidates every claim and links privately staged caller and provider bytes. A successful check supplies the effect out of band to the internal pass API; rejection supplies no authorization. Successful validation binds the contract to the selected snapshot; it does not show that the snapshot obeys the contract. The optional static-target profile then checks the final Darwin/arm64 image: the raw link map must attribute the caller and callee to their staged objects, the callee must be uniquely defined in executable text with no dynamic import, and the caller’s single AArch64 direct branch must decode to that definition. A post-link receipt binds the prior build receipt, objects, executable, link map, canonical certificate, protected symbols, environment, profile, and checker-tool identities. 

Definition 1 (Base deployment authorization) . Let 𝜒 be a receipt, 𝐼 the current build inputs, 𝑐 the validation context, and 𝑞 a reuse request. The base route is summarized by: 

CheckReceipt (𝜒 ) 𝐼 = 𝜒. inputs BaseAuthorize (𝑐, 𝜒. candidate , 𝑞 ) = Grant (𝑒 )

DeployBase (𝜒, 𝐼, 𝑐, 𝑞 ) = Grant (𝑒 ) .

The conjuncts of BaseAuthorize are artifact authentication and binding; surface and normalized-effect well-formedness; exact root/order/provider request equality; caller alias admission; and 

Safe (𝑞. layer , 𝑒 ). Failure of any premise yields Neutral in the abstract semantics; the controlled 6 Zhonghua Yi 

driver may instead abort before emitting a binary after a receipt or link-input mismatch. Callback and projection routes add their respective closure predicates before the same grant. 

2.4 Bounded checked-producer instantiation 

Producer selection. We sought a concrete producer rather than designing a paper-specific source language. The selection criteria were conjunctive: a compiler-checked, root-sensitive distinction between payload access and topology mutation; ordinary LLVM/native output without changing the caller ABI; and exportable per-function/root evidence that can be bound to concrete build products. Representative ownership, general-effect, and verification/specification toolchains satisfy different subsets of these criteria (Section 6). Among the concrete systems examined, Toka was the closest direct match for our bounded fragment: its compiler classifies root-sensitive effects, emits the required native artifacts, and exports object-bound function/root evidence (Yi 2026; Yi and Toka Language Contributors 2026). We use it as an existence witness for the producer interface, not as a claim that this capability is unique to Toka. The general artifact interface does not prescribe how an issuer establishes effect truth. Our checked-producer instantiation uses two distinct, conjunctive gates. First, the frozen Toka compiler produces a preliminary native object and its object-bound .tke . The source-summary gate requires exactly one selected function and root, empty function effects, and root effects contained in {Read , Write }. Rebind , Invalidate , every other root bit, any function effect, malformed evidence, or preliminary-object/evidence disagreement yields no artifact. This gate restricts source-level producer eligibility and validates the compilation-identity inputs later bound by the receipt; it is not evidence that the exact backend IR preserves the selected topology. Second, the same registered compiler emits exact unoptimized LLVM 20 IR. An exact-IR checker scans every block and instruction of the selected function under a request fixing the function, root argument, and root order; it recomputes the target triple, DataLayout, and IR digest from those IR bytes. 

Meaning of source-summary-independent. Here and throughout, source-summary-independent 

denotes implementation and input separation, not third-party or organizational independence. The checker is a separate C++ executable that recomputes its decision from the exact IR and registered request. It takes neither the .tke , source-summary verdict, GPE sidecar, consumer result, nor an expected acceptance verdict as an authorization input; favorable LLVM metadata cannot authorize the route. The checker is nevertheless shipped in the same artifact and remains part of the trusted build toolchain. Its correctness and correspondence to the Rocq action classifier are external premises. The checker rejects topology-slot writes, unknown or indirect calls, pointer escape or casts, dynamic GEPs, unknown pointer merges, atomic or volatile access, and every unclassified opcode. On acceptance, the checker issues a certificate for that exact IR and request. Only the accepted IR is passed to the registered fixed llc invocation, which produces the final provider object named by the GPE artifact. A producer receipt binds the source and compiler identity, preliminary object, 

.tke , exact IR, checker identity and certificate, backend identity and flags, final object, and sidecar. The preliminary object bound by .tke is distinct from the final llc object. This route replaces a manual assertion only for a bounded payload fragment. It does not prove source-to-IR equivalence, correspondence between the C++ checker and the Rocq action model, semantic preservation by the LLVM backend, or full compiler correctness. 

2.5 Effect domain 

For a root of order 𝐾 , let Layer 𝐾 = {1, . . . , 𝐾 }. The normalized effect domain is: Build-Authorized Evidence for Opaque Calls: A Fail-Closed Rewrite-Authority Boundary 7

𝑒 :: = Unknown | Known (𝑅, 𝑀, 𝐻 )

𝐻 :: = Clean | Invalidating .𝑅 and 𝑀 are read and modified layer sets. Invalidating conservatively covers free, capture, concurrency, untracked alias writes, and behavior outside the certified fragment. Let ⊔ be the hazard join: Clean ⊔ Clean = Clean , and every other pair joins to Invalidating . Composition is union: 

Known (𝑅 1, 𝑀 1, 𝐻 1) ⊕ Known (𝑅 2, 𝑀 2, 𝐻 2) = Known (𝑅 1 ∪ 𝑅 2, 𝑀 1 ∪ 𝑀 2, 𝐻 1 ⊔ 𝐻 2),

with Unknown absorbing. The interface transports 𝑅 for effect accounting and composition, but the registered load-reuse decision consults only 𝑀 and 𝐻 ; no optimization benefit is attributed to the unused read mask. 

2.6 Base surface encodings 

The base layered-effect validator accepts two issuer-facing encodings: 

𝐺 (𝑎, 𝑗 ) and 𝑃 (𝑎, 𝑑 ),

where 𝐺 names an absolute layer and 𝑃 is a run-length exact path. The registered domain requires 

𝑗 ∈ Layer 𝐾 and 𝑑 = 𝐾 − 𝑗 ∈ { 0, . . . , 𝐾 − 1}; values that would select layer zero are rejected. For an order-𝐾 chain: 

normalize 𝐾 (𝐺 (𝑎, 𝑗 )) = Known ({ 𝑗 + 1, . . . , 𝐾 }, { 𝑗 }, Clean ),

normalize 𝐾 (𝑃 (𝑎, 𝑑 )) = normalize 𝐾 (𝐺 (𝑎, 𝐾 − 𝑑 )) .

This equality is deliberate. It makes the exact-path route the exact control for the registered linear-chain fragment and prevents the systems result from being credited to a favorable wire encoding. 

2.7 Alias admission 

The effect describes mutations reachable from a root; it does not prove that unrelated caller pointers cannot alias that root. The current consumer admits only root arguments carrying LLVM 

noalias , obtained from a C restrict parameter in the registered positives. Missing admission is a conservative fallback. This check is necessary but not sufficient for the reference-model correspondence: registered caller shape/stratification and the absence of untracked cross-layer aliases remain external, unvalidated premises. 

2.8 Callback-environment and projection extensions 

The callback singleton closes one declared callback environment by composing a provider-local effect with the separately validated effect of the actual direct callback. Closure authorization authenticates both component origins and the declared same-root/order map, and discovers the caller-to-provider direct callback operand in the neutral module. Truthful provider-to-callback forwarding on that root remains an issuer assertion and compiler-to-model premise. A later closure-specific receipt binds that authorization and every receipt-listed link input. Missing, mismatched, or Unknown callback evidence produces no authority. Component artifacts use a distinct schema and cannot enter the base validator directly. For aggregate loads, the parallel projection artifact binds a layout descriptor, positive DataLayout-normalized byte offset, access width, root and result address spaces, and a fixed C ABI descriptor. Expected, offered, and requested identities must agree exactly, and only a Stable claim authorizes 8 Zhonghua Yi 

reuse; Unknown and modifying claims do not. Within the globally receipt-bound layout/module, the cache key is the root, offset, width, and root/result address spaces, so authority for one field does not authorize a same-layout sibling. Projection artifacts likewise cannot enter the base validator or consumer. The implementation accepts only syntactic, constant, inbounds GEPs; it does not infer general paths. 

3 Semantic Result Spine 

The base model uses a single selected root in a sequential, statically layered, well-stratified, acyclic pointer chain; untracked cross-layer aliases are outside the base model and its results. Let resolve 𝑖 (𝜎, 𝑟 ) be the address selected at layer 𝑖 from root 𝑟 in store 𝜎 . The layers on which that selection depends are: 

deps 𝐾 (𝑖 ) = {𝑖 + 1, . . . , 𝐾 }.

Definition 2 (Safe reuse) .

Safe (𝑖, 𝑒 ) ⇐⇒ 𝑒 = Known (𝑅, 𝑀, Clean ) ∧ 𝑀 ∩ deps 𝐾 (𝑖 ) = ∅.

Definition 3 (Effect soundness) . We retain the mechanization’s name ProducerSound (𝐵, 𝑒 ) for the obligation that the issuer’s asserted effect bounds the body’s writes: 𝑒 = Known (𝑅, 𝑀, Clean )

and every transition of body 𝐵 changes cells only at locations whose certified layer belongs to 𝑀 .Authentication and fragment checks are separate. 

Definition 4 (Neutral and optimized observations) . For one execution 𝐵 (𝜎, 𝜎 ′), the neutral obser-vation is 

𝑁 𝑖 (𝐵, 𝜎, 𝜎 ′, 𝑟 ) = resolve 𝑖 (𝜎 ′, 𝑟 ).

Given an authorization decision 𝑎 , the bounded optimized observation is 

𝑂 𝑖 (𝑎, 𝐵, 𝜎, 𝜎 ′, 𝑟 ) =

(

resolve 𝑖 (𝜎, 𝑟 ) if 𝑎 authorizes reuse at 𝑖, 𝑁 𝑖 (𝐵, 𝜎, 𝜎 ′, 𝑟 ) otherwise. Thus rejection is semantic fallback, not an optimization error. 

Theorem 1 (Topology-address preservation). Suppose the chain from 𝑟 in 𝜎 is stratified through order 𝐾 , ProducerSound (𝐵, 𝑒 ), executing 𝐵 produces 𝜎 ′, and Safe (𝑖, 𝑒 ). Then: 

resolve 𝑖 (𝜎, 𝑟 ) = resolve 𝑖 (𝜎 ′, 𝑟 ).

Consequently, replacing the post-call resolution with its cached pre-call address preserves the registered caller observation. 

The theorem preserves the selected address, not arbitrary payload values below it. 

Lemma 1 (Composition). Assume: 

ProducerSound (𝐵 1, 𝑒 1),

ProducerSound (𝐵 2, 𝑒 2).

Then 

ProducerSound (𝐵 1; 𝐵 2, 𝑒 1 ⊕ 𝑒 2).

Moreover, 

Safe (𝑖, 𝑒 1 ⊕ 𝑒 2) ⇐⇒ Safe (𝑖, 𝑒 1) ∧ Safe (𝑖, 𝑒 2).Build-Authorized Evidence for Opaque Calls: A Fail-Closed Rewrite-Authority Boundary 9

Theorem 2 (Validated consumer refinement). Suppose validation accepts an artifact bound to the complete selected callee/ABI/fragment/provider identity and normalizes it to 𝑒 . The invoked body in the model is selected from that complete binding and the caller’s argument map. The actual observation root is obtained exclusively by looking up the validated root-argument index in the same map; it is not supplied independently. If the executable checker admits the requested coordinate, the caller supplies the required alias admission, ProducerSound (𝐵, 𝑒 ), and 𝐵 takes 𝜎 to 𝜎 ′, then the optimized cached observation equals the neutral post-call resolution. If validation or authorization rejects, the consumer is definitionally the neutral consumer. Applying this result to a native dynamic call additionally assumes that linker resolution and the runtime call target select that same bound body. 

The remaining results discharge separate dimensions of the authorization discipline rather than defining one unrestricted calculus. Theorem 3 establishes transaction non-amplification; singleton closure establishes whose effects must be composed; and selected projection establishes how narrowly the resulting authority may be applied. In every case, asserted-effect soundness, alias admission, and the relevant compiler-to-model correspondence remain premises of consumer refinement. 

Theorem 3 (Link-receipt authorization non-amplification). Represent each input bound by the final link receipt—including the neutral module, canonical effect, provider snapshot, sidecar, pass schema/plugin, environment, toolchain, command, and caller object—by an abstract content identifier. If the deployed consumer obtains an effect 𝑒 , then the receipt checker accepted, every current identifier equals its receipt claim, and the existing artifact authorization returned exactly 𝑒 . Hence 𝑒 also has the validated origin described above. If receipt acceptance fails or any bound identifier differs, the abstract consumer selects the neutral observation. 

Theorem 4 (Receipt-bound selected-runtime refinement). Suppose deployment grants 𝑒 , the actual invoked body equals the body selected by the registry from the validated binding and caller root map, the selected chain is stratified, ProducerSound (𝐵, 𝑒 ), and 𝐵 takes 𝜎 to 𝜎 ′. Then the receipt was accepted, all current receipt inputs match, the artifact binding equals the expected binding, the observation root and provider are obtained from that same binding, and the deployed observation equals neutral post-call resolution. Equality of the actual and registry-selected bodies is an explicit runtime-target adequacy premise, not a conclusion about a native loader. 

The static-target profile supplies executable evidence for that equality in one registered Dar-win/arm64 profile instantiated by three final images. In each image, the receipt-bound provider object owns the embedded definition, the protected symbol has no dynamic import, and the caller’s decoded direct branch targets that definition. This instantiates a premise of the theorem; it is not a mechanized linker or machine-code correctness result and does not apply to the dynamic-provider routes. 

Theorem 5 (Singleton callback closure). For one direct, sequential callback on the selected root, an effect returned by the singleton callback-closure validator (named Open1 in the mechanization) has independently accepted provider and callback origins, the registered root/order mapping declaration, and equals their effect composition. Missing, Unknown , mismatched, or same-origin callback evidence returns no effect. If the provider truthfully forwards the declared root to that callback and both component effects are truthful, their safe composition preserves the selected topology address. 

Theorem 6 (Authenticated selected projection). If deployment returns a selected projection effect, then the receipt was accepted, all abstract build inputs match, and expected, offered, and requested bindings and projection identities agree. The identity has positive offset and width, the claim is stable, and the external executable-admission gate has accepted the request. Under the separate asserted-effect-soundness premise for that projection at the validated callsite root, the cached pre-call slot equals 10 Zhonghua Yi 

the neutral post-call slot. A same-layout, different-offset sibling is not authorized and has a distinct abstract cache key. This is an abstract stable-selected-slot result; LLVM GEP normalization, layout/ABI correspondence, and executable admission remain external premises. 

Theorem 7 (Bounded source-summary producer). Consider the abstract Toka fragment gener-ated by skip, payload read, payload write, and sequencing. Its topology-store semantics erases payload operations to identity. The bridge rejects handle rebind, root invalidation, raw, unsafe, and unknown commands. If it returns an effect 𝑒 , then 𝑒 = normalize 2 (𝐺 (0, 1)) , the analyzed command contains none of the rejected effects, and ProducerSound (𝐵, 𝑒 ) holds for the fragment’s abstract body 𝐵 . Conse-quently, under the same stratification and safety premises as Theorem 1, the selected outer handle is preserved. 

This theorem moves effect truth inside the abstract source model for one fragment; it does not prove that the concrete Toka compiler classifies every AST or lowers every accepted program according to that model. 

Theorem 8 (Bounded concrete-IR action model). For a finite action list, the checker admits only topology traversal, payload read, payload write, and scalar steps, and rejects topology-write and unknown actions. Acceptance implies that the modeled program is identity on the topology store. If the checked-IR gate returns an effect 𝑒 , then 

𝑒 = normalize 2 (𝐺 (0, 1)) and ProducerSound (checked _ir _program (𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠 ), 𝑒 ).

Under the existing stratification and safety premises, the selected outer handle is therefore preserved. 

This theorem concerns the bounded action-list model, not LLVM syntax. LLVM parsing and opaque-pointer analysis, correspondence between the C++ checker and the action list, source-to-IR correspondence, and semantic preservation by the fixed backend remain external premises. 

Mechanized anchors. The corresponding kernel-checked declarations are Soundness. topology_address_preservation; EndToEnd.deployed_effect_non_amplification and EndToEnd. deployed_consumer_refines_neutral, and EndToEnd.deployed_selected_runtime_refines_neutral; OpenCallback.open1_effect_non_amplification and OpenCallback.open1_sequential_ topology_preservation; and AggregateProjection.deployed_projection_non_amplification, AggregateProjection.deployed_selected_projection_refines_neutral, and AggregateProjection. sibling_projection_not_authorized; and TokaProducer.bridge_summary_non_amplification, TokaProducer.accepted_toka_summary_implies_producer_sound, and TokaProducer. checked_toka_fragment_preserves_outer_handle; and ConcreteIRChecker.accepted_ir_ program_is_topology_identity, ConcreteIRChecker.checked_ir_effect_non_amplification, ConcreteIRChecker.accepted_checked_ir_implies_producer_sound, and ConcreteIRChecker. accepted_checked_ir_preserves_outer_handle. 

Proof plan. The Rocq development inducts over chain resolution. Its key frame lemma states that writes outside deps 𝐾 (𝑖 ) preserve every edge traversed by resolve 𝑖 ; composition follows from effect union and sequential execution. Boolean well-formedness and safety checks reflect into the propositional model. The pure validator then establishes object and coordinate binding, and the consumer theorem connects successful authorization to Theorem 1; all rejection paths select neutral recomputation. An independent receipt gate then checks exact equality of the abstract build-input record before it can invoke that existing authorization path; Theorem 3 follows by inversion of those two boolean gates. Theorem 4 then composes that result with the registry-selected-body theorem while retaining actual-target equality as a premise. The callback proof reuses effect and asserted-effect composition; discovery of the actual direct callback, truthful provider Build-Authorized Evidence for Opaque Calls: A Fail-Closed Rewrite-Authority Boundary 11 

forwarding, and its runtime same-root mapping remain compiler-to-model and issuer-assertion premises. The projection proof exposes only the selected-projection slice, which contains the requested pointer-valued slot at the validated root, then reuses the existing write-frame definition; it does not model the pointee heap. The checked-producer proof inducts over its bounded source-command syntax: accepted payload operations are identity on the topology-store quotient, while every topology-changing or unknown constructor has a rejected summary. It then reuses the existing producer-soundness and path-frame results. The concrete-IR proof separately inducts over a bounded action list: checker-action acceptance excludes topology writes and unknown actions, hence establishes topology-store identity, then reuses the existing ProducerSound and path-frame results. Rocq’s kernel checker reports these results closed under the global context. The receipt and artifact authentication decisions are deliberately abstract and remain separate from ProducerSound , so provenance cannot be confused with semantic truth. The model does not establish hashes, HMAC, filesystem measurement, public-pass non-bypass, or concrete link-gate behavior; its neutral branch corresponds to fail-closed semantics, while the implementation may reject the build rather than emit a neutral binary. Likewise, alias admission is an explicit boolean premise: this model does not establish LLVM noalias , GEP/DataLayout/ABI adequacy, callback discovery, or compiler-to-model, linker-resolution, or runtime-call-target adequacy. 

4 Implementation 

The prototype implements validate, optimize, codegen, and link as a controlled four-stage transac-tion. 

Validator. The validator parses the artifact, checks its schema and HMAC, compares the callee, ABI, fragment, and root coordinates, verifies the build-selected provider-snapshot digest, and normalizes graded or exact-path syntax. It then issues an HMAC-authenticated authorization receipt over the neutral module, canonical effect, snapshot, sidecar, pass binary/schema, environment, toolchain versions, and command template. 

LLVM consumers. The LLVM 20 New-PM consumers compute forward CFG fixed points over simple, pointer-valued loads. The base consumer admits a direct noalias root; the projection consumer additionally recognizes one syntactic constant inbounds GEP, normalizes its positive byte offset with the module DataLayout, and keys the cache by root, offset, width, and address spaces. Dominating observations seed the cache; a safe opaque call preserves only its registered keys; an unsafe effect kills them; and a later observation can reseed them. Meet points retain only facts valid on every predecessor. Calls, native ABIs, and provider opacity are preserved. Accepted effects enter through exported internal C APIs. The ordinary public pipelines construct the passes with empty effect tables and ignore public effect metadata. Here “internal” denotes the trusted driver’s protocol, not process isolation: a principal able to call those exported APIs directly or read or replace the prototype HMAC key is inside the trusted computing base. The packaged experiments use public, fixed reproduction keys to exercise the protocol; secret-key provisioning, isolation, and rotation are not implemented. The projection route additionally admits only a declaration and call with C calling convention, non-variadic void result, two address-space-zero pointer parameters, and none of the registered ABI-changing parameter attributes. 

Closest-mechanism controls. The strongest control reuses the Cairo neutral module, provider snapshot, canonical effect, and receipt protocol. It accepts the same provider/effect evidence through a separately receipt-bound consumer entry, creates a fresh llvm.launder.invariant.group iden-tity for one same-basic-block pre-call/post-call selected-load window, applies stock GVN, and removes the temporary intrinsics and metadata before returning IR. All receipt claims other than 12 Zhonghua Yi 

the necessarily distinct consumer entry/schema are equal. Pre-existing invariance assumptions, intervening stores, atomics, fences, unknown calls, or any ordinary projection mismatch reject the route. This is deliberately a closest implementation baseline, not an unauthenticated annotation route. Separately, a real external Clang noescape redeclaration lowers to nocapture but does not state that the selected pointee slot is stable. It is an independent user-responsible expressiveness control, not a consequence of the path-effect receipt. 

Callback closure resolver. The singleton resolver independently validates provider-local and whole-callback artifacts and receipts, verifies distinct origins and the declared same-root/order map, and asks LLVM to canonicalize the neutral module before checking that it contains exactly one direct provider call with the bound callback operand. It does not inspect the opaque provider body to prove that the provider forwards that root to the callback; truthful forwarding is an issuer-assertion/adequacy premise. Only then does it pass the composed effect to the internal consumer. Multiple or indirect calls remain unsupported. Neither callback-component nor projection artifacts can be parsed as a base layered-effect artifact; only their dedicated resolver/validator may issue the internal authorization consumed by the corresponding pass. 

Toka exact-IR checked producer. The source-summary gate first validates the frozen compiler, source, preliminary object, object-bound .tke , selected function, and single root. A separate LLVM 20 checker then parses and scans the complete exact unoptimized target function. It classifies bounded root traversals and scalar payload operations and rejects topology-slot writes, unknown or indirect calls, pointer escape or casts, dynamic addressing, unknown pointer merges, atomic or volatile access, and unsupported instructions. Metadata and producer markers cannot by themselves authorize the route. This checker does not consume the .tke , source-gate verdict, sidecar, or consumer result; “source-summary-independent” refers only to that input and implementation separation, not to a third-party trust domain. On success the checker emits a certificate over the exact IR digest and request; the registered fixed llc invocation takes that same accepted IR as its sole provider-code input. The source gate is therefore an eligibility screen over language-level effects and compilation-identity inputs, whereas the route admits the bounded topology-preservation claim only after the exact-IR checker classifies the backend input. The two checks are conjunctive but do not prove the same property. An authenticated producer receipt binds source, compiler, preliminary object, .tke , exact IR, checker and certificate, backend and flags, final object, and sidecar. The GPE artifact names the final object, not the preliminary object. The final object is then consumed as an opaque provider by the unchanged controlled C/LLVM consumer path. 

Codegen and link gate. After optimization, the driver compiles the caller and issues a link receipt that additionally binds the caller-object digest. The link entry revalidates the receipt, sidecar normalization, provider snapshot, pass binary/schema, and toolchain record. It writes the receipt-validated caller and provider bytes to a private staging directory and links those bytes, never reopening the resolver’s original provider pathname. This closes the build-input check–use window for the staged caller and provider pathnames at native link; it makes no claim that every implicit linker/toolchain input is snapshotted. The registered command contains no competing definition, but the prototype does not inspect relocation ownership for the dynamic-library routes and assumes their protected symbols resolve to the staged provider. The bounded static-target profile permits no additional link arguments and embeds the receipt-bound provider object in a Darwin/arm64 executable. A separate post-link checker parses a raw link map and fixed LLVM 20 llvm-nm /llvm-objdump outputs. It requires strong text definitions owned Build-Authorized Evidence for Opaque Calls: A Fail-Closed Rewrite-Authority Boundary 13 

by the staged caller/provider objects, no protected bind/lazy-bind/weak-bind/chained-fixup/indirect-symbol entry, and exactly one symbolic direct branch in the caller. It independently decodes the AArch64 BL immediate and compares its target with the final callee address. A second HMAC receipt binds this certificate, the image and raw map, the protected symbols, previous receipt and objects, frozen environment, profile, and tool digests/versions. Execution rechecks the receipt and reproduces the certificate. The parser, link-map production, disassembler, and linker remain trusted; this is one static call-edge profile, not general loader integrity. 

Fail-closed rewrite authorization. When the controlled driver is used, missing, malformed, forged, provider-mismatched, coordinate-mismatched, topology-invalidating, and unknown effects leave the neutral IR unchanged. The same holds for local callee shadowing, alias-unsafe inputs, un-supported observation shapes, and direct metadata forgeries. Receipt, neutral module, sidecar, snapshot, plugin/schema, caller, environment, and link-command tampering are rejected before their respective stages. Darwin’s ABI spelling \01_readv is normalized only for effect lookup; the call symbol itself is not rewritten. 

Contract-authoring modes. The real-boundary results use trusted manual contracts; the synthetic exact-IR-checked Toka route is the sole checked-producer instantiation. For the registered readv 

graded/exact-path comparison, ten source tokens and a 332-byte public manifest are charged. Those numbers are not assigned to the distinct singleton-callback and selected-projection schemas: the accepted projection sidecar is 170 bytes and its canonical internal effect is 246 bytes, while callback-artifact size is not used as a cost claim. Automatic effect inference for general native providers is not part of the implementation claim. HMAC is appropriate to the evaluated trusted-build boundary; an independent third-party issuer would require a public-key deployment not implemented here. 

5 Evaluation 

One-hop load reuse is the minimal observable witness used to test whether rewrite authority is granted, withheld, or over-amplified; it is not evaluated as an end-to-end performance target. The evaluation asks: (1) Does receipt closure prevent unbound build inputs or public metadata from acquiring rewrite authority? (2) Does callback-environment closure distinguish provider-closed calls, a real open-callback rejection, and one independently bound singleton? (3) Does projection identity authorize one nonzero aggregate slot without authorizing a sibling or unsupported GEP? (4) Can a checked source producer instantiate the effect-truth premise for one bounded fragment without a manual effect assertion? (5) When the applicable gates close, can the one-hop witness expose a rewrite while the native provider body and source ABI remain opaque? (6) Can existing LLVM/Clang assumption mechanisms consume the same authorized selected-slot fact, and if so, what contribution remains? (7) What build-time cost does the current controlled transaction add over stock code generation and linking of the same microcase? (8) Can one restricted embedded-provider profile replace the runtime-target premise with checked final-image evidence? 14 Zhonghua Yi 

Table 1. Auditable anchors for the bounded claims. 

Claim Formal anchor Executable anchor Artifact/trust validated-consumer refinement; receipt-bound selected-runtime refinement Single-shot validator controls plus controlled-build tamper/snapshot tests LLVM consumer authorized-consumer refinement in the bounded chain model Fixed-point, kill, reseed, alias, and binding tests Reuse/compose address preservation; asserted-effect/safety composition; kernel-checked by coqchk 

Single-call, loop, mixed kill/reseed, and wrong-code controls Deployment normalization parity; no LLVM adequacy claim 

readv , recvmsg , and libjpeg evidence Callback closure singleton non-amplification and sequential preservation Bound preserving/invalidating/unknown callback tests Aggregate projection selected-slot non-amplification/refinement and sibling separation Cairo nonzero-GEP, ABI, and receipt controls plus a synthetic distinct-offset projection Checked producer bounded action-list acceptance, topology identity, producer soundness, and outer-handle preservation Three exact-IR-checked Toka positives; 14 handwritten rejection classes; 17 deterministic IR variants; source-summary, substitution, and alias controls Static target instantiates selected-runtime refinement’s target-equality premise; no new linker theorem Three embedded-provider images; ownership/import/direct-branch checks and post-link receipt controls Transaction cost no cost theorem claimed 21 paired stock/authorized builds; 21 checked-producer phase samples and six checker-size points 

5.1 Evaluation protocol and evidence map 

Protocol. All macOS native-library results were rerun on the registered arm64 macOS host with LLVM 20.1.8 and the exact provider and, where applicable, header digests recorded in the artifact. The strict entry point runs 20 host-independent artifact regressions and exactly 116 registered executable tests with no skips, performs a clean Rocq 9.1.1 build followed by coqchk ; make paper 

independently rebuilds the manuscript. Positive authorization probes check neutral and authorized IR, retained calls, load counts, runtime oracles, and their registered mismatch controls. The libjpeg rejection instead checks a neutral route and a legal callback counterexample. Claim-specific frozen files record the applicable tool, host, provider, fixture, and implementation identities; remaining executable-only controls are covered by the strict run. These are executable deployment checks paired with bounded mechanization. Fixed artifact keys reproduce protocol decisions; they do not evaluate secrecy against an adversary who holds the key. Section 3 lists the exact kernel-checked declaration names for the base, receipt, callback, and projection rows. 

5.2 Mechanism and recurrence 

The single-call probe removes one redundant outer load only for the safe coordinate. The loop probe removes the loop-carried topology-preserving reload. The mixed preserving/invalidating Build-Authorized Evidence for Opaque Calls: A Fail-Closed Rewrite-Authority Boundary 15                 

> Table 2. Receipt-closure controls from the independent synthetic controlled-build fixture (whose runtime oracle is 40, rather than the real boundary’s 42). “Abort” means the controlled build issues no binary through its link entry.
> Input or perturbation Gate Observation All receipt inputs match optimize/link loads 2→1; result 40 Neutral IR, effect, schema, or plugin mismatch before pass optimizer not run Receipt, caller, sidecar, snapshot, environment, toolchain, or command tamper link abort Original pathname replaced after snapshot staged snapshot result 40 Staged snapshot bytes changed link abort Bare public effect metadata public pass neutral IR

chain removes only the preserving reload; deliberately reusing through the invalidating effect changes the oracle result and is rejected by the real consumer. An alias control stores a descendant pointer that points back to the observed root slot. Without 

noalias , the consumer remains neutral and retains both loads. Merely adding noalias would not turn this control into a defined counterexample: LLVM’s “based on” rules do not make a pointer loaded through an argument based on that argument, while parameter noalias makes it undefined to access a modified location through both based-on and non-based-on pointers (LLVM Project 2025). This control therefore checks fail-closed behavior when alias admission is absent; broader LLVM-to-model alias adequacy remains an explicit premise rather than a proved consequence of the attribute. 

5.3 Exact-IR-checked Toka producer 

The producer uses the public Toka repository (Yi and Toka Language Contributors 2026). We froze commit 8056dabc722d , its compiler executable, three accepted source inputs, their preliminary native objects and object-bound .tke summaries, the exact unoptimized LLVM 20 IR emitted for each input, an exact-IR checker and certificate, a fixed llc invocation, the resulting final objects, and the bridge/consumer implementations. The source-summary gate first requires an empty function effect and a sole root whose effect is contained in Read |Write . The exact-IR checker then scans every instruction in the selected function without consulting that summary decision. Only accepted IR is supplied to the fixed backend, and the final object—not the preliminary Toka object—is named by the issued 𝐺 (0, 1) artifact. Four source-summary controls—handle rebind, root consume/invalidate, raw boundary, and unsafe boundary—are rejected before the IR gate. Separately, 14 handwritten IR controls are rejected: direct topology store; partial-width topology overwrite; scalar load from a topology slot; unknown call; indirect call; pointer return/escape; ptrtoint ; inttoptr ; dynamic GEP; pointer phi ; pointer 

select ; atomic load; volatile store; and unsupported opcode. Malformed IR is a tool error, and favorable metadata does not authorize unsafe input. A deterministic bounded corpus additionally exercises six LLVM-valid preserving variants across CFG, scalar type, and root-spill shapes and 11 LLVM-valid exact-reason rejecting variants. Every decision matches its fixed label; this is regression coverage, not fuzzing or checker-soundness evidence. The producer receipt detects substitution of the source, preliminary object, .tke , exact IR, checker, certificate, backend, backend flags, final object, sidecar, or receipt itself. Removing the C caller’s restrict /LLVM noalias admission retains two loads in all three positive cases, so neither source nor IR gate bypasses the independent alias gate. These observations establish a 16 Zhonghua Yi 

Table 3. Registered applicability matrix. Load counts compare neutral and authorized caller IR; all calls remain present. Rejection characterizes the authorization boundary rather than a failed optimization benchmark. “Declared” denotes an issuer assertion accepted and scoped by the validator, not a fact inferred from the provider body; the Toka row instead uses its bounded checked-producer route. 

Boundary Selected observation Closure/admission Decision and result Established boundary 

readv 

(libsystem )

iovec.iov_base ,direct-root lowering Declared provider-closed; 

restrict /noalias root Both encodings accepted; loads 2 → 1; result 42 Fixed ABI and opaque provider; both encodings are tied 

recvmsg 

(libsystem )

msghdr.msg_name ,direct-root lowering Declared provider-closed; root 

noalias and nested-output separation Both accepted in two alias modes; loads 2 → 1;result 42 Selected pointer slot is reusable while sibling 

msg_namelen changes 

jpeg_read_ header 

(libjpeg )

cinfo->err Callback-open: caller 

init_source receives the root No provider-only contract; loads remain 2; legal callback rebinds the slot Provider identity alone does not close caller-supplied behavior 

Callback singleton 

(indepen-dent objects) 

*root One direct, sequential, same-root callback Preserving: 2 → 1, result 11; invalidating/other: 2 loads One bound callback; general callback sets unsupported 

cairo_ append_ path 

(libcairo )cairo_path_t.data, byte offset 8 Declared provider-closed; fixed arm64 layout/ABI and root noalias 

Declared Stable ; validator scopes exactly: 2 → 1;controls retain 2 Second positive native library and nonzero projection; synthetic offset-16 separation 

IR-checked Toka (three frozen objects) outer handle of a synthetic C int*** 

root Source summary plus exact-IR certificate; fixed 

llc ; C noalias root All three accepted; loads 

2 → 1; results 34, 28, and 46; noalias-free: 2; static subprofile closes the protected direct target Checked producer instantiation and one target-closed deployment profile; synthetic cross-language route, not an unchanged real client 

Table 4. Accepted exact-IR producer cases. Counts are (root traversals, payload reads, payload writes); every optimized caller retains the opaque call. 

Source case Checker counts Consumer observation payload read/write (2, 1, 1) loads 2 → 1; result 34 payload read only (2, 1, 0) loads 2 → 1; result 28 two sequential payload writes (4, 2, 2) loads 2 → 1; result 46 

checked-effect-export route for three synthetic payload-only programs. They do not establish source-to-IR equivalence, correspondence between the concrete checker and the Rocq action model, backend correctness, full Toka compiler correctness, general source-effect inference, or an admitted unchanged real client. Build-Authorized Evidence for Opaque Calls: A Fail-Closed Rewrite-Authority Boundary 17                             

> Table 5. Final fair-control matrix. “Unavailable” means no provider IR is available to the consumer; 𝐺 and
> 𝑃 are the graded-coordinate and exact-path encodings from Section 2. Deployment/API requirements and written/serialized costs are reported separately.
> Route Root loads ABI / provider IR Deployment/API requirement Written + serialized cost Stock readv 2fixed / unavailable none none Direct-target read 0changed / unavail-able replace public readv bound-ary not comparable ThinLTO + dylib 2fixed / unavailable caller bitcode no detached contract Exact path 𝑃 1fixed / unavailable sidecar + registered consumer 10 tokens; 332-B manifest + 114-B artifact Graded coordinate
> 𝐺
> 1fixed / unavailable sidecar + registered consumer 10 tokens; 332-B manifest + 114-B artifact

For one accepted producer, 21 warm-host samples give 533.559 ms median construction and 127.138 ms receipt revalidation (660.697 ms combined). A separate six-point accepted-IR response spans 10.879–17.764 ms for 8–7,169 selected-function instructions. The supplementary appendix gives the phase breakdown and measurement boundary; these are descriptive prototype costs, not scalability results. 

5.4 Static target closure 

We relink the three exact-IR checked providers under a stricter Darwin/arm64 profile with no user-supplied linker arguments. Each final Mach-O contains one strong mutate_inner text definition attributed by the raw link map to the privately staged provider object. The protected symbol appears in no bind, lazy-bind, weak-bind, chained-fixup import, or indirect symbol entry. The caller contains exactly one symbolic direct call; decoding the AArch64 BL immediate yields the final callee address. A post-link receipt binds those facts, the executable and raw map, the prior build receipt and objects, symbols, environment, profile, and checker-tool identities. All three images preserve one selected load and return 34, 28, and 46. Changing any bound post-link material, reassigning the callee’s link-map ownership, adding linker arguments, or im-porting the provider dynamically rejects. In a separate control, a same-name injected dylib runs its constructor, but the protected direct call still returns 34. This closes the runtime-target premise for these registered executable/call-edge pairs. It does not certify a general linker, arbitrary machine code, process integrity, or the dynamic-provider experiments. 

5.5 Prebuilt readv boundary 

The selected provider is the system /usr/lib/system/libsystem_kernel.dylib . Its exported 

_readv symbol and SHA-256 digest are checked, and the digest is rechecked before link. Every route below returns 42 under default type-based alias analysis (TBAA) and -fno-strict-aliasing .ThinLTO optimizes the available caller and main bitcode but imports no readv definition from the prebuilt dylib; the call and both root loads remain. The direct-target route reaches zero root loads by replacing the scatter/gather readv(iovec*) boundary with the direct-buffer read(void*) 

boundary. The graded-coordinate and exact-path routes preserve the original source ABI and provider opacity while retaining one load. 18 Zhonghua Yi   

> Table 6. recvmsg loads under two alias-analysis modes. The noalias control uses an accepted sidecar but removes caller admission.

Mode Stock 𝐺 /𝑃 Noalias control Runtime Default TBAA 2 1/1 2 42 No strict aliasing 2 1/1 2 42 

5.6 Aggregate recvmsg boundary 

The second system boundary uses the prebuilt Darwin recvmsg symbol from the same system provider as readv . The candidate observation is the pointer-valued msghdr.msg_name slot; the contract says nothing about the aggregate’s scalar fields. A real AF_UNIX /SOCK_DGRAM execution writes the descendant payload and changes msg_namelen from 128 to 16 while preserving the 

msg_name pointer. The fixture separately checks that nested output buffers do not overlap the observed slot. Every optimized route retains the opaque call and the sibling update. The graded-coordinate and exact-path routes again normalize to identical consumer IR. One graded route additionally runs through the controlled transaction: the provider dylib is snapshotted, the neutral module and effect are authorized, and the link gate consumes only the digest-checked snapshot. These results extend the witness from a const iovec array to a mutable aggregate, but only under the registered 

noalias /nested-output-separation admission. The committed machine-readable snapshot records the complete six-cell semantic matrix, provider hash and install identity, toolchain, host, fixtures, and implementation hashes without host-timing samples. 

5.7 Open-callback libjpeg rejection 

The libjpeg header reader initially appears to be a third positive: LLVM emits two direct loads of the decompressor’s error-manager slot, and the standard stdio source manager leaves it unchanged. However, libjpeg invokes a caller-installed init_source callback with the complete decompressor pointer. Our legal callback replaces cinfo->err , delegates to the original callback, and still obtains 

JPEG_HEADER_OK on a 1×1 image. Because the candidate observation changes, we issue no contract: binding only the libjpeg dylib cannot certify an effect whose truth also depends on caller-supplied callback code. Its committed snapshot records both the standard stable execution and the legal callback rebind that forces rejection. 

5.8 Receipt-bound singleton callback closure 

A separate synthetic boundary tests the smallest supported open-world rule: one provider object directly calls one callback object on the same root. The provider-local and whole-callback artifacts have independent origins, receipts, and object snapshots. The controlled driver canonicalizes the neutral LLVM module, binds the actual direct callback operand, authenticates the declared same-root/order map, and authorizes only the composed effect. It does not inspect the opaque provider body; the claim that the provider really forwards that root to the callback remains an issuer-assertion/adequacy premise. The invalidating-effect row is a wrong-code control: unauthorized reuse would change −1 to 11. A module with multiple matching calls is rejected rather than lifting one safe callback decision to callee-wide authority. This is a singleton closure result, not inference for callback sets, indirect calls, captures, recursion, or dynamic substitution. Build-Authorized Evidence for Opaque Calls: A Fail-Closed Rewrite-Authority Boundary 19 

> Table 7. Receipt-bound singleton callback closure. Every row retains the opaque call.

Callback evidence Authorized Root loads Runtime independently bound preserving effect yes 1 11 independently bound invalidating effect no 2 −1

missing/ Unknown /wrong/mapping mismatch no 2 11 

> Table 8. Authenticated Cairo selected-projection result. Runtime is identical in every row.

Claim Accepted Projection loads Call/GEP retained missing no 2 yes/yes stable yes 1 yes/yes 

Unknown no 2 yes/yes modifying no 2 yes/yes 

5.9 Authenticated nonzero Cairo projection 

The final positive selects Homebrew Cairo 1.18.4, a provider distinct from the Darwin system provider. The registered root is the second argument of the append-path call. We observe its pointer-valued data member, at registered arm64 byte offset 8. The artifact and receipt bind the provider/header digests, C and LLVM ABI descriptors, target DataLayout, layout, offset, width, address spaces, pass, neutral IR, caller object, toolchain, and commands. The artifact’s Stable label is a trusted selected-slot assertion; the validator authenticates and scopes it but does not infer it from the Cairo body. The runtime confirms that the source path header is unchanged and its 11 path items are copied into the destination context. A joint IR fixture eliminates only the real offset-8 pointer reload; a synthetic pointer-valued projection at offset 16 retains both loads. The latter is a cache-identity control, not a claim that Cairo’s scalar num_data field is pointer-valued. Offset zero, dynamic or non-inbounds GEPs, missing noalias , wrong root, local callee shadowing, DataLayout or ABI mismatch, public metadata, and receipt-input tampering all fail closed. The registered projection schema recognizes this single constant shape rather than solving general access paths. 

5.10 Protocol ablation: receipt-gated LLVM assumptions 

This ablation preserves the provider/effect/receipt authorization protocol but replaces the custom projection consumer with LLVM’s existing invariance machinery. We use the same Cairo neutral module, selected provider, canonical effect, and receipt protocol. Consumer identity is itself a receipt input, so the custom and invariance receipts intentionally differ only in consumer entry/schema; forcing byte-identical receipts would defeat that binding. The independent, user-responsible external noescape redeclaration is a real Clang source an-notation and emits nocapture ; the selected-slot effect does not imply noescape , and nocapture 

does not prohibit mutation of the selected pointer-valued field. The receipt-gated invariance route instead lowers the accepted selected-slot fact to a fresh invariant.group identity and lets stock GVN obtain the same 2 → 1 result as the custom consumer. Its output contains no temporary in-variance metadata or intrinsics. Injected pre-existing assumptions are rejected; missing, Unknown ,modifying, tampered-receipt, and intervening-effect controls remain neutral or fail closed. In a joint fixture, the selected offset-8 load is reused while the offset-16 sibling retains two loads. 20 Zhonghua Yi  

> Table 9. Closest-mechanism control on the selected Cairo projection. All authorized routes retain the opaque call; missing, Unknown , or modifying effects retain two loads.

Route Authorized Projection loads Stock neutral IR no 2External Clang noescape independent assertion 2Custom GPE consumer yes 1Receipt-gated invariant.group yes 1

> Table 10. Warm-host prototype build-transaction time (ms), 21 paired repetitions. P95 uses nearest rank.

Route or phase Median P95 Stock total 117.591 119.740 Authorization/snapshot 97.984 100.120 Optimize/recheck/codegen 205.677 208.161 Final recheck/stage/link 211.222 213.666 Authorized total 514.834 520.242 Paired authorized–stock increment 397.492 401.527 The parity result closes any claim that the custom cache algorithm is uniquely necessary: in this fragment, the consumer is an interchangeable lowering. The remaining evaluated contribution is the authorization protocol deciding whether a detached selected-slot fact may introduce either lowering. 

5.11 Full transaction cost 

We separately measure the current projection controlled-build implementation against stock code generation and linking of the same neutral Cairo fixture. Pass plugin compilation, neutral C-to-IR generation, contract/sidecar authoring, and executable runtime are outside the timed region; the runtime oracle is checked once outside it. After three discarded warmups, 21 paired repetitions alternate which route runs first. Each authorized sample includes snapshot and authorization, receipt and input rechecks, the LLVM consumer, caller/main code generation, final recheck, private provider staging, and native linking. The stock sample includes the same caller/main code generation and native link without that protocol. The current defensive prototype therefore imposes a visible subsecond cost on this tiny build rather than obtaining authorization for free. The result measures the implementation as shipped— including repeated toolchain probes, provider/header checks, process startup, and private snapshot staging. It is an unamortized cost of the defensive build transaction, not a semantic cost imposed by the Toka producer route or a runtime cost. It is not an inherent lower bound, an amortized build-service design, or evidence about scaling to a large application. 

5.12 Exact-path control and costs 

For the prebuilt readv case, 𝐺 and 𝑃 both use a 114-byte artifact, 16 bytes of canonical effect data, a 624-byte caller object, and 272 bytes of final text. Their optimized IR is identical. In the separately measured SQLite matrix, five registered repetitions of the four graded/exact rows report 0.485–0.512 ms median pass time and 0.084–0.092 ms median validation time. These host-specific Build-Authorized Evidence for Opaque Calls: A Fail-Closed Rewrite-Authority Boundary 21                                   

> Table 11. Bounded unchanged-client census. “Calls” counts direct target-API invocations in each frozen scan unit; “shapes” counts the manually screened pre-call/post-call pointer-observation pattern.
> Snapshot Calls Shapes Decisive outcome Cairo 1.18.4 25 1Store/local-root seeding unsupported; an intervening opaque call remains GTK a8dd18e 30No repeated selected observation libuv 1.52.1 11Root fails alias admission; a user buffer may overlap the request CPython v3.14.0 file snapshot 10Pointer remains in SSA; no repeated projection NGINX 95a24d1 32Store/local-root seeding unsupported; selected projection is offset zero curl 1128177 11Store/local-root seeding unsupported; selected projection is offset zero libevent e1f0335 00No direct recvmsg /sendmsg call Total 34 5No admitted unchanged client

diagnostics do not establish compile- or link-time superiority. The parity facts close a graded representation-performance claim while preserving the deployment-interface result. 

5.13 Bounded unchanged-client census 

We searched the frozen C/C++ scan units for direct calls to cairo_append_path , readv , and 

recvmsg , manually removed declarations, definitions, diagnostics, and comments, and retained only sites with the same pointer-valued root or projection observed before and after the opaque call. We then applied the registered gates in order: alias/root admission, supported projection shape, and closure of intervening opaque effects. Table 11 reports this bounded targeted census, not an ecosystem-prevalence estimate. Five of 34 direct invocations had the syntactic reuse shape; none satisfied all semantic gates. In particular, no candidate was rejected solely because of function arity or return type, so ABI generalization alone would admit none. The machine-readable census records every direct-call position, every retained shape and decisive gate, and snapshot identities. The CPython input is explicitly a tag-labelled single-file snapshot with a content digest, not a repository checkout or commit-level freeze. Its checker validates schema, row counts, and totals without redownloading or reinterpreting upstream source. A separate frozen IR-level search across four unchanged Rust FFI snapshots found 13 calls satisfying the frozen ABI and noalias prerequisites but no complete accepted load–call–reload window; the supplementary appendix reports the bounded search and its cross-version positive control. 

5.14 Answers to the evaluation questions 

Yes: the authorized readv , recvmsg , callback-singleton, and Cairo routes retain the opaque call and ABI while reducing the selected topology loads from two to one; no provider body is imported. Receipt closure prevents every registered stale, substituted, or publicly injected input from acquiring authority inside the trusted-driver protocol; depending on the stage, rejection retains neutral IR or aborts the controlled build. Provider identity alone is insufficient for a callback-open call, as the libjpeg counterexample demonstrates, while independently bound preserving evidence closes the supported direct singleton under the stated forwarding premise. Finally, the Cairo result and its distinct-offset control show that authorization follows the complete projection identity rather 22 Zhonghua Yi 

than spreading from a root to a sibling slot. External noescape is too weak for that selected-slot reuse, whereas receipt-gated invariant.group matches the custom consumer in the registered straight-line fragment. The remaining distinction is the checked route by which a detached provider assertion acquires authority to introduce that assumption, not a novel RLE algorithm. The measured controlled route costs 514.834 ms at the median versus 117.591 ms for the stock micro-build, a paired median increment of 397.492 ms; this is descriptive prototype cost rather than a scalability claim. Finally, the frozen Toka route combines a conservative source-summary gate with direct instruction-level inspection of the exact IR supplied to a fixed backend. Three payload-only programs acquire the registered effect; four disallowed source summaries, 14 unsafe IR classes, malformed or substituted materials, and alias-unsafe callers do not acquire rewrite authority. Together with the static subprofile, final-image ownership, import, and branch-target checks replace the runtime-target premise for those three protected call edges; the dynamic-library routes retain it. These cases exercise one non-amplification principle across receipt-bound provenance, callback environment, observation identity, and the bounded final target. The limitations below enumerate the retained semantic and implementation premises. 

5.15 Limitations 

The experiment is a macOS-specific collection of ABI microcases, not an application benchmark. Its warm-host transaction timing excludes plugin compilation, neutral-IR generation, contract authoring, and runtime, and does not model amortized or parallel builds. A bounded audit of Cairo/GTK, libuv/CPython, and NGINX/curl/libevent found no unchanged client that both exposed the registered reuse window and satisfied its alias admission (Table 11). We therefore do not claim workload coverage. This census measures opportunistic adoption by unchanged existing clients; it does not measure adoption through checked producers that export evidence during compilation. Every authorized rewrite assumes sound producer evidence and caller noalias admission. For the manual real-boundary routes, if the issuer assertion or alias premise is false, an accepted rewrite can be wrong; receipt and identity checks do not detect or mitigate that semantic failure. The Toka route obtains its topology-preservation claim from source-summary-independent inspection of the exact unoptimized IR used by the fixed backend, not from the compiler summary alone. This is not third-party verification: the checker remains in the trusted toolchain. The Rocq result nevertheless concerns only a bounded action-list model. LLVM parsing and opaque-pointer analysis, correspondence between the C++ checker and that model, backend semantic preservation, source-to-IR intended-behavior correspondence, and full Toka compiler correctness remain external. The base graded theorem additionally assumes sequential execution and a well-stratified acyclic chain; the singleton callback result assumes one direct, sequential, same-root callback; and the projection theorem exposes a selected projection slice containing the requested slot, while the executable Cairo selected-projection result fixes the registered arm64 layout. Callback same-root metadata and the selected-slot Stable label are authenticated declarations, not facts inferred from opaque provider bodies. The LLVM consumers handle only simple pointer-valued one-hop loads directly from a root or through the registered constant nonzero projection; they do not establish arbitrary access-path optimization, and the base rewrite does not consume the transported reference mask. The controlled entry protects its official trusted-build transaction from bare metadata and input substitution; it does not defend against an administrator who can replace the driver, plugin, or HMAC key. The experiment does not measure workload runtime, automatic effect inference for general native providers, concurrency, free/capture, general callback environments, or arbitrary aggregate aliasing. The checked Toka fixture is synthetic and does not change the zero-admission result for unchanged real clients in Table 11. Toka is not an exclusive producer requirement: another language or verified toolchain could instantiate the same interface by exporting equivalently checked, object-bound Build-Authorized Evidence for Opaque Calls: A Fail-Closed Rewrite-Authority Boundary 23 

evidence; this paper evaluates only the bounded Toka route. In particular, the recvmsg and Cairo contracts and rewrites concern selected pointer slots, not a semantic certification that their whole aggregates are unmodified. The evaluated invariant.group control handles only one same-basic-block selected-load window. Its parity result is implementation evidence for that common fragment, not a general equivalence theorem for all CFGs or access paths. The dynamic-library links contain no competing symbol definition, but their driver does not verify relocation ownership or enforce that a later dynamic call resolves to the receipt-bound provider; both remain explicit adequacy premises. The static-target profile closes one different, embedded-object case. Its link-map parser, LLVM tool output classification, AArch64 instruction decoding, linker behavior, and final-image integrity remain in the trusted computing base; it is not general loader enforcement. 

6 Related Work 

Modular and precompiled-library summaries. Precise relational and symbolic-heap summaries already support body-independent instantiation, composition, and alias-sensitive specialization (Dil-lig et al . 2011; Yorsh et al . 2008). More directly, Rountev and Ryder construct points-to and side-effect summaries for statically or dynamically linked precompiled libraries independently of unknown clients, store a summary with the library binary, and reuse it when analyzing clients (Rountev and Ryder 2001). Their worst-case auxiliary client model conservatively accounts for callbacks from a library to unknown client modules. Thus neither body-free summaries, precompiled-library Mod information, nor conservative unknown-callback modeling is new here. Our boundary instead binds the actual direct callback object and its independently asserted effect when that supported route is used, while detaching the provider effect from an unmodified binary and binding both to the controlled build transaction. 

Library-level semantic annotations. Broadway attaches separate expert-written annotations to C libraries. Its on_entry /on_exit clauses describe pointer structures, while access /modify clauses describe per-routine uses and defs; a whole-program pointer and dataflow framework then uses those facts to analyze and optimize library calls (Guyer and Lin 1999, 2005). Broadway also demon-strates that such annotations can be applied without requiring source-level changes to the library or application, and its PLAPACK study supplies real-application evidence that our bounded authoriza-tion fixtures do not. Thus external library semantics, pointer-shape and Mod/Ref annotations, and their use in compiler transformations are prior art. Broadway studies an integrated source-to-source compilation architecture, however, rather than fail-closed authorization of a detached claim against the build-selected native object, exact caller and optimizer entry, link inputs, callback environment, and projection identity. Our residual claim is limited to that latter authorization transaction and decomposition. 

Heap graphs, paths, and effects. LLVM Data Structure Analysis constructs context-sensitive per-function heap graphs and supplies Mod/Ref information to alias and dataflow-optimization clients (Lattner et al . 2007). Deutsch represents interprocedural aliases with symbolic access paths (Deutsch 1994); Sălcianu and Rinard compute parameterized results and parameter-rooted mutation-path regular expressions (Sălcianu and Rinard 2005); and DPJ declares nested region-path reads /writes 

effects for modular noninterference checking (Bocchino et al . 2009). IPSSA also resolves record and singleton-heap loads for interprocedural optimization (Calman and Zhu 2009). Accordingly, we claim no novelty for multi-hop effects, path summaries, or heap-analysis-driven optimization. Our graded coordinate is only a sufficient quotient for the evaluated layer-invariant query; the exact-path control is equally precise and equally compact in the measured fragment. 24 Zhonghua Yi 

Candidate checked producers. We compared representative source toolchains against the conjunc-tion required by our producer instantiation, rather than against effect expressiveness alone. Rust supplies ownership-based memory safety (Jung et al . 2018); Koka exposes inferred row-polymorphic effects (Leijen 2014); Low* verifies low-level memory programs and extracts them predictably to C (Protzenko et al . 2017); and Frama-C supports specification-driven analysis and verification of C (Cuoq et al . 2012). These designs cover different parts of ownership, effect checking, native-code production, and memory specification. Among the specific designs reviewed here, we did not find the exact detached, object-bound function/root evidence consumed by our build transaction. This is a selection rationale, not an impossibility claim: any of these or another toolchain could serve as a producer after adding a suitable conservative exporter. We selected Toka because its existing root-sensitive effect classification, LLVM/native output, and object-bound evidence jointly matched the bounded experiment. 

Transported optimizer metadata and LTO. Le, Lhoták, and Hendren encode Soot-produced side-effect information in Java class-file attributes and consume it in Jikes RVM for CSE, heap SSA, redundant-load elimination, and LICM (Le et al . 2005). This directly precedes summary-driven RLE, and its SPECjvm98 evaluation reports execution-time speedups for several benchmarks, unlike our non-workload microfixtures. GCC IPA passes serialize analysis summaries for LTO, and WPA can consume summaries without bodies (Free Software Foundation, Inc. 2026). LLVM ThinLTO combines bitcode with a compact module-summary index (The Clang Team 2026); FatLTO objects can contain both native text and bitcode (LLVM Project 2026). These remain IR-bearing LTO pipelines that may regenerate or import implementations. Stock LLVM’s memory(. . . ) classes are coarser than a pointer-hop effect (LLVM Project 2025). Our comparison concerns continued calls to a separately selected native provider, not a general claim that LTO is weaker. 

Compiler-local contracts and invariance. LLVM already exposes assumption-style invariance mech-anisms. !invariant.load imposes value stability wherever the read locations are dereferenceable, while experimental !invariant.group ties equal-value assumptions to the same pointer-operand identity; interval intrinsics can also delimit invariant byte ranges (LLVM Project 2025). Our protocol-ablation experiment confirms this possibility: receipt-gated fresh invariant.group identities plus stock GVN match the custom consumer on the registered straight-line Cairo projection, whereas a real external Clang noescape redeclaration leaves both loads. These mechanisms do not themselves describe a callee’s root-relative path effect or authenticate and bind a detached contract to the build-selected provider. Our consumer derives only the supported pre/post-call reuse after artifact validation, root matching, and alias admission; rejection leaves neutral IR. Clang permits stronger nonblocking /nonallocating constraints to be added by redeclaring external-library functions without editing their headers. Separately, its user-responsible noescape 

attribute is an optimizer assumption about references derived from the outermost pointer parame-ter, not a prohibition on pointee mutation. Clang’s callback attribute also describes a broker’s callback operand and argument mapping and lowers that structure to LLVM callback metadata for interprocedural analysis (The Clang Team 2025a,b). Thus ABI-neutral external annotations, detached source overlays, trusted optimizer assumptions, and callback-argument maps are prior art. The residual combination here is a machine-readable pointer-hop effect, a provider snapshot and authenticated build/link receipt, independent binding of the actual callback object and its effect, out-of-band internal-pass authorization, and the supported LLVM consumer; the identity checks still do not prove the effect semantically true. 

Native object metadata. A particularly close deployment predecessor is Hewlett-Packard’s object-file-summary scheme, an industrial patent rather than a peer-reviewed systems evaluation (Li et al .Build-Authorized Evidence for Opaque Calls: A Fail-Closed Rewrite-Authority Boundary 25 

Table 12. Capabilities of the closest prior art for the residual deployment boundary. “Not reported” describes only the reviewed source; it is not an impossibility claim. 

Approach Carrier / provider relation Validation / binding Demonstrated use and relevant scope HP OFSI patent (Li et al. 2010) Co-resident summary IR in native objects, archives, and shared libraries; nested dereference and Mod/Ref Association through the containing artifact; detached build receipt not reported Linker-to-compiler optimization feedback; callback/projection authorization not reported Precompiled-library summaries (Rountev and Ryder 2001) Points-to and direct/one-dereference summaries stored with a precompiled library Reusable for unknown clients; authentication and exact selected-file receipt not reported Client points-to and side-effect analysis, including conservative unknown-client callbacks; evaluated load reuse not reported Broadway annotations (Guyer and Lin 1999, 2005) Separate library specification describing pointer structure, uses/defs, analysis properties, and transformations Expert-supplied semantics consumed by a source-to-source compiler; selected-native-object/build receipt not reported Whole-program library-call analysis and PLAPACK specialization; receipt/callback/projection authorization not reported Jikes side-effect attributes (Le et al. 2005) Side-effect and dependence attributes in Java class files Attributes identify bytecode locations; selected native-provider receipt not reported Jikes RVM CSE, heap SSA, RLE, and LICM; current callback/projection gates not reported LLVM / Clang metadata (LLVM Project 2025; The Clang Team 2025a,b) Caller-IR invariance metadata/intrinsics and external declarations or attributes Trusted compiler assumptions and annotations; a detached provider-snapshot validator is not reported Stock optimization and interprocedural analysis; pointer/range identities and callback maps, not receipt-bound callee effects in-toto (Torres-Arias et al. 2019) Signed layouts and link metadata over build materials and products Cryptographic verification of steps, functionaries, materials, and products Supply-chain policy enforcement; path/callback/projection-gated optimizer authorization is not reported This work Detached sidecar for an unmodified prebuilt native provider binary Fail-closed binding to provider snapshot, ABI, caller, plugin, and link-input receipt; effect truth remains a premise LLVM one-hop load reuse for provider-closed direct roots, one bound callback singleton, and one exact constant projection; rejection remains neutral or aborts the controlled build 

2010). It stores summary IR, points-to, and Mod/Ref information in object files and shared libraries, including nested dereference operators, and lets a linker return that information to a compiler when source is unavailable. SELF likewise adds a backward-compatible metadata section to ELF for binary analysis and transformation (DuVarney et al . 2003). Accordingly, native/object-library summary transport is prior art, and we make no first-architecture claim. The patent does not, however, report a reproducible semantic or empirical evaluation of the narrower transaction studied here: a detached contract applied without rewriting the third-party provider binary, validated fail-closed for rewrite authorization, bound to the build-selected native snapshot and caller/link receipt, and consumed by our supported custom LLVM 20 topology-load optimizer. 

Certified and signed code contracts. Proof-Carrying Code assigns proof construction to the pro-ducer and lets a receiver validate a property of actual machine code (Necula 1997); Model-Carrying Code supplies a concise behavior model for consumer policy checking (Sekar et al . 2003); and Security-by-Contract binds mobile code and a behavioral contract under a digital signature (Dragoni et al . 2007). We therefore claim neither generic producer/consumer validation nor code–contract binding. Indeed, our authenticated artifact is weaker than a PCC proof: identity checks establish provenance and freshness, while semantic truth remains a separately checked or trusted-boundary premise. The in-toto framework cryptographically verifies software-supply-chain layouts and signed in-toto link metadata—step attestations over functionaries, materials, products, commands, and byproducts (Torres-Arias et al . 2019). Thus signed build-input attestation is also prior art. Our narrower question is how an accepted build attestation gates optimizer authority and is then intersected with callback-environment closure and projection identity. 26 Zhonghua Yi 

Table 12 is attribution and boundary accounting, not a superiority result; its “not reported” entries do not imply that build attestations, external annotations, or LLVM invariance mechanisms cannot be composed to realize a related design. 

Residual boundary. Because prior work supplies summaries, signatures, build attestations, call-back maps, and path identities, often in close combinations, the scientific increment is instead an evaluated decomposition of opaque-call optimizer authority into separately checked failure modes in the evaluated fragment. A same-symbol provider substitution motivates receipt closure; the libjpeg callback rebind motivates callback-environment closure; and the distinct-offset control tests observation identity. The implementation realizes these obligations in route-specific validators rather than a unified calculus. In the concrete systems reviewed, we did not find this decomposition evaluated across the separate supported routes as a controlled optimize–codegen–link transaction over an unmodified native provider binary selected for one build, one independently bound callback singleton, and one exact constant projection. The current system makes no first-architecture, semantic-proof-of-provider, dynamic-loader rebinding, or post-link substitution claim. Linker ownership and runtime resolution to the receipt-bound provider remain explicit premises for the dynamic-library routes. The bounded static-target profile operationally discharges that premise for its registered embedded-provider direct call edge, subject to its trusted link-map/tool parsing, instruction decoding, linker behavior, and final-image integrity. Its HMAC assumes a trusted build service, and its novelty claim is limited to this non-amplifying integration and evaluated trust/deployment frontier. 

7 Conclusion 

Opaque-call optimization is an authorization problem as much as an effect representation problem. The common invariant in this work is that rewrite authority must not spread beyond receipt-bound provenance, an applicable bound callback environment, or the selected observation identity. Our prototype therefore grants bounded topology-load reuse only after closing the relevant build transaction, accounting for the callback environment that can affect the root, and matching the exact observation to be reused. This organization explains both the positive and negative results: prebuilt 

readv and recvmsg are issuer-declared provider-closed positives; libjpeg remains callback-open; the singleton validator closes one independently bound callback under a truthful-forwarding premise; and Cairo’s issuer-declared stable-slot effect authorizes one nonzero projection while a synthetic distinct-offset control prevents authority conflation. An LLVM-native control further shows that a receipt-gated lowering to fresh invariant.group identities can match the custom consumer on the registered straight-line projection; external noescape cannot. A checked-producer instantiation additionally combines a conservative Toka source-summary gate with direct instruction-level inspection of the exact unoptimized LLVM 20 IR used to build the provider. This denotes a separate decision procedure and input path, not third-party independence. Three synthetic payload-only programs are accepted, 14 handwritten unsafe IR classes are rejected, and only accepted IR is compiled by the fixed llc into the receipt-bound final object consumed by a C/LLVM caller as an opaque provider. A bounded post-link profile additionally embeds those three checked providers, attributes the protected definition to the staged object, excludes a protected dynamic import, and verifies that the caller’s decoded direct branch targets that definition before issuing a final-image receipt. It closes the runtime-target premise for those registered call edges, not for the real dynamic-library routes or a general loader. Exact paths match graded coordinates throughout their evaluated layer-only common fragment. Accordingly, the contribution is the checked boundary by which a detached fact acquires nar-rowly scoped compiler authority while an unmodified native provider binary and ordinary ABI Build-Authorized Evidence for Opaque Calls: A Fail-Closed Rewrite-Authority Boundary 27 

remain opaque, not a uniquely expressive effect encoding or a uniquely necessary load-elimination algorithm. The Rocq development proves conditional non-amplification and refinement for the bounded base, singleton-callback, selected-projection, and action-list models. Concrete effect truth, alias admission, compiler/ABI correspondence, checker/backend adequacy, and dynamic-library runtime targeting remain external as detailed in Section 5. The static profile’s linker/tool parsing and direct-target checks are trusted executable evidence, not a mechanized linker theorem. General callback sets, arbitrary paths, and runtime-loader integrity remain outside scope. 

Generative-AI Use Disclosure 

OpenAI Codex was used throughout this project to assist with research planning, literature triage, drafting and revising prose, and generating, reviewing, and debugging prototype code, tests, artifact scripts, and Rocq mechanization. The human author selected the research claims, inspected and executed the resulting artifacts, verified cited sources and generated material, and takes full responsibility for the work. 

Data-Availability Statement 

A reproducibility artifact has been prepared for archival submission. It contains all source code, contracts, frozen JSON evidence, LLVM 20 pass sources, executable test harnesses, Rocq sources, and manuscript sources; no external research dataset is used. The command make proof checks the mechanized fragment independently. On a host with Python 3.10 or newer and make , make portable-check verifies the package manifest when present, Python/JSON syntax, the Rocq forbidden-declaration audit, frozen claim values, cross-file invariants, and 20 portable artifact-regression tests. This includes offline validation of the packaged checked-Toka sources, preliminary objects and .tke files, exact IR, checker certificates, fixed-backend final objects, sidecars, producer receipts and canonical claims, and frozen results; it does not invoke tokac , the native checker, or the backend, or regenerate the recorded native evidence. It also authenticates the frozen static-target caller objects, final Mach-O images, raw link maps, canonical target certificates, and post-link receipts without re-running the Darwin target checker. A strict run of the full 116-test registered suite requires the exact native environment because the evaluated protocol intentionally binds provider and header bytes: arm64 macOS 26.5 (Darwin 25.5.0), LLVM/lld 20.1.8, the recorded system provider, Cairo 1.18.4, jpeg-turbo 3.1.4.1, and the registered Toka checkout and compiler identity recorded in the checked-producer evidence. The TOKA_REPO and TOKAC environment variables may select those external inputs for live replay. The strict make ae-check entry point runs the 20 artifact checks, seven LLVM 22 reporter/LLVM 20 consumer alignment checks, exactly 116 registered native tests with no skips, and then the Rocq checker. The artifact records provider paths, versions, and digests and reports a mismatch rather than silently substituting another provider. Its documentation gives claim-specific commands, expected observations, and approximate runtimes. An optional make linux-arm64-check target rebuilds the three exact-IR checked producer cases in a digest-pinned Ubuntu/LLVM 20 Linux/ARM64 image, emits fresh ELF objects and platform-specific receipts, and replays the positive and fail-closed matrices. Its frozen JSON records the image, tools, target triple/DataLayout, outputs, and rejection reasons; it reports no container performance and does not reproduce the Darwin native-library experiments. We intend to submit the artifact for artifact evaluation and, upon acceptance, archive it in a persistent public repository. 

References 

> Robert L. Bocchino, Vikram S. Adve, Danny Dig, Sarita V. Adve, Stephen Heumann, Rakesh Komuravelli, Jeffrey Overbey, Patrick Simmons, Hyojin Sung, and Mohsen Vakilian. 2009. A Type and Effect System for Deterministic Parallel Java. In

28 Zhonghua Yi 

Proceedings of the 24th ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Object-Oriented Programming Systems Languages and Applications .ACM, New York, NY, USA, 97–116. doi:10.1145/1640089.1640097 Silvian Calman and Jianwen Zhu. 2009. Increasing the Scope and Resolution of Interprocedural Static Single Assignment. In 

Static Analysis (Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 5673) , Jens Palsberg and Zhendong Su (Eds.). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 154–170. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-03237-0_12 Pascal Cuoq, Florent Kirchner, Nikolai Kosmatov, Virgile Prevosto, Julien Signoles, and Boris Yakobowski. 2012. Frama-C: A Software Analysis Perspective. In Software Engineering and Formal Methods (Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 7504) .Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 233–247. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-33826-7_16 Alain Deutsch. 1994. Interprocedural May-Alias Analysis for Pointers: Beyond k-Limiting. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGPLAN 1994 Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation . ACM, New York, NY, USA, 230–241. doi:10.1145/178243.178263 Isil Dillig, Thomas Dillig, Alex Aiken, and Mooly Sagiv. 2011. Precise and Compact Modular Procedure Summaries for Heap Manipulating Programs. In Proceedings of the 32nd ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation . ACM, New York, NY, USA, 567–577. doi:10.1145/1993316.1993565 Nicola Dragoni, Fabio Massacci, Katsiaryna Naliuka, and Ida Sri Rejeki Siahaan. 2007. Security-by-Contract: Toward a Semantics for Digital Signatures on Mobile Code. In Public Key Infrastructure: 4th European PKI Workshop: Theory and Practice (Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 4582) . Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 297–312. doi:10.1007/978-3-540-73408-6_21 Daniel C. DuVarney, V. N. Venkatakrishnan, and Sandeep Bhatkar. 2003. SELF: A Transparent Security Extension for ELF Binaries. In Proceedings of the 2003 Workshop on New Security Paradigms . ACM, New York, NY, USA, 29–38. doi:10.1145/ 986655.986661 Free Software Foundation, Inc. 2026. GNU Compiler Collection (GCC) Internals: Interprocedural Analysis and Link-Time Optimization . https://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/gccint/IPA.html See also the LTO design overview; accessed July 18, 2026. Samuel Z. Guyer and Calvin Lin. 1999. An Annotation Language for Optimizing Software Libraries. In 2nd Conference on Domain-Specific Languages (DSL 99) . USENIX Association, Austin, TX, 39–52. https://www.usenix.org/conference/dsl-99/annotation-language-optimizing-software-libraries Samuel Z. Guyer and Calvin Lin. 2005. Broadway: A Compiler for Exploiting the Domain-Specific Semantics of Software Libraries. Proc. IEEE 93, 2 (2005), 342–357. doi:10.1109/JPROC.2004.840489 Ralf Jung, Jacques-Henri Jourdan, Robbert Krebbers, and Derek Dreyer. 2018. RustBelt: Securing the Foundations of the Rust Programming Language. Proceedings of the ACM on Programming Languages 2, POPL, Article 66 (2018), 34 pages. doi:10.1145/3158154 Chris Lattner, Andrew Lenharth, and Vikram Adve. 2007. Making Context-Sensitive Points-to Analysis with Heap Cloning Practical for the Real World. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation . ACM, New York, NY, USA, 278–289. doi:10.1145/1250734.1250766 Anatole Le, Ondřej Lhoták, and Laurie J. Hendren. 2005. Using Inter-Procedural Side-Effect Information in JIT Optimizations. In Compiler Construction (Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 3443) , Rastislav Bodik (Ed.). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 287–304. doi:10.1007/11406921_22 Daan Leijen. 2014. Koka: Programming with Row Polymorphic Effect Types. Electronic Proceedings in Theoretical Computer Science 153 (2014), 100–126. doi:10.4204/EPTCS.153.8 Xinliang David Li, Mur Litharan Vijayasundaram, Dmitry Mikulin, and Shin-Ming Liu. 2010. Program Optimization Using Object File Summary Information. U.S. Patent No. 7,814,467 B2. https://patents.google.com/patent/US7814467B2/en Filed January 15, 2004; published as US 2005/0160058 A1 on July 21, 2005; granted October 12, 2010. LLVM Project. 2025. LLVM Language Reference Manual . https://releases.llvm.org/20.1.0/docs/LangRef.html LLVM 20.1.0 documentation; see Memory Effects, Pointer Aliasing Rules, invariance metadata, and invariant intrinsics; accessed July 18, 2026. LLVM Project. 2026. FatLTO. https://llvm.org/docs/FatLTO.html LLVM 24.0.0git documentation; accessed July 18, 2026. George C. Necula. 1997. Proof-Carrying Code. In Proceedings of the 24th ACM SIGPLAN-SIGACT Symposium on Principles of Programming Languages . ACM, New York, NY, USA, 106–119. doi:10.1145/263699.263712 Jonathan Protzenko, Jean-Karim Zinzindohoué, Aseem Rastogi, Tahina Ramananandro, Peng Wang, Santiago Zanella-Béguelin, Antoine Delignat-Lavaud, Cătălin Hriţcu, Karthikeyan Bhargavan, Cédric Fournet, and Nikhil Swamy. 2017. Verified Low-Level Programming Embedded in F*. Proceedings of the ACM on Programming Languages 1, ICFP, Article 17 (2017), 29 pages. doi:10.1145/3110261 Atanas Rountev and Barbara G. Ryder. 2001. Points-to and Side-Effect Analyses for Programs Built with Precompiled Libraries. In Compiler Construction (Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 2027) , Reinhard Wilhelm (Ed.). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 20–36. doi:10.1007/3-540-45306-7_3 Alexandru D. Sălcianu and Martin C. Rinard. 2005. Purity and Side Effect Analysis for Java Programs. In Verification, Model Checking, and Abstract Interpretation (Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 3385) . Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 199–215. Build-Authorized Evidence for Opaque Calls: A Fail-Closed Rewrite-Authority Boundary 29 

doi:10.1007/978-3-540-30579-8_14 R. Sekar, V. N. Venkatakrishnan, Samik Basu, Sandeep Bhatkar, and Daniel C. DuVarney. 2003. Model-Carrying Code: A Practical Approach for Safe Execution of Untrusted Applications. In Proceedings of the 19th ACM Symposium on Operating Systems Principles . ACM, New York, NY, USA, 15–28. doi:10.1145/945445.945448 The Clang Team. 2025a. Attributes in Clang . https://releases.llvm.org/20.1.0/tools/clang/docs/AttributeReference.html See the callback and noescape attributes; Clang 20.1.0 documentation; accessed July 18, 2026. The Clang Team. 2025b. Function Effect Analysis . https://releases.llvm.org/20.1.0/tools/clang/docs/FunctionEffectAnalysis. html Clang 20.1.0 documentation; accessed July 18, 2026. The Clang Team. 2026. ThinLTO. https://clang.llvm.org/docs/ThinLTO.html Clang 24.0.0git documentation; accessed July 18, 2026. Santiago Torres-Arias, Hammad Afzali, Trishank Karthik Kuppusamy, Reza Curtmola, and Justin Cappos. 2019. in-toto: Providing Farm-to-Table Guarantees for Bits and Bytes. In 28th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 19) . USENIX Association, Santa Clara, CA, 1393–1410. https://www.usenix.org/conference/usenixsecurity19/presentation/torres-arias Zhonghua Yi. 2026. Toka: A Systems Programming Language with Explicit Resource Semantics. arXiv:2606.01974 [cs.PL] doi:10.48550/arXiv.2606.01974 Zhonghua Yi and Toka Language Contributors. 2026. Toka Programming Language. GitHub repository. Version 0.9.8-09-RC; https://github.com/tokalang/toka. Greta Yorsh, Eran Yahav, and Satish Chandra. 2008. Generating Precise and Concise Procedure Summaries. In Proceedings of the 35th Annual ACM SIGPLAN-SIGACT Symposium on Principles of Programming Languages . ACM, New York, NY, USA, 221–234. doi:10.1145/1328897.1328467 30 Zhonghua Yi 

A Authorization and Proof Audit 

This appendix makes the bounded scientific argument auditable without opening the artifact archive. It collects the exact authorization routes, the formal definitions hidden by the paper’s higher-level notation, the proof factorization, the checked-producer instantiation, and the remaining adequacy ledger. It deliberately omits wire bytes, proof scripts, test logs, and reproduction commands: those are replication material rather than missing parts of the argument. 

A.1 Model and failure outcomes 

Let locations be natural numbers. A topology store is a partial successor map 𝜎 : Loc → option (Loc ),and a certified layering is ℓ : Loc → N. Following 𝑑 edges is: 

walk (0, 𝜎, 𝑟 ) = Some (𝑟 ),

walk (𝑑 + 1, 𝜎, 𝑟 ) =

(

walk (𝑑, 𝜎, 𝑟 ′) 𝜎 (𝑟 ) = Some (𝑟 ′),

None 𝜎 (𝑟 ) = None .

Bottom-up absolute layer 𝑖 of an order-𝐾 root is resolve 𝑖 (𝜎, 𝑟 ) = walk (𝐾 − 𝑖, 𝜎, 𝑟 ) when 𝑖 ≤ 𝐾 , and 

None otherwise. A chain is stratified when 

𝑑 ≤ 𝐾 ∧ walk (𝑑, 𝜎, 𝑟 ) = Some (𝑙 ) =⇒ ℓ (𝑙 ) = 𝐾 − 𝑑. 

Writing only layers 𝑀 means 

writesOnly ℓ,𝑀 (𝜎, 𝜎 ′) ⇐⇒ ∀ 𝑙 . ℓ (𝑙 ) ∉ 𝑀 =⇒ 𝜎 ′ (𝑙 ) = 𝜎 (𝑙 ).

For a relational body 𝐵 , the exact semantic premise consumed by the proof is 

ProducerSound ℓ (𝐵, Known (𝑅, 𝑀, Clean )) ⇐⇒ ∀ 𝜎, 𝜎 ′. 𝐵 (𝜎, 𝜎 ′) =⇒ writesOnly ℓ,𝑀 (𝜎, 𝜎 ′),

and it is false for Unknown and Invalidating effects. Thus artifact authentication never establishes 

ProducerSound .The executable routes below return one of three operational outcomes: 

Grant (𝑒 ), Neutral , Abort (𝑚 ).

Grant (𝑒 ) makes a canonical effect available only to the internal optimizer entry. Neutral withholds authority and preserves neutral IR or recomputes the post-call observation. The abstract Rocq development maps every rejection to None and hence to neutral observation; the controlled driver may instead use Abort for a receipt or link-input mismatch and issue no binary. 

A.2 Exact authorization routes 

The following pseudocode is intentionally logical rather than a transcription of JSON or binary parsers. A base binding contains schema, callee, ABI, semantic fragment, root-argument index, order, and selected-provider identity. Build-Authorized Evidence for Opaque Calls: A Fail-Closed Rewrite-Authority Boundary 31 

> BaseAuthorize(ctx, candidate, request): require candidate.surface exists as s require candidate.binding = ctx.expected_binding require argument(s) = ctx.root_argument require surface_wf(ctx.order, s) e := normalize(ctx.order, s) require effect_wf(ctx.order, e) require authenticate(ctx, candidate) require request.(root_argument, order, provider) = ctx.(root_argument, order, provider) require request.alias_ok require Safe(request.order, request.layer, e) return Grant(e)

Every failed require returns Neutral . The concrete base parser additionally checks bounded length, schema, issuer, HMAC, encoding, callee, ABI digest, provider-implementation digest, and fragment before normalization. The LLVM consumer separately admits only a registered direct declaration and a tracked noalias root in the supported load shape. A receipt closes the later build transaction around the already checked base route: 

> DeployBase(receipt, current_inputs, ctx, request): require CheckReceipt(receipt) require current_inputs = receipt.inputs return BaseAuthorize(ctx, receipt.candidate, request)

The equality covers receipt schema and phase, neutral module, canonical effect, provider snapshot, sidecar, pass schema and plugin, environment, toolchain, arguments, commands, and caller object. The implementation checks the relevant prefix when authorization is issued, rechecks it before optimization and code generation, adds the caller-object digest, and rechecks the complete link receipt before linking privately staged bytes. A mismatch in this controlled transaction is an Abort ;it is Neutral in the abstract observation semantics. The supported callback rule closes exactly one separately authenticated, direct, sequential callback: 

> Open1(provider, callback?, actual_symbol, query_layer): require CheckProvider(provider) require callback exists and CheckCallback(callback) require Origin(provider) != Origin(callback) require actual_symbol = Symbol(callback) require provider.(root_argument, order) = callback.(root_argument, order) require provider.effect = Some(ep) require callback.effect = Some(ec) e := ep (+) ec require Safe(provider.order, query_layer, e) return Grant(e)

Here (+) unions read/modified layers and joins hazards. Missing or Unknown evidence, a same-origin component, symbol or root/order mismatch, or an unsafe composition returns Neutral .The executable route is narrower still: it requires one direct provider call in the neutral module, extracts its callback operand, freezes the registered argument map, and binds the resulting closure authorization into its own receipt. It does not prove that the opaque provider truthfully forwards the declared root. For a selected aggregate pointer slot, let 

𝑝 = (layout , offset , width , rootAS , resultAS ).32 Zhonghua Yi 

Authorization is: 

AuthorizeProjection(ctx, candidate, request): require candidate.identity exists as p require AuthenticateProjection(ctx, candidate) require candidate.binding = ctx.expected_binding require request.binding = ctx.expected_binding require p = ctx.expected_identity require request.identity = ctx.expected_identity require p.offset > 0 and p.width > 0 require request.alias_ok require candidate.claim = Stable return Grant(p, Known({}, {}, Clean)) 

The same receipt-acceptance and exact-current-input wrapper surrounds this route. The empty effect is interpreted only over the selected (𝑝, root ) slot, not as whole-heap purity. The executable consumer also requires the registered ABI/DataLayout and a syntactic constant inbounds GEP. Within the receipt-bound layout and module, its cache key contains root, offset, width, and both address spaces; a sibling offset therefore cannot inherit the grant. The bounded checked-producer route uses two distinct, conjunctive gates before constructing a base candidate. The first gate checks source-derived evidence; the second checks the exact LLVM IR that will be passed to a fixed backend: 

IssueFromToka(compiler, source, checker, backend, fn, root): require compiler.commit = 8056dabc...211824 (preliminary, evidence) = compiler.emitSummary(source) require evidence binds source, compiler, target, and preliminary require evidence digest is embedded in preliminary require exactly one function matches fn require that function contains exactly one root, matching root require fn.local_effects = fn.effects = {} require root.local_effects, root.effects subset {Read, Write} ir = compiler.emitExactLLVM20(source) require ir embeds the accepted evidence digest request = (fn, root-argument=0, root-order=2, target-triple, DataLayout, Hash(ir)) certificate = checker.check(ir, request) require certificate accepts this exact ir and request flags = fixedBackendFlags() final = backend.compile(ir, flags) artifact = IssueBase(G(0,1), callee=fn, provider=Hash(final)) receipt = Bind(source, compiler, preliminary, evidence, ir, checker, certificate, backend, flags, final, artifact) return (final, artifact, receipt) 

The preliminary object is used only to bind the source summary; it is different from the final provider object. The exact-IR checker scans every instruction in the selected function and rejects topology-slot writes, unknown or indirect calls, escape or pointer casts, dynamic GEPs, unknown pointer merges, atomic or volatile access, and unclassified instructions. It is a separate implementa-tion and does not read the source summary, .tke , sidecar, consumer result, or expected verdict. This is not third-party or organizational independence: the checker remains in the trusted toolchain. Build-Authorized Evidence for Opaque Calls: A Fail-Closed Rewrite-Authority Boundary 33 

Only accepted exact IR reaches the registered LLVM 20 llc ; the ordinary GPE artifact names the re-sulting final object. The producer receipt binds both chains and every material executable input. The abbreviated commit above is the frozen full object 8056dabc722d2338ede791b330f6024a45211824. 

A.3 Proof factorization 

The mechanized argument is short because each authorization layer removes authority rather than inventing a new semantic frame theorem. (1) Path frame. Model.walk_preserved is proved by induction on walk depth: if each traversed successor cell is unchanged, the resulting walk is unchanged. Stratification turns a depth on the walk into its absolute layer. (2) Semantic preservation. Soundness.topology_address_preservation obtains writes_only from 

ProducerSound , and Safe shows that every traversed layer is outside the modification set. The path-frame lemma then yields resolve 𝑖 (𝜎, 𝑟 ) = resolve 𝑖 (𝜎 ′, 𝑟 ). Effects.safe_compose and Soundness.producer_sound_compose lift the same result over sequential composition. (3) Base consumer. Artifact.validate_sound reflects successful binding, normalization, well-formedness, and the external authentication gate. Consumer.authorize_sound adds coordi-nate equality, alias admission, and reflected safety. The authorized branch invokes semantic preservation; Consumer.rejected_consumer_is_neutral makes the other branch definitionally neutral. (4) Receipt and callback wrappers. EndToEnd.deployed_effect_non_amplification inverts re-ceipt acceptance and exact input equality before exposing the base authorization. EndToEnd. deployed_selected_runtime_refines_neutral composes that result with registry-selected bind-ing, root, provider, producer soundness, and consumer refinement while retaining actual-body equality as a premise. OpenCallback.open1_effect_non_amplification similarly exposes both independently checked origins, the actual symbol, root/order mapping, component effects, their exact composition, and safety. OpenCallback.open1_sequential_topology_preservation then reuses the composition and frame results. (5) Projection wrapper. AggregateProjection.projection_authorize_sound reflects exact bind-ing and projection identity. The selected-slot producer premise applies the existing frame definition only to that slot. deployed_selected_projection_refines_neutral combines receipt non-amplification with selected-slot preservation, while sibling_projection_not_authorized follows from offset inequality. (6) Checked producer. TokaProducer.bridge_summary_non_amplification reflects the payload-only whitelist and exact issued effect. Induction over the bounded source-command syntax proves that every accepted command is identity on the topology-store quotient, yielding accepted_toka_summary_implies_producer_sound. checked_toka_fragment_preserves_outer_ handle then reuses the existing path-frame theorem for that source model. Independently, ConcreteIRChecker.accepted_ir_program_is_topology_identity proves topology identity for an accepted list in the bounded concrete-IR action model; checked_ir_effect_non_amplification reflects the fixed effect, accepted_checked_ir_implies_producer_sound derives the abstract producer premise, and accepted_checked_ir_preserves_outer_handle reuses the existing path-frame theorem. These are theorems about the bounded source and action models; correspon-dence from the C++ checker to the action list is not hidden inside either proof. All named declarations are closed by Rocq’s kernel under the development’s global context. This is a proof of the abstract authorization/refinement spine, not a proof of cryptography, arbitrary native-provider bodies, Toka compiler correctness, the LLVM parser or C++ checker, fixed-backend correctness, or LLVM semantics. 34 Zhonghua Yi 

A.4 Claim, evidence, and adequacy ledger 

Table 13 separates kernel-checked implications, executable observations, and premises supplied outside the model. The test families summarize the registered source-level observations; opening the archive is needed to rerun them, not to determine what each claim depends on. 

Table 13. Audit ledger. 

Claim Kernel-checked anchors Executable observation External Normalize and com-pose exact_path_normalizes_to_graded; safe_ compose; producer_sound_compose graded/exact routes produce identical IR in the common fragment; recurrence and kill/reseed controls E1, E2, E5 Base refinement walk_preserved; topology_address_ preservation; authorize_sound; authorized_consumer_refines_neutral single-shot, CFG fixed-point, wrong-coordinate, alias, local-shadow, and wrong-code controls E1–E7 Receipt closure deployed_effect_non_amplification; bound_input_mismatch_is_neutral; deployed_consumer_refines_neutral; deployed_selected_runtime_refines_ neutral Tampering with neutral IR, effect, plugin, caller, provider, environment, toolchain, or command does not reach the registered rewrite E1–E7 Static target deployed_selected_runtime_refines_ neutral under its selected-body equality premise three embedded-provider images have one owned text definition, no protected import, and one decoded direct branch to that definition; post-link mutation, dynamic-provider, and same-name injec-tion controls fail closed E1–E5, E7, E10; target-check/linker adequacy Singleton callback open1_effect_non_amplification; open1_ sequential_topology_preservation preserving singleton rewrites; invalidat-ing, missing, wrong, and mapping mis-match remain neutral; libjpeg remains open E1–E8 Selected projection projection_authorize_sound; deployed_ projection_non_amplification; deployed_ selected_projection_refines_neutral; sibling_projection_not_authorized Cairo offset 8 rewrites; offset 16 sibling, dynamic/non-inbounds GEP, ABI/layout mismatch, and public metadata remain neutral E1, E3–E7, E9 Checked Toka pro-ducer bridge_summary_non_amplification; accepted_toka_summary_implies_ producer_sound; checked_toka_ fragment_preserves_outer_handle; accepted_ir_program_is_topology_ identity; checked_ir_effect_non_ amplification; accepted_checked_ir_ implies_producer_sound; accepted_ checked_ir_preserves_outer_handle three exact-IR positives certify traver-sal/read/write counts (2, 1, 1), (2, 1, 0),and (4, 2, 2), rewrite 2 → 1, retain the call, and return 34, 28, and 46; 14 IR classes and four source-summary classes are rejected; six deterministic preserving and 11 deter-ministic rejecting IR variants match their fixed labels; every material-input muta-tion fails closed; and absent noalias re-mains neutral E2–E7, E10 

E1 Effect truth. 

The issuer’s claim satisfies ProducerSound ; authentication proves origin, not semantic truth. 

E2 Base-model adequacy. 

One selected root, sequential execution, static layering, a stratified acyclic chain, and no untracked cross-layer aliases. 

E3 Alias admission. 

The registered C restrict /LLVM noalias fact and the case-specific separation needed by the observation. 

E4 Authentication and measurement. 

HMAC, hashing, parsing, snapshots, filesystem measurement, and receipt checking correctly implement the abstract boolean gates. Build-Authorized Evidence for Opaque Calls: A Fail-Closed Rewrite-Authority Boundary 35 

E5 Compiler/model correspondence. 

The registered LLVM root, load, call, callback operand, or GEP corresponds to the abstract request and observation. 

E6 Selected-body adequacy. 

Linker ownership and the runtime call target select the receipt-bound provider body. This re-mains a premise for the dynamic-library routes. The static profile checks it for one embedded-provider call edge while trusting its link-map/tool parsers, disassembly classification, and linker. 

E7 Trusted-entry non-bypass. 

The driver, internal pass API, plugin, key, and link gate form the stated trusted computing base. 

E8 Callback adequacy. 

There is one direct sequential callback; the provider truthfully forwards the declared same-root/order argument and both component effects are true. 

E9 Projection adequacy. 

The selected-slot Stable assertion is true, and ABI, layout, offset, width, address spaces, and GEP normalization agree with the model. 

E10 Checked-producer adequacy. 

The concrete Toka AST and emitted root summary correspond to the bounded source-command model. Separately, LLVM parsing and the C++ checker’s classification of the selected function correspond to the bounded concrete-IR action list. The accepted exact IR is mechanically fixed as the registered backend input, but checker-to-model correspondence, source-to-IR compiler correctness, and backend correctness remain external premises. 

A.5 One complete projection trace 

The Cairo case illustrates how the three proof layers meet. Neutral caller IR loads the pointer-valued 

cairo_path_t.data slot at arm64 byte offset 8, calls opaque cairo_append_path , and reloads that same slot. The detached artifact asserts Stable for the exact projection identity (layout , 8, 8, 0, 0)

and the registered root argument. The validator checks the artifact origin and provider/ABI/layout identity; the receipt then binds the neutral IR, canonical claim, provider snapshot, sidecar, plugin, toolchain, commands, and caller object. Only after all current inputs equal those receipt claims does the internal pass receive the selected-slot grant. Its cache key matches the pre-call load, so it retains the call and GEP but replaces the second load with the cached pointer. The runtime observation is unchanged. A synthetic pointer-valued sibling at offset 16 has the same root and layout but a different projection identity. It cannot satisfy the request-identity equality above, so no grant is issued and both loads remain. This trace demonstrates authorization confinement; it does not infer Cairo’s effect or prove general aggregate-path analysis. 

A.6 Complete checked-producer traces 

Each accepted Toka input contains one public function, mutate_inner , whose selected root is used only for bounded topology traversal and descendant payload access. The compiler first emits a preliminary native object and an object-bound root summary. The source gate checks the frozen compiler identity, source/evidence/object bindings, function and root selection, empty function effects, and the { Read ,Write } root-effect whitelist. The same registered compiler separately emits exact unoptimized LLVM 20 IR. The exact-IR checker scans the complete selected function under a request fixing the function, root argument and order, target triple, DataLayout, and IR digest. The certificate and producer receipt separately 36 Zhonghua Yi 

bind checker identity. The three frozen positives certify, respectively, traversal/read/write counts 

(2, 1, 1) for the stable update, (2, 1, 0) for the read-only provider, and (4, 2, 2) for the multi-payload provider. Only those accepted IR bytes are passed to the fixed llc invocation. Its output is a distinct final object, and the ordinary order-two 𝐺 (0, 1) artifact binds that final object rather than the preliminary one. For all three providers the consumer retains the call, changes the caller from two root loads to one, and native execution returns 34, 28, and 46; removing caller noalias leaves both loads. The rejection matrix exercises 14 concrete-IR classes: topology store, partial-width topology store, scalar load from a topology slot, unknown direct call, indirect call, pointer return, ptrtoint ,

inttoptr , dynamic GEP, pointer phi , pointer select , atomic load, volatile store, and unsupported opcode. Malformed IR is a tool error rather than acceptance, and forged metadata cannot authorize a rejected topology store. The source-summary gate rejects four summaries: handle rebind, root consumption/invalidation, raw pointer use, and unsafe code. A second deterministic corpus is independent of Toka lowering. LLVM’s verifier accepts all 17 modules before classification. Six expected-preserving modules vary conditional control flow, scalar payload type, root spills, and read/write mode; 11 LLVM-valid mutations exercise exact rejection reasons for topology writes, atomic/volatile access, pointer casts and comparisons, non-

inbounds /dynamic GEPs, calls, pointer merging, and escape. All decisions match the fixed manifest. This corpus is bounded regression coverage, not random fuzzing, exhaustive coverage, or a checker-correctness argument. Finally, the producer receipt binds the source, compiler, preliminary object, summary evidence, exact IR, checker, checker certificate, backend executable, backend flags, final object, and sidecar. Mutation of any one of those materials, or of the receipt itself, fails validation. These traces replace a manual effect assertion only in the bounded checked-producer route. They are synthetic and do not prove the checker-to-model, compiler, or backend adequacy premises in E10, nor do they supply an unchanged real-client positive. 

A.7 Pinned Linux/ARM64 functional replay 

The checked-producer route was freshly rebuilt inside a pinned Ubuntu image for Linux on ARM64 with LLVM 20. Table 15 reports the complete functional result; each positive uses newly emitted ex-act IR, an ELF provider object, and a fresh Linux receipt rather than replaying Darwin authorization material. The evidence binds the base-image digest, direct package inventory and built image identity, Toka commit/compiler, LLVM checker, fixed backend, target triple and DataLayout, and final objects. The no-noalias control retains two loads. Because the host supplies the LinuxKit kernel, its release is recorded but not treated as pinned. No timing was collected, and this replay makes no claim about bare-metal Linux, arbitrary Linux libraries, cross-platform receipt reuse, or whole-compiler correctness. 

A.8 Closest-mechanism lowering audit 

The executable invariance control begins from the same Cairo neutral module, canonical effect, provider snapshot, and non-consumer receipt claims as the custom projection route. Because a receipt binds the optimizer entry, its consumer schema is necessarily distinct. After validation, the control introduces a fresh invariant.group identity only for one exact selected-load/call/selected-load window, invokes stock GVN, and strips every temporary assumption. The frozen matrix records custom and invariance 2 → 1 parity, a two-load external-noescape control, selected/sibling separation, and rejection of injected invariance or receipt/effect mismatches. This is executable evidence about a closest lowering target; no Rocq theorem claims equivalence of the two LLVM Build-Authorized Evidence for Opaque Calls: A Fail-Closed Rewrite-Authority Boundary 37 

Table 14. Warm-host checked-producer measurements on the registered arm64 macOS/LLVM 20 host. Both panels use three discarded warmups and 21 samples with perf_counter_ns ; P95 is nearest rank. Tool discovery and checker/plugin construction are excluded. Panel (a) includes process startup and file I/O within each named phase. Panel (b) times a prebuilt checker subprocess, including IR read/parse/verify/classify and certificate serialization; IR generation, file creation, and preflight are excluded. These are descriptive prototype observations, not scaling results. 

(a) One accepted producer construction (ms) Phase Median P95 Preliminary object + .tke 243.866 245.841 Source-summary gate 0.385 0.430 Exact LLVM IR emission 118.825 121.518 Exact-IR gate 18.984 19.440 Fixed llc 44.275 44.686 Sidecar/receipt issuance 106.916 107.796 Construction total 533.559 535.356 Receipt revalidation 127.138 129.871 Construction + revalidation 660.697 663.790 (b) Accepted-IR checker response Instructions / textual IR Median (ms) P95 (ms) 8 / 0.7 KiB 10.879 11.039 29 / 2.0 KiB 10.740 10.999 113 / 7.1 KiB 10.946 11.205 449 / 27.6 KiB 11.275 11.568 1,793 / 109.8 KiB 12.576 12.983 7,169 / 438.3 KiB 17.764 18.270 

Table 15. Linux/ARM64 checked-producer replay. Every positive retains one opaque call. 

Case Reads Writes Loads Runtime stable 1 1 2 → 1 34 readonly 1 0 2 → 1 28 multi 2 2 2 → 1 46 Reject: 4 source; 14 IR; 11 tamper; 4 Darwin material. 

implementations. The external annotation is an independent user-responsible claim, not something derived from the selected-slot receipt. 

A.9 Static-target certificate audit 

The Darwin/arm64 profile links only privately staged caller and provider object bytes and passes no user-supplied link arguments. Its target checker requires: (1) the raw map assigns g1_loop to 

verified-caller.o and mutate_inner to verified-provider-snapshot.o ; (2) the final Mach-O is an ARM64 executable with unique strong text definitions; (3) no exact protected symbol occurs in bind, lazy-bind, weak-bind, chained-fixup import, or indirect-symbol output; and (4) exactly one caller BL decodes to the final callee address. The certificate records these facts and the 38 Zhonghua Yi 

fixed LLVM-tool identities. A second receipt authenticates the certificate plus the prior receipt, caller/provider digests, image, raw map, symbols, environment, and profile. The frozen stable, read-only, and multi-write images have zero registered protected imports, preserve the call and one-load consumer, and return 34, 28, and 46. Ten material mutations, link-map ownership reassignment, a dynamic provider, and additional link arguments reject. A same-name dylib injection loads its constructor but cannot redirect the protected direct branch. These are executable checks of one registered final-image shape, not a formal semantics for Mach-O, AArch64, or the linker. 

A.10 Transaction-timing audit 

The frozen cost record contains 21 paired samples after three discarded warmups and alternates stock-first with authorized-first order. Each stock sample times caller/main code generation and native linking. Each authorized sample times authorization and snapshotting, optimize/recheck-/codegen, and final receipt recheck, private snapshot staging, and linking. Plugin construction, neutral C-to-IR generation, sidecar issuance, and the separately checked runtime oracle are not timed. The checker recomputes median, nearest-rank P95, minimum, and maximum from every raw phase, checks each per-pair delta, and binds the manuscript’s rounded totals. This evidence is descriptive for the registered microfixture and has no associated cost theorem. 

A.11 Bounded IR-level applicability audit 

As a second applicability check, we compiled four unchanged Rust FFI snapshots to optimized LLVM IR and searched only for the complete straight-line fragment accepted by the projection consumer: a simple pointer load from a constant, inbounds , nonzero projection of a noalias 

argument; a direct external void(ptr,ptr) C call receiving that argument; and a second pointer load from the identical projection. Provider effects were to be audited only after this syntactic filter produced a candidate. Table 16 reports the frozen result.                                        

> Table 16. Bounded optimized-IR search. “Proj.” counts admissible nonzero constant projections; “ABI+NA” counts frozen-ABI calls receiving a noalias argument.
> Snapshot Funcs Calls Ptr loads Proj. ABI+NA Windows freetype-rs 0.38.0 53 201 57 24 00rust-harfbuzz 0.7.0 48 127 38 000tree-sitter 0.27.0 228 1,626 404 91 12 0cubeb-rs tone 33 215 79 26 10Total 362 2,169 578 141 13 0

The reporter used LLVM 22.1.8 because the frozen Rust compiler emitted LLVM 22 IR, whereas the evaluated consumer uses LLVM 20.1.8. To check this version boundary, both implementations consumed one identical frozen positive module. The reporter found exactly one window, and the authorized LLVM 20 consumer retained the call while reducing the selected pointer loads from two to one. This is a positive alignment control, not a proof that the reporter and consumer recognize identical IR sets. The four-snapshot result is neither an ecosystem estimate nor evidence that no unchanged client exists. It strengthens only the explanation of the observed zero: many individual prerequisites occur in optimized IR, but their complete conjunction did not occur in this bounded corpus. The search did not change the consumer, effect language, alias admission, ABI descriptor, or proof model.