Title: Characterizing Real-World Bugs in Tile Programs for Automated Bug Detection

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.19652v1

Published Time: Wed, 20 May 2026 01:17:15 GMT

Number of Pages: 24

Markdown Content:
# Characterizing Real-World Bugs in Tile Programs for Automated Bug Detection 

RAVISHKA RATHNASURIYA ∗, The University of Texas at Dallas, USA 

ZIHE SONG ∗, The University of Texas at Dallas, USA 

NIDHI MAJOJU, The University of Texas at Dallas, USA 

AARYAA MOHARIR, The University of Texas at Dallas, USA 

TINGXI LI, The University of Texas at Dallas, USA 

WEI YANG †, The University of Texas at Dallas, USA 

TAO XIE †‡ , Key Lab of HCST (PKU), MOE; SCS, Peking University, China and Beijing Tongming Lake Information Technology Application Innovation Center, China Tile-based programming frameworks are increasingly adopted to write high-performance GPU kernels in domains such as deep learning and scientific computing. While these frameworks enhance productivity and hardware utilization, their multi-stage compilation pipelines introduce distinct code generation bugs that are tightly coupled to input shapes, data types, and backend targets. These bugs often manifest as silent correctness or performance issues, making them difficult to detect using existing compiler testing tools. Additionally, the unique programming conventions of tile domain-specific languages complicate root cause identification, while fixing such bugs demands specialized knowledge of tile abstractions and compilation pipelines. Despite the growing adoption of tile-based systems, their code generation bugs remain largely unexplored. This paper presents the first systematic study of tile-program code generation bugs. We curate 401 bug reports from GitHub and identify 301 tile-program codegen bugs for analysis, categorizing the root causes, symptoms, input patterns, test oracles that trigger these bugs, and the strategies used to fix bugs. Our study provides foundational insights for building debugging, testing, and repair tools tailored to tile-based compiler infrastructures. 

ACM Reference Format: 

Ravishka Rathnasuriya, Zihe Song, Nidhi Majoju, Aaryaa Moharir, Tingxi Li, Wei Yang, and Tao Xie. 2026. Characterizing Real-World Bugs in Tile Programs for Automated Bug Detection . In Proceedings of the 35th ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis (ISSTA ’26), October 3–9, 2026, Oakland, CA, USA. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 24 pages. https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX 

> ∗

Both authors contributed equally to this research. 

> †

Corresponding author. 

> ‡

Tao Xie is also affiliated with the Institute of Systems for Advanced Computing at Fudan University, China, and the Shanghai Institute of Systems for Open Computing, China. Authors’ Contact Information: Ravishka Rathnasuriya, ravishka.rathnasuriya@utdallas.edu, The University of Texas at Dallas, Richardson, Texas, USA; Zihe Song, zihe.song@utdallas.edu, The University of Texas at Dallas, Richardson, Texas, USA; Nidhi Majoju, nidhi.majoju@utdallas.edu, The University of Texas at Dallas, Richardson, Texas, USA; Aaryaa Moharir, aaryaa.moharir@utdallas.edu, The University of Texas at Dallas, Richardson, Texas, USA; Tingxi Li, tingxi.li@utdallas.edu, The University of Texas at Dallas, Richardson, Texas, USA; Wei Yang, wei.yang@utdallas.edu, The University of Texas at Dallas, Richardson, Texas, USA; Tao Xie, taoxie@pku.edu.cn, Key Lab of HCST (PKU), MOE; SCS, Peking University, China and Beijing Tongming Lake Information Technology Application Innovation Center, China. Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org. 

ISSTA ’26, October 3–9, 2026, Oakland, CA, USA 

© 2026 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM. ACM ISBN 978-X-XXXX-XXXX-X/2026/10 https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2026.  

> arXiv:2605.19652v1 [cs.SE] 19 May 2026 2Rathnasuriya and Song, et al.

1 Introduction 

Modern accelerators such as graphics processing units (GPUs) [ 45 ] and artificial intelligence (AI)-specific hardware [ 1, 12 , 61 ] deliver high throughput by combining deep memory hierarchies, wide vector execution, and massive parallelism. Achieving this performance in software requires fine control over memory access patterns, data locality, and synchronization across threads. However, traditional GPU programming models [ 42 , 59 ] and deep learning (DL) frameworks [ 11 , 53 ] constrain such control in different ways. Vendor libraries offer limited kernel customization, while low-level CUDA development demands manual scheduling decisions and careful memory management. Tile-based programming frameworks [ 47 , 50 , 83 , 91 ] aim to close this gap by expressing kernels in terms of fixed-size tiles, where each tile is a logical block of data processed cooperatively by a group of threads. The tile-based formulation separates the computation from the hardware-specific mapping, allowing the compiler to select and optimize scheduling choices such as pipelining, memory layout, and warp-level specialization. Tile-based intermediate representations (IRs) make memory placement, reuse, and synchronization explicit, which supports structured lowering and architecture-aware transformations. Consequently, tile programming has become a common basis for generating high-performance kernels on modern GPU and AI platforms. While improving programmability and performance portability, tile-based frameworks also introduce compilation pipelines that translate high-level domain-specific language (DSL) kernels into hardware-specific GPU executables [ 71 , 79 ]. The code generation (codegen) process spans multiple transformation stages, including layout selection, tiling and scheduling, and progressive lowering across IRs. Each stage can alter indexing, predication, and memory placement decisions, creating opportunities for transformation-induced bugs. In this paper, we define a codegen bug as a case where the pipeline produces incorrect code for a semantically valid program. Tile codegen bugs can be difficult to reproduce and diagnose because bug-triggering conditions often involve specific tensor shapes, tile parameters, or backend-dependent compilation paths. Prior work has extensively studied miscompilation in traditional optimizing compilers [ 16 , 39 ,40 , 87 ]. A separate line of work targets CUDA-kernel correctness through GPU verification and testing [ 8 , 9, 15 , 25 , 26 , 28 –30 , 32 , 36 , 58 , 62 , 84 ]. Reliability issues in DL systems and frameworks have also received substantial attention [ 27 , 54 , 60 , 80 , 85 , 92 ], and IR-centric testing and fuzzing techniques have been developed for tensor compilers and related codegen stacks [ 38 , 65 , 81 , 82 ]. However, prior efforts do not characterize the root causes, symptoms, triggers, and fixes of tile-based codegen bugs as a distinct bug space. The distinction matters because tile-level abstractions and schedule-driven transformations restructure memory access and parallel execution. The abstraction-and-scheduling design improves kernel authoring, but also obscures generated code paths and makes transformation-induced bugs difficult to observe and localize. Tile semantics and scheduling decisions make tile codegen bugs different because both remain central throughout lowering [ 50 , 71 ]. Rather than optimizing a fixed control-flow program, the compiler constructs the execution plan by selecting layouts, introducing predication for partial tiles, and specializing mapping to warps and the memory hierarchy. Tile-level transformations directly rewrite indexing, synchronization, and memory placement, so small mistakes can lead to shape- or configuration-dependent wrong-code that is difficult to observe or diagnose from the DSL level [ 31 , 38 , 65 , 81 ]. The close connection between tile semantics and lowering motivates a dedicated, tile-focused study of codegen bugs grounded in the transformations unique to tile compilers. The structural differences between tile compilation and prior compilation settings also reduce the applicability of existing compiler testing tools and methodologies [ 16 , 38 –40 , 81 , 87 ]. Randomized  

> , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2026. Characterizing Real-World Bugs in Tile Programs for Automated Bug Detection 3

program generators such as Csmith [ 87 ] and IR-level fuzzers such as MLIR-Smith [ 81 ] primarily tar-get general-purpose program or IR inputs with deterministic semantics, rather than tile-structured GPU kernels whose behavior depends on schedules, layouts, and backend-specific lowering. GPU-specific compiler fuzzers such as CLsmith [ 37 ], CUDAsmith [ 26 ], and DarthShader [ 7 ] exercise accelerator backends, but operate on explicit CUDA, OpenCL, or shader programs and do not control tile-level schedules, layouts, mask coverage, or shape-dependent lowering decisions. As a result, existing generators do not systematically exercise tile-centric transformations such as multi-level tiling, warp specialization, and shared-memory staging. Oracle construction for tile compilation is also more challenging than for central processing unit (CPU) compilation. Many tile frameworks lack CPU-executable reference implementations that preserve equivalent kernel semantics, so correctness checking typically relies on executing generated GPU kernels and differential testing against trusted implementations (e.g., cuBLAS or optimized reference kernels) [ 34 , 43 ]. Moreover, tile codegen decisions can vary across backends and devices, and numerical non-associativity and mixed-precision behavior further complicate the design of precise and robust automated oracles. Existing bug studies in adjacent areas also focus on different bug sources. CUDA-focused studies primarily analyze developer-written kernels with explicit indexing, memory accesses, and syn-chronization [ 8, 9 , 15 , 17 , 25 , 26 , 28 –30 , 32 , 36 , 58 , 62 , 84 ], while DL-framework studies often focus on application programming interface (API) misuse, operator-level failures, shape-related issues, or backend divergences [ 27 , 43 , 44 , 54 , 60 , 80 , 85 , 92 ], typically treating vendor libraries such as cuBLAS [ 43 ] and cuDNN [ 44 ] as trusted baselines. In contrast, tile-based frameworks shift kernel construction into the compiler. Layout inference, tiling, fusion, and scheduling implicitly determine indexing and execution structure, which allows transformation-induced bugs to surface only under specific shapes, tile parameters, or backend configurations. This paper presents a systematic study of codegen bugs in tile-based compilation pipelines. We examine 401 public bug reports from open-source tile programming frameworks and identify 301 tile codegen bugs, where semantically valid tile programs trigger incorrectly generated GPU code. From the analyzed bug reports, we derive a taxonomy of six categories— (1) control flow and scheduling, (2) IR construction and transformation, (3) tile mapping and launch configuration, (4) memory, (5) type and operator handling, and (6) device-specific bugs—and characterize their recurring symptoms, triggering conditions, oracle patterns, and repair strategies. Based on the empirical findings, we distill a practical workflow for detection, diagnosis, and repair that reflects observed developer practice and can guide systematic testing of tile compilers. Overall, this paper makes the following contributions: 

• A curated dataset of 301 real-world tile codegen bugs across eight tile programming frameworks, supporting future empirical and tooling research. 

• A root-cause taxonomy of six categories, together with the mapping from causes to observable symptoms and developer-applied fixes. 

• A characterization of bug-triggering input patterns and oracle practices, motivating structured input variation and multi-oracle strategies for tile-aware testing. 

• Implications for automated detection, diagnosis, and repair of tile compiler bugs, organized around compiler stages and tile-specific transformation decisions. 

2 Background and Motivation 

GPU kernels often require implementation decisions that are not fixed by the operator definition. Many kernels differ in correctness and efficiency based on how computation is partitioned into tiles, how data is staged across memory levels, and how parallel execution is coordinated. Tile 

> , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2026.

4 Rathnasuriya and Song, et al. 

programming [ 47 , 50 , 83 , 91 ] exposes these decisions at the kernel-construction level. Tile com-pilation then translates tile-level intent into a concrete implementation that satisfies hardware constraints. Figure 1 summarizes how this pipeline differs from traditional compilation and tensor graph compilation. Tile Abstractions    

> (no explicit control / sync)
> Semantic Synthesis
> (control / layout / sync)
> FTG IR
> (Fine -grained Task Graph)
> Best Valid Candidate
> Semantic Finalization
> (predicate / sync / layout)
> Backend Code Generation
> Tensor Graph IR
> (fixed semantics)
> Graph Optimization
> Schedule Space
> Scheduling Space
> (s earch / layout)
> Cost
> Model
> Best Valid Candidate
> Kernel Code Generation
> Backend Code Generation
> Source Program
> (explicit control / memory)
> Semantic Analysis
> (type / scope / control)
> High -level IR
> (explicit control & dataflow)
> IR Optimization
> (SSA -based, heuristic)
> Low -level IR
> (machine -oriented)
> Instruction Selection
> Register Allocation
> Backend Code Generation
> Constraint Analysis
> (hardware, resource & tile constraints)
> Legality -aware Search
> (autotuning schedule /
> layout / swizzling)
> Constraint
> Filtering Performance
> Evaluation
> (empirical / heuristic)
> Traditional Compiler Tensor Compiler Tile Compiler

Fig. 1. Conceptual comparison of compilation pipelines across traditional, tensor, and tile-based compilers. 

2.1 Tile programs 

A tile program represents a kernel as operations over blocked fragments of tensors. Each program instance operates on one or more tiles mapped to a GPU execution scope such as a thread block or a warp-aligned group. Compared with tensor graph representations, tile programs make three classes of choices explicit. First, they specify tile-level data movement, including how values are loaded, staged in registers or shared memory, reused across compute steps, and written back. Second, they specify tile-level parallel mapping, including how program instances cover the iteration space and how work is assigned to threads [ 47 , 50 ]. Third, they expose layout-sensitive access decisions, including vectorization, alignment, padding, and layout transforms that affect memory legality and access efficiency [ 83 ]. These properties place tile programs close to the executed kernel while retaining a structured representation that supports compiler analysis. 

Tile compilation. The tile compiler produces a correct and efficient kernel under hardware and resource limits. In contrast to compilation settings where control flow and memory behavior are fully specified by the input program, tile compilation often begins from abstractions that describe tiled computation and dataflow while leaving some kernel details unresolved. The compiler must determine concrete boundary handling, synchronization structure, and layouts, and must also select among many implementation alternatives. 

2.2 Comparison of Compiler Pipelines 

Figure 1 contrasts three compilation pipelines and highlights why tile compilation warrants separate study. Traditional compilers lower source programs with explicit control and memory behavior through semantic analysis and IR transformations, then apply backend phases such as instruction selection and register allocation on explicit dependence and memory representations. Tensor graph compilers begin from fixed operator semantics, apply graph rewrites, and search a schedule space 

, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2026. Characterizing Real-World Bugs in Tile Programs for Automated Bug Detection 5

(e.g., tiling, fusion, layout) using cost models or measurements before emitting kernels. Tile compil-ers instead begin with tile abstractions that leave aspects of layout and coordination unresolved; the pipeline performs feasibility checks under resource constraints, synthesizes explicit boundary handling and synchronization, and then searches schedule and layout parameters subject to le-gality constraints before committing final kernel details. This structure introduces additional bug opportunities beyond conventional lowering and tensor scheduling, including errors in constraint reasoning, boundary/synchronization synthesis, and mismatches between legality checks and generated code, often triggered only by specific combinations of tile sizes, layouts, and resource usage. 

3 Methodology 

In this section, we describe our data collection process (Section 3.1) and discuss the methodology for filtering and labeling codegen bugs (Section 3.2). 

3.1 Data Collection 

To investigate codegen bugs in real-world tile-based programming frameworks, we curated a dataset of verified bug reports from actively maintained open-source repositories. Our goal was to focus on bugs encountered in both research and production usage, ensuring that our analysis reflects the challenges faced by practitioners. The collection process comprises two main stages: (1) identifying relevant repositories and (2) extracting valid bug reports. 

3.1.1 Repository Selection. We leveraged GitHub [ 18 ] as the primary data source due to its central role in hosting tile programming frameworks and its extensive ecosystem of dependent projects. GitHub provides structured metadata for issue tracking, pull request discussions, and code evolution, making it well-suited for empirical analysis of software failures [13, 58, 60]. To improve search precision and reduce irrelevant results, we constructed compound keyword queries based on the terminology commonly used to describe tile programs in documentation and community discussions [ 50 , 71 ]. Specifically, we searched for projects containing terms such as “tile language”, “tile kernels”, and “tile programming”, yielding 155, 45, and 914 repositories, respectively. These targeted queries substantially improved search precision over a naive query using “tile” alone, which retrieved over 56,000 repositories, most of which were unrelated, for example, containing references to Triton Inference Server [48] or unrelated software sharing the same name. To finalize the selection, we applied three filtering criteria: (1) project activity : repositories were required to show active development and community interaction such as 200 GitHub stars, non-trivial issue discussions, and frequent contributions; (2) direct tile usage : only repositories that implemented tile programs or directly invoked tile-program APIs were retained. Projects using transitive dependencies or wrappers were excluded; (3) semantic relevance: we manually excluded unrelated projects that used the term “tile” for other purposes (e.g., graphical tiling, branded inference runtimes) and retained only those built on compiler frameworks that expose tile-level abstractions. This step reduced the number of repositories to 15. After de-duplication and validation, we selected eight repositories that represent both aca-demic and production use of tile-based programming models. These include OpenAI Triton [ 73 ], TileLang [ 66 ], Halide [ 22 ], TVM (tile-programming components only) [ 4], XLA [ 51 ], DaCe [ 63 ], NVIDIA-Warps [ 47 ], and PyTorch (tile-specific modules) [ 55 ]. For completeness, we also note two emerging tile-programming frameworks that we considered but ultimately excluded from analysis: ThunderKittens [ 64 ] and CUDA Tile [ 46 ], as the result of each project had too few publicly con-firmed codegen bug reports during our collection window to support reliable analysis.A summary of the analyzed GitHub repositories is available on our project website [3]. 

> , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2026.

6 Rathnasuriya and Song, et al. 

Table 1. Summary of findings (F) and implications (I) in codegen bug study 

Findings about codegen bug causes Implications on unique characteristics of tile codegen F1. Tile program bugs stem from six distinct root causes: control-flow and scheduling, IR construction and transformation, tile mapping and launch, memory, type/operator handling, and device-specific assumptions (Section 4 and Table 2). 

I1. Tile program frameworks shift memory and control management to the compiler, introducing distinct failure modes at each transformation stage that demand specialized, stage-aware diagnostics. 

F2. Control-flow and scheduling bugs are triggered by incorrect mask generation, instruction reordering, or missed synchroniza-tion at tile boundaries (Table 2). 

I2. Tile DSLs make predication and warp-level synchronization first-class, leading to subtle tile-specific bugs—like silent corruption from miscomputed masks that is not seen in traditional loop transformations. 

F3. IR construction and transformation bugs arise from mal-formed graphs, incorrect rewrites, or lowered nodes with miss-ing metadata such as type or layout (Table 2). 

I3. Tile DSLs extend frameworks like MLIR with custom IRs, but stricter tile-specific semantics make transformations like fusion and splitting prone to brittle index-space misalignment bugs. 

F4. Tile mapping and launch bugs result from incorrect thread-grid calculations, out-of-bound indexing, or misconfigured launch parameters that misalign the kernel’s logical and physical execution dimensions (Table 2). 

I4. Tile DSLs auto-generate launch configs from loop nests, making them vulnerable to subtle errors near tile boundaries or with dynamic shapes—unlike manual control in CUDA. 

F5. Type and operator bugs are among the most frequent causes (48.84%), often due to unsupported operators, incomplete type inference, or missing type specializations in the backend (Ta-ble 2). 

I5. Tile DSLs aggressively specialize for performance but lack standard fallback paths, causing unsupported types or fused ops to silently pro-duce invalid code or incorrect results. 

Findings about codegen bug manifestation Implications on bug detection F6. Bugs emerge under narrow input dimensions like specific shapes, layouts, or values, particularly near tile boundaries or with non-divisible extents (Section 6.1). 

I6. Effective detection demands structured input generation that targets tile multiples, extreme shapes, and special values since shape-dependent bugs are missed by uniform random manual testing. 

F7. Developers use schedule variation, launch sweeps, and cross-device runs to reveal discrepancies, motivating a taxonomy of differential and metamorphic oracles (Section 6.2). 

I7. Detection tools should apply semantic-preserving transformations and compare outputs across configurations to expose diverse root causes. 

F8. A single output mismatch may stem from diverse root causes such as masking, aliasing, or type issues, therefore no single oracle suffices for all bug types. (Section 6.2) 

I8. Bug detection requires combining diverse oracles—differential, meta-morphic, canary, and algebraic—each targeting specific root causes, underscoring the need for modular, extensible frameworks. 

Findings about codegen bug symptoms Implications on debugging F9. Crashes are the most frequent symptom, occurring in nearly 58.14% of the cases, and span multiple stages such as front-end, mid-end, backend, and runtime (Table 3). 

I9. Crash phases offer diagnostic signals, but effective triage requires mapping stack traces to tile-specific transformation stages. 

F10. Correctness issues such as silent miscomputations or nu-meric anomalies occur without triggering crashes and are often architecture- or input-dependent (Table 3). 

I10. These bugs evade simple detection and demand oracle-based de-bugging—like differential execution or contract checks—as traditional debuggers miss silent failures. 

F11. Performance bottlenecks appear in correct programs and stem from resource overuse or warp-level misbehavior (Table 3). 

I11. Performance debugging needs profiling and architectural in-sight—like shared memory and warp scheduling—as issues often stem from masking, memory, or type bugs. 

F12. The mapping between symptoms and root causes is many-to-many (Table 5). 

I12. Superficial symptoms rarely reveal root causes; effective debugging requires cross-phase reasoning across compiler transforms, memory layouts, and backend constraints. 

Findings about codegen bug fixing Implications on program repair F13. Fixes for control and scheduling bugs involve modifying loop guards, predication, and instruction orderings across com-piler stages (Table 5). 

I13. Fixing control-flow errors requires global reasoning across trans-formation stages, with attention to data dependencies, mask coverage, and warp divergence. 

F14. IR transformation bugs are repaired through low-level rewrites to operator lowering, type emission, and pass com-position (Table 5). 

I14. IR-related fixes demand detailed knowledge of internal represen-tations and backend constraints, raising the repair barrier for non-compiler developers. 

F15. Fixes for tile mapping and launch bugs adjust kernel tiling parameters and thread-block layouts to restore spatial coverage (Table 5). 

I15. Launch-related fixes often need manual tuning and shape-wise revalidation, revealing gaps in abstraction consistency and auto-tuning support. 

F16. Type and operator bugs are fixed by correcting intrinsics, enforcing IEEE-754 semantics, and aligning datatypes with hard-ware constraints (Table 5). 

I16. Precision-sensitive bugs expose missing semantic checks for nu-merical safety, forcing developers to account for hardware-specific type behavior. 

3.1.2 Bug Report Extraction. From the selected repositories, we collected all GitHub issues filed between January 2022 and November 2025. This time window reflects the period of active adoption following the public release of key tile-programming frameworks, which became production-ready after mid-2021. Earlier reports were excluded to avoid noise from pre-release instability. Our extraction process began with a total of 43,255 GitHub issues across the selected repositories. To identify relevant bug reports, we applied a multi-stage filtering strategy designed to ensure 

, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2026. Characterizing Real-World Bugs in Tile Programs for Automated Bug Detection 7

both accuracy and relevance: (1) Closed and confirmed issues. We filtered for issues marked as closed, under the assumption that resolved issues with discussions or commits are more likely to reflect confirmed bugs. This reduced the dataset to 3,283 issues; (2) Keyword and label-based filtering. To isolate bug-related discussions, we applied both keyword filtering and label matching. Keywords such as “tile error”, “tile bug”, “index”, “compile”, “synchronization”, “warp”, “OOM”, “data type”, “indexing error”, “compile crash”, “warp mapping”, “incorrect IR”, “fix codegen”, and “fix” were used to match issue titles and descriptions. We also retained issues explicitly tagged with GitHub labels such as “bug”, “error”, or “fix”. This step narrowed the candidate set to 892 issues; (3) 

Fix availability. To support downstream analysis of bug resolution patterns, we further restricted the dataset to issues that included a documented fix, either in a corresponding pull request, commit reference, or linked resolution discussion. This reduced the set to 579 issues; and (4) Deduplication and relevance filtering. Finally, we manually removed duplicates, redundant reports, and issues that were misclassified or irrelevant (e.g., feature requests or configuration questions). This resulted in a final curated dataset of 401 unique bug reports. This multi-phase filtering strategy ensured high precision in our bug corpus, allowing us to focus on well-documented and contextually rich failures that accurately reflect the challenges of developing with the tile programming frameworks. 

3.2 Bug Labeling and Categorization 

To analyze the characteristics of tile-program codegen bugs, we applied a structured labeling pro-cedure informed by prior taxonomies in GPU and compiler bug studies. We began with established root cause classes including memory bugs [ 25 , 35 , 62 , 72 ], synchronization bugs [ 19 , 35 , 84 , 88 ], numerical bugs [ 58 , 88 ] or data-type bugs [ 58 ], and general correctness bugs [ 24 , 27 , 35 , 85 ]. These categories have been widely used in prior empirical studies of CUDA, MLIR, and DL-framework bugs, providing a validated foundation for our analysis [24, 58, 72, 85]. We initiated the labeling process with two authors—both of whom have prior experience con-ducting empirical studies of GPU-related bugs and have published peer-reviewed work in this domain—independently reviewing each candidate bug report. This review involved a detailed examination of the issue description, discussion threads, and associated commits or pull requests to assign the most appropriate root cause label. During labeling, we observed that traditional bug taxonomies, especially those from CUDA, were not directly applicable to tile codegen bugs. For example, CUDA synchronization bugs refer to low-level thread divergence or barrier misuse. In tile programs, where warp-level parallelism and implicit scheduling are handled by the compiler, synchronization bugs more commonly arise from mismatches in tile boundaries, warp-id semantics, or shape assumptions across thread groups. To accommodate these shifts, we refined the root cause taxonomy to better reflect the abstraction level and failure modes of tile-based compilers. For instance, we introduced the category of “warp control bugs” to capture bugs involving incorrect warp/thread mapping, loop unrolling, or tile ID misalignment. To ensure consistency across reviewers, we compared the independently assigned labels and merged equivalent categories where appropriate. Disagreements were resolved through a joint adjudication process. During this process, 151 bug reports were identified as inconsistently labeled. After further review, we excluded 100 of them due to insufficient information to determine a root cause or because the issue stemmed from high-level user errors (e.g., misuse of the tile API rather than bugs in kernel logic). This left a final set of 301 tile program codegen bug reports that were clearly attributable to well-defined root causes and suitable for downstream analysis. 

Taxonomy Construction. After finalizing the labeled dataset, we developed a bug taxonomy that associates each root cause category with its observable symptoms and developer-applied fixes. 

> , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2026.

8 Rathnasuriya and Song, et al. 

Unlike prior studies in compiler bugs that focus primarily on crash vs. non-crash failures [ 16 , 38 –40 , 65 , 81 , 82 , 87 ], our analysis revealed a richer set of bug characteristics in tile programs, including shape mismatches, tile alignment bugs, vectorization regressions, memory scope conflicts, and architecture-dependent miscompilations. To construct the taxonomy, we grouped similar symptoms observed across reports and traced them to the compiler transformation responsible for the bug. Fix strategies were derived from the resolution steps taken in patches, including scheduling changes, index expression rewrites, type propagation fixes, and warp mapping adjustments. 

4 Bug Causes 

Table 2. The taxonomy of bug causes 

Category Subcategory Description # Bugs Ratio 

Control Flow and Scheduling Bugs Branch Predication Incorrect predicates or loop guards cause wrong control-flow decisions. 10 3.32% Instruction Scheduling Instruction reordering violates dependencies, causing unsafe execution. 2 0.66% Warp Control Misuse of warp intrinsics causes incorrect thread coordination. 4 1.33% 

Subtotal - 16 5.32% 

IR Construction and Transformation Bugs IR Construction Result from incorrect IR generated during compiler lowering of valid source programs, such as wrong types, shapes, or memory annotations. 4 1.33% IR Transformation Arise from wrong rewrite or optimization passes that violate tile-specific invariants during IR transformation. 45 14.95% 

Subtotal - 49 16.28% 

Tile Mapping and Launch Bugs Launch Configuration Miscomputed launch geometry produces invalid grid, block, or memory sizing. 5 1.66% Thread Block Mapping Wrong mapping logic assigns threads to incorrect data regions. 14 4.65% 

Subtotal - 19 6.31% 

Memory Bugs Indexing and Stride Incorrect address computation due to invalid strides, broadcasts, or layout transformations. 35 11.63% Resource Allocation Misestimated buffer sizes, alignments, or memory spaces cause overflows or invalid accesses. 16 5.32% Ordering and Caching Missing synchronization or improper cache usage leads to stale or inconsistent data reads. 7 2.33% 

Subtotal - 58 19.27% 

Type and Operator Bugs Special Value Handling Arithmetic fails to correctly propagate or detect NaN, Inf, or denormal values. 9 2.99% Data Type Semantics Loss of numeric meaning or precision from implicit casts or inconsistent mixed-precision handling across devices. 58 19.27% Operator Implementa-tion Operator logic is incorrect or incomplete after specialization for type or tile shape. 80 26.58% 

Subtotal - 147 48.84% 

Device-Specific Bugs - Bugs caused by unsupported or inconsistent backend features across GPU architectures or toolchain layers. 12 3.99% 

We identified 301 codegen bugs and classified them into six primary categories according to which compiler-synthesized tile semantics are violated: control flow and scheduling, IR construction and transformation, tile mapping and launch, memory, type and operator, and device-specific bugs. Table 2 summarizes the distribution of bugs across these categories (I1 in Table 1). 

4.1 Control Flow and Scheduling Bugs 

This category comprises 5.32% of the observed codegen bugs and captures violations of compiler-synthesized tile control semantics. Control flow and scheduling bugs arise when the compiler derives control logic—such as boundary guards, predicate masks, and synchronization placement—from high-level tile abstractions, and generates incorrect control behavior during lowering. In tile compilers, control decisions (e.g., which threads are active, which iterations are valid, and when synchronization is required) are not explicitly programmed, but are automatically inferred from 

, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2026. Characterizing Real-World Bugs in Tile Programs for Automated Bug Detection 9

the tile iteration space, thread mapping, and shape specialization. Errors in this synthesis, such as incorrect tile-edge predicates, misgenerated branch conditions, or improper instruction reordering across implicit synchronization points, can violate tile-level execution invariants. These bugs typically manifest only under specific tile shapes, boundary configurations, or warp layouts, and often remain latent under full-tile execution. They originate during lowering and scheduling stages, where high-level tile constructs (e.g., loop nests, thread mappings, and boundary guards) are translated into backend control flow and synchronization instructions (I2 in Table 1). Based on the synthesized semantic object being violated, we identify three subcategories: (1) branch predication bugs , (2) instruction scheduling bugs , and (3) warp-level control bugs .

Branch Predication Bugs. Branch predication bugs arise when control flow expressed over logi-cal tiles is incorrectly lowered to operate over physical threads. In tile-based abstractions, constructs such as if -statements and boundary guards are intended to selectively predicate computation within a tile, rather than terminate or invalidate the execution of the underlying hardware thread. Incorrect lowering of such predicates can cause valid tile instances to be skipped or incorrectly masked, leading to silent loss of computation. A representative example is reported in the Triton compiler [ 77 ], where the compiler generates incorrect predicate and tile-guard logic under specific warp configurations. Although the high-level kernel is semantically valid, the control-flow synthesis pass infers inconsistent tile boundary conditions, resulting in invalid predication over partial tiles and incorrect execution behavior. 

Instruction Scheduling Bugs. In tile-based compilers, instruction scheduling bugs arise when backend reordering violates compiler-synthesized tile pipeline invariants, rather than explicit source-level data dependencies. A representative example from Triton [ 78 ] shows that the AMD backend as-sumes a fixed per-tile ordering of local_store , global_load , compute, and local_load to imple-ment local prefetching. A later instruction reordering pass swaps global_load and local_store ,preserving dependencies but breaking the intended tile pipeline. 

Warp Control Bugs. Warp control bugs in tile-based compilers arise from incorrect synthesis or propagation of warp-level execution metadata, rather than from programmer-written warp logic. As a result, inconsistencies in warp-related metadata (e.g., mismatches between logical tile layouts and physical warp configurations) can invalidate warp-synchronous assumptions during codegen. Because warp-related metadata is synthesized and propagated across multiple compiler stages, no single transformation validates global consistency between tile-level layout assumptions and backend warp configurations. A representative example is reported in Triton [ 76 ], where the WSMaterialization (warp specialization) pass modifies the module-level warp configuration by updating the number of warps, but leaves the warpsPerCTA field unchanged. This partial update breaks the consistency between warp specialization metadata and the tile-level warp layout expected by subsequent lowering stages. Although the generated code remains structurally valid, the compiler operates under incorrect assumptions about warp grouping within a tile, leading to miscompiled warp-level execution. 

4.2 IR Construction and Transformation Bugs 

This category accounts for 16.28% of the observed bugs and captures violations of compiler-synthesized tile IR semantics that occur during IR construction and IR rewriting, prior to target-specific codegen (I3 in Table 1). In tile compilers, IRs do not merely encode control flow or data dependencies, but explicitly materialize tiling metadata such as per-tile buffers, memory layout descriptors, partial iteration coverage, and masked execution regions. These IR-level objects and invariants are automatically derived from tile shapes, scheduling parameters, and thread mappings, and are central to preserving the semantics of tile-structured execution. IR-level bugs arise when the compiler incorrectly constructs or transforms these tile-aware IRs, violating semantic invariants  

> , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2026. 10 Rathnasuriya and Song, et al.

that govern how logical tiles map to physical memory and execution resources. Such violations stem from inconsistent synthesis or preservation of implicit tile semantics, rather than from malformed IR or incorrect handling of explicit program constructs. As a result, these failures predominantly arise in tile compilers, whose domain-specific IRs critically depend on consistent construction and transformation of tiling metadata across compiler stages. Based on the stage at which synthesized IR semantics are violated, we identify two subcategories: (1) IR construction bugs 

and (2) IR transformation bugs .

IR Construction Bugs. IR construction bugs arise during front-end lowering, where high-level tile programs are translated into tile-aware IRs that explicitly represent per-tile buffers, memory layouts, and layout-to-buffer bindings. At this stage, the compiler must deterministically create and associate IR objects corresponding to shared-memory tiles and their layout metadata. In tile compilers, these IR objects are first-class and order-sensitive: even when the source program is unchanged, differences in how tile handles or layout mappings are constructed can alter the effective kernel semantics. IR construction bugs occur when the compiler introduces non-determinism or inconsistency in the creation or ordering of tile-level IR entities, leading to semantically unstable IRs. A representative example is reported in TileLang [ 68 ]. In this case, a tiled FlashAttention kernel repeatedly produces different IRs because shared-memory tile handles (e.g., dv_shared , K_shared ,

dk_shared ) are created in a non-deterministic order. As a result, the layout_map attribute binds layout specifications to different tile handles across compilations, defeating kernel caching and causing logically identical kernels to be treated as distinct. 

IR Transformation Bugs. IR transformation bugs arise during mid-end optimization passes that rewrite tile IRs, such as control-flow simplification, predicate rewriting, or loop restructuring. These passes often reuse transformation logic originally designed for uniform or affine iteration spaces, implicitly assuming full domain coverage and unconditional execution. In tile-based IRs, iteration spaces are explicitly structured into tiles with boundary conditions and masked regions. Transformation bugs occur when IR rewrites invalidate these tile-specific execution invariants, for example, by dropping boundary tiles, simplifying predicates under incorrect assumptions, or restructuring control flow in a way that excludes valid tile instances. Such violations may not trigger compilation errors, but instead silently reduce the effective iteration domain. An illustrative example is reported in Halide [ 23 ]. After an IR transformation, the optimized IR computes g(x) only for a subset of the intended domain, skipping x = 0 , despite the original tiled logic correctly covering the full loop extent. The optimizer rewrites control flow based on undefined-value assumptions, inadvertently eliminating boundary points introduced by tiling. 

4.3 Tile Mapping and Launch Bugs 

This category accounts for 6.31% of the observed bugs and captures failures in how tile-level computations are mapped to the underlying GPU execution geometry (I4 in Table 1). Unlike control-flow or IR-level bugs, tile mapping and launch bugs arise at the stage where logical tiles are concretized into physical execution parameters, including grid dimensions, block sizes, and thread–tile associations. Errors in this synthesis can lead to incorrect or invalid kernel launches, even when the source tile program is semantically valid. We classify tile mapping and launch bugs into two subcategories: (1) launch configuration bugs and (2) thread–block mapping bugs , depending on whether the failure originates from incorrect launch geometry inference or from erroneous mapping between logical tiles and physical threads. 

Launch Configuration Bugs. Launch configuration bugs arise when the compiler miscom-putes launch parameters such as grid size, block dimensions, or shared memory usage derived from tile-level abstractions. Tile compilers infer these parameters from input shapes, tile sizes, and tile grouping constraints. As a result, incorrect assumptions during launch synthesis (e.g.,  

> , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2026. Characterizing Real-World Bugs in Tile Programs for Automated Bug Detection 11

implicit divisibility, warp alignment, or resource availability) can produce invalid or incomplete execution. A representative example is reported in PyTorch’s Triton integration [ 56 ], where setting 

config.triton.max_tiles = 3 triggers a kernel launch failure. This failure arises because the compiler synthesizes a non-standard launch geometry for grouping logical tiles, introducing inter-nal launch parameters whose autogenerated identifiers conflict with a reserved namespace (e.g., a banned z-prefixed dimension). While common tile groupings (e.g., one or two tiles per group) satisfy backend constraints, increasing the tile group size exposes inconsistencies between tile grouping semantics and the inferred grid geometry. 

Thread-Block Mapping Bugs. Thread–block mapping bugs arise when the compiler emits incorrect logic for mapping logical tiles to physical grid and block indices. Tile compilers frequently decompose multi-dimensional iteration spaces (e.g., batch, head, or sequence dimensions) into tiles, and then flatten or distribute these tiles across the limited grid axes supported by GPUs. Errors in this mapping process can lead to invalid grid dimensions, overlapping execution, or incomplete coverage of the logical iteration space. An illustrative example is reported in PyTorch [ 57 ], where a kernel fails due to invalid grid dimensions when mapping batch and head tiles to grid axes. When tiling is enabled, the compiler must synthesize additional structure to map multiple logical tile dimensions onto physical grid axes. In this case, incorrect flattening and dimension assignment produce a grid configuration that violates backend constraints, causing the kernel to fail at launch. 

4.4 Memory Bugs 

This category accounts for 19.27% of all observed bugs and captures failures in translating compiler-synthesized tile memory semantics into correct low-level memory operations (I1 in Table 1). Unlike control-flow or mapping bugs, which govern execution and scheduling, tile memory semantics bugs arise when the compiler incorrectly derives how memory behavior is structured across tiles and tile execution stages. In tile-based compilers, memory layouts, buffer lifetimes, and synchronization boundaries are derived from tile configurations and scheduling decisions, rather than explicitly specified in the source program. Errors in these derivations can therefore lead to silent data corruption or incorrect results even when the source tile program is semantically correct. We classify tile memory semantics bugs into three subcategories: (1) indexing and stride bugs , (2) resource allocation bugs , and (3) ordering and caching bugs , based on which aspect of compiler-synthesized memory behavior is violated. 

Indexing and Stride Bugs. Indexing and stride bugs arise when the compiler incorrectly synthesizes address computations from logical tile indices. Tile programs typically express memory access in terms of tile-local indices, while the compiler is responsible for lowering these accesses into concrete global or shared memory addresses, including boundary masking and tail handling. Errors in this synthesis can cause incorrect memory accesses derived from tile-local index arithmetic, even though the source program does not explicitly perform invalid indexing. A representative example is reported in Triton [ 74 ], where an out-of-bounds read occurs due to incorrect index computation within a tile. The bug arises at runtime when threads attempt to read memory addresses derived from compiler-generated tile index arithmetic that fails to account for tile boundaries. 

Resource Allocation Bugs. Resource allocation bugs arise when the compiler incorrectly infers the lifetime or reuse of registers or shared-memory buffers across tile phases. Tile compilers aggressively optimize memory usage by overlapping tile computation stages, reusing registers, and minimizing shared-memory footprints. These optimizations rely on precise lifetime analysis across tile-parallel regions. When such analysis is incorrect, registers or buffers may be freed or reused prematurely, leading to incorrect computation. An illustrative example is reported in TileLang [ 70 ], where correctness breaks due to premature register deallocation during a tile-parallel copy operation. The code snippet in Figure 2 loads values from global memory into  

> , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2026. 12 Rathnasuriya and Song, et al.

shared memory using a T.Parallel construct. TileLang lowers this tile-parallel copy into a single instruction multiple threads (SIMT) copy instruction executed by a producer warpgroup. As part of its optimization pipeline, TileLang applies warpgroup_reg_dealloc to reduce register pressure by freeing registers associated with the producer warpgroup. However, in this case, the SIMT copy requires intermediate registers to stage values from global memory before writing them to shared memory (i.e., global → register → shared). The compiler incorrectly assumes that these registers are no longer needed and deallocates them prematurely. As a result, subsequent memory operations observe corrupted values in shared memory, leading to incorrect computation.                      

> 1#Load scale into shared memory
> 2for iin T. Parallel ( block_M ):
> 3Scale_C_shared [i] =scales_a [ by *block_M +i , k] *scales_b [bx , k]
> Fig. 2. An instance of a resource allocation bug triggered by premature warpgroup register deallocation in TileLang [70].

Ordering and Caching Bugs. Ordering and caching bugs arise when the compiler mismanages tile-derived ordering or reuse assumptions during codegen. Tile compilers often emit synchroniza-tion primitives and caching decisions implicitly as part of pipelined tile schedules, rather than relying on fixed procedural barriers. Errors in this process can lead to stale data reads, missing memory fences, or reuse of incorrect cached results. A representative example is reported in TileLang [ 69 ], where incorrect hashing of tile configurations causes the compiler to reuse cached kernels with incompatible memory ordering assumptions. In this case, the specialization key fails to capture relevant tile scheduling or synchronization parameters, leading to reuse of a kernel with insufficient ordering guarantees. 

4.5 Type and Operator Bugs 

This category accounts for 48.84% of all observed bugs and captures failures in preserving numeric and operator semantics during tile-level lowering and specialization (I5 in Table 1). Unlike control-flow or memory bugs, these issues arise when the compiler synthesizes arithmetic behavior—such as value propagation, type promotion, and operator logic—based on tile shapes, masks, and fusion strategies, rather than relying on explicit source-level semantics. As a result, subtle mismatches can silently corrupt results without triggering runtime errors. We classify type and operator bugs into three subcategories: (1) special-value handling bugs , (2) data-type semantics bugs , and (3) operator implementation bugs .

Special-Value Handling Bugs. Special-value handling bugs occur when the compiler mishandles floating-point edge cases such as NaN propagation, denormal values, or signed zeros during tile-level execution. In tile compilers, these semantics often depend on synthesized masking, boundary handling, and layout assumptions rather than explicit control constructs. As a result, incorrect interactions between tile sizes and memory layouts can introduce NaNs even when the high-level computation is well-defined. A representative example is reported in NVIDIA Warp [ 49 ], where NaN values are produced when the tile size does not align with the matrix dimensions expected by tile_load . This failure arises from a mismatch between tile-level boundary assumptions and the inferred memory layout used during loading, causing some tile lanes to read from memory locations that are never initialized or properly masked. 

Data-Type Semantics Bugs. Data-type semantics bugs arise when incorrect type propagation or promotion breaks the mathematical structure of tile-level layout and index transformations. Tile compilers frequently split, fuse, and remap iteration axes, constructing algebraic mappings between logical coordinates and physical memory locations. When type constraints are violated in                                                          

> , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2026. Characterizing Real-World Bugs in Tile Programs for Automated Bug Detection 13
> 1@triton . jit
> 2def matmul_argmax_kernel (A , B , Out , BLOCK_M : tl . constexpr , BLOCK_N : tl . constexpr , BLOCK_K : tl . constexpr ):
> 3offs_m =tl . arange (0 , BLOCK_M )
> 4offs_n =tl . arange (0 , BLOCK_N )
> 5offs_k =tl . arange (0 , BLOCK_K )
> 6a=tl . load (A +offs_m [: , None ] *BLOCK_K +offs_k [ None , :])
> 7b=tl . load (B +offs_n [: , None ] *BLOCK_K +offs_k [ None , :])
> 8dist =tl . dot (a , tl . trans (b))
> 9idx =tl . argmax ( dist , axis =1)
> 10 tl . store ( Out +offs_m , idx )

Fig. 3. A tile-level argmax reduction triggering an operator-implementation bug in Triton [75]. 

this process, the resulting mappings may become ill-defined even if the computation itself is type-correct. An illustrative case is reported in Apache TVM [ 5 ], where failures in transform_layout ,

transform_block_layout , and IndexMap::NonSurjectiveInverse are triggered by data-type mismatches. These transformations exist specifically to support tiled layout algebra, such as remapping multi-dimensional indices (e.g., (𝑛, 𝑦, 𝑥 ) → 𝑛 × 64 + 𝑦 × 8 + 𝑥 ). A mismatched data type breaks the assumptions underlying these index maps, causing compilation failures. 

Operator Implementation Bugs. Operator implementation bugs arise when the compiler synthesizes incorrect logic for operators under tiling, masking, or fusion. In tile-based compilers, high-level operators are frequently lowered into tile-local algorithms whose control flow, reduction structure, and boundary handling are derived from tile shapes and execution strategies. Errors in this synthesis can violate operator semantics even when the source operator itself is well-defined. A representative example is reported in Triton [ 75 ], where the compiler emits incorrect logic for a tile-level argmax reduction following a matrix multiplication. Figure 3 shows a kernel that computes a tile-local distance matrix using tl.dot and then applies tl.argmax along a reduction axis. While the high-level composition of dot and argmax is semantically valid, the compiler internally synthesizes a reduction algorithm whose correctness depends on precise handling of tile boundaries and reduction axes. In this case, incorrect assumptions in the compiler’s reduction implementation lead to invalid lowering of the argmax operator under tiling, causing compilation failures or incorrect results. 

4.6 Device-Specific Bugs 

This category accounts for 3.99% of the observed bugs and captures failures caused by incompatibil-ities between compiler-generated tile kernels and target GPU hardware constraints (I1 in Table 1). In these cases, the tile program and its transformations are semantically valid, but the lowered code violates device-specific requirements related to execution units or resource layouts. Such bugs typically surface only at runtime and stem from implicit assumptions about hardware capabilities during tile lowering. One example is reported in TileLang [ 67 ], where a kernel fails due to incompatible tile dimensions for matrix-multiply-accumulate (MMA) operations. The tile program specifies a logical tile size that cannot be evenly partitioned into the MMA atom layout supported by the target GPU. While the tile-level computation is well-defined, the compiler assumes that the tile can be decomposed into hardware MMA fragments during lowering. This assumption breaks when the tile dimensions do not align with the device’s MMA execution units, resulting in invalid codegen. 

5 Mapping Symptoms to Root Causes 

This section summarizes methods for identifying the root causes of codegen bugs based on their symptoms. Our study identifies three symptom types: crashes, correctness issues, and performance  

> , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2026. 14 Rathnasuriya and Song, et al.

bottlenecks, each with specific subcategories as illustrated in Table 3. This classification provides a structured lens for tracing how symptoms map to distinct root causes, enabling systematic diagnosis of codegen bugs. 

Table 3. Distribution of bug symptoms across causes. Each cause (RC1–RC6) represents a major bug category: RC1 for control-flow and scheduling bugs, RC2 for IR construction and transformation bugs, RC3 for tile mapping and launch bugs, RC4 for memory bugs, RC5 for type and operator bugs, and RC6 for device-specific bugs.                         

> Symptoms Occurrence RC1 RC2 RC3 RC4 RC5 RC6 Crash
> Front-end Errors 89 (29.57%) 175 (58.14%) 12 (6.86%) 37 (21.14%) 8(4.57%) 32 (18.29%)
> 76 (43.43%)
> 10 (5.71%) Mid-end Errors 20 (6.64%) Back-end Errors 34 (11.30%) In-Kernel Runtime Errors 32 (10.63%)
> Correctness Issues
> Silent wrong result 23 (7.64%) 109 (36.21%) 4(3.67%) 10 (9.17%) 9(8.26%) 19 (17.43%)
> 67 (61.47%) -Run-to-run variance 2 (0.66%) Cross-implementation mismatch 6 (1.99%) Contract violation 19 (6.31%) Wrong buffer/region 4 (1.33%) Numeric Pathology 55 (18.27%)
> Performance Bottlenecks
> Execution Hang 8 (2.66%) 17 (5.65%) -2(11.76%) 2(11.76%)
> 7(41.18%) 4(23.53%)
> 2(11.76%) Memory Inefficiency 4 (1.33%) Type Inefficiency 5 (1.66%)

Crashes occur when compilation or kernel execution terminates abnormally due to exceptions, segmentation faults, or device-side errors. Although multiple root causes may contribute to a crash, the associated error messages often provide meaningful signals about the responsible transformation phase. Front-end crashes typically arise from type and operator bugs or IR construction bugs, where unsupported operations, incomplete type inference, or invalid IRs trigger early failures, e.g., “Cannot infer type of ‘tl.where’ ” or “Mismatched operand types for fusion” . In contrast, mid-end and back-end crashes are more commonly induced by control-flow, scheduling, or tile mapping bugs, where errors emerge during tiling, vectorization, or lowering—e.g., “Expected mask of shape (X, Y), got (X, 1)” or “Shared memory allocation exceeds device limits” . Runtime crashes, such as CUDA launch failures or invalid memory accesses, frequently indicate incorrect indexing, launch configuration bugs, or violations of hardware constraints. While overlapping causes can obscure attribution, error signatures often localize the bugs to a specific phase in the compiler pipeline (I9 in Table 1). Correctness violations arise when the program completes execution without an error but produces incorrect results such as silent numerical inaccuracies, shape mismatches, or violated mathematical contracts. Although these bugs stem from diverse root causes, the manifestation is typically exposed via oracle-based testing: for example, comparing the output of a Triton kernel against a trusted PyTorch baseline, sweeping input data types (e.g., float16 vs. float32 ) for the same computation, or running the same logic across varying tile shapes and launch configurations. Type and operator bugs often lead to precision loss or accumulation drift that only appears under certain dtypes or fusion patterns. Memory bugs such as incorrect indexing or buffer aliasing are revealed when the output shape or value pattern diverges under different tensor layouts. Control-flow and scheduling bugs can manifest as off-by-one errors or masked tile regions, particularly under partial-tile cases, while tile mapping bugs may result in duplicated or missing output when the same input is executed with different grid or block shapes. Although the output may appear superficially correct, detailed comparison against reference implementations or metamorphic variants typically reveals the semantic discrepancy (I10 in Table 1). Performance bottlenecks arise when a kernel compiles and returns correct results, but exhibits poor runtime characteristics such as prolonged execution time, high memory footprint, or under-utilized hardware resources. These symptoms are exposed through profiling tools (e.g., Nsight  

> , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2026. Characterizing Real-World Bugs in Tile Programs for Automated Bug Detection 15

Compute, PyTorch timers) and manifest as execution stalls, shared memory overuse, or low arith-metic intensity. Although multiple root causes may contribute, the most common causes are memory bugs such as uncoalesced loads, excessive shared memory allocation, or omitted synchro-nization and type and operator bugs, where poor type specialization (e.g., unnecessary upcasting or incorrect fusion of precision modes) leads to degraded compute throughput. For instance, failing to apply warp-level intrinsics correctly under predication may serialize execution, while unguarded vectorization across partial tiles can trigger performance bottlenecks. Unlike correctness issues, performance bugs do not violate semantics, but instead reveal inefficiencies in tile-to-hardware mapping or operator lowering, and are often shape-dependent or architecture-sensitive (I11 in Table 1). 

6 Bug Detection Strategies 

Based on findings in Table 1, our study identifies two key components for detecting codegen bugs: 

test input generation and test oracles . Input generation aims to trigger bugs by exploring both 

predefined general inputs and feedback-driven inputs . Once inputs are generated, test oracles identify bugs using comparison-based methods (I6 in Table 1). 

6.1 Test Input Generation 

Our findings indicate that developers frequently rely on random modifications of predefined inputs to expose codegen bugs. Such manual efforts are limited in coverage and reproducibility. Developers start with predefined inputs and apply random perturbations, such as altering precision, to generate new inputs. This ad hoc approach can be systematically automated using fuzzing techniques, which offer a structured means of input variation to improve bug detection (F6 and I6 in Table 1). 

6.1.1 Predefined General Inputs. These inputs represent principled variations over common tile program parameters. Tensor shapes as inputs are crafted to explore edge cases such as (i) small sizes and singleton dimensions (e.g., 1D or 1-element tensors), (ii) boundary sizes near tile multiples (e.g., 31/32/33 or 63/64/65), which reveal loop mispredication and mask bugs, and (iii) large or irregular shapes (e.g., 65,537 or prime sizes like 17, 29), which stress indexing logic, grid bounds, and resource allocation. Memory layouts as inputs are non-contiguous or transposed tensors, channel-last formats, and offsetted views are used to uncover stride miscalculations and misaligned memory accesses. 

Tile and launch parameters as inputs systematically vary tile size, number of warps, vector width, and unroll factors to stress synchronization logic, shared memory allocation, and control-flow generation. Data types and values like mixed-precision types (e.g., float16, bfloat16, int8), boolean masks, and extreme values (e.g., NaNs, inf, signed zeros) help expose type handling and IEEE-754 compliance issues. 

6.1.2 Feedback -Driven Customized Inputs. These inputs leverage mutation techniques to system-atically generate inputs to trigger codegen bugs. Such techniques include: shape dimensions are incremented, padded, or transposed; data types are altered or upcast; value ranges are modified to test numerical stability and overflow; or layout permutations are introduced to break hidden as-sumptions. This technique simulates how developers explore bugs iteratively, but can be automated using mutation engines or fuzzing. In particular, greybox fuzzing [ 90 ] enables mutation guided by compiler diagnostics or runtime divergence, allowing fine-grained exploration of bug-inducing input neighborhoods. 

6.2 Test Oracles 

Test oracles are essential for verifying the correctness of results in GPU programs. Our study finds that correctness is initially confirmed by comparing tile program results with outputs from  

> , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2026. 16 Rathnasuriya and Song, et al.

corresponding PyTorch programs using the same predefined inputs. When discrepancies arise, customized inputs or manifestation strategies can be applied to further investigate codegen bugs (F7 and I7 in Table 1). Our study reveals that developers primarily validate codegen correctness through ad hoc comparisons, such as running alternative kernel configurations or reference implementations. We systematize these practices into a unified test oracle framework that systematically maps bug manifestations to root causes, as summarized in Table 4. Control-flow and scheduling bugs are identified via schedule invariance and padding equivalence 

tests. Kernels are executed with different warp or unroll parameters that should preserve semantics; mismatches reveal missing barriers or incorrect predication. Canary-tail checks insert sentinel values after tile boundaries to detect out-of-bounds writes. IR construction and transformation bugs are exposed through differential testing , where kernels are compiled with alternative pass combinations or optimization levels. IR assertions (e.g., domi-nance, type correctness, predicate coverage) detect invalid rewrites or inconsistent pass behavior. Tile mapping and launch bugs are diagnosed via launch equivalence —executing logically identical kernels under different grid/block factorizations and comparing outputs. Single-writer bijection 

checks confirm every index is written exactly once. Padding-crop consistency helps distinguish tile-mapping errors from control-flow faults. Memory bugs are detected using stride and alignment differentials , comparing outputs between contiguous versus strided views or aligned versus misaligned offsets. Canary-region checks detect buffer overflows, while repeated executions surface nondeterminism from races or missing barriers. Type and operator bugs are revealed through precision round-trip tests and special-value prop-agation checks. Operators are validated across data types and accumulation modes, ensuring consistency within tolerance. NaNs and Infs are tested for IEEE-754 compliance, and algebraic invariants (e.g., monotonicity, conjugation) confirm semantic correctness. Device-specific bugs are exposed via cross-architecture differential testing , executing the same kernel across GPUs or driver versions. Divergences indicate backend mismatches or code-emission bugs. Feature-toggle tests (e.g., fast-math) confirm optional hardware paths do not alter semantics. 

7 Fixing Tile-Program Codegen Bugs 

Our analysis identifies common strategies developers use to manually address codegen bugs. For each root cause, we examined common fixes based on commit histories, comments, and bug report descriptions, and the resulting strategies are developer-facing guidelines rather than concrete or mechanizable fix recipes. Applying any fixing strategy in practice requires stage-specific knowledge of the target compiler’s IRs, transformation passes, and backend constraints.Table 5 summarizes these fixing strategies. 

Fixing Control Flow and Scheduling Bugs: Developers corrected loop guards, branch predi-cates, and instruction scheduling to restore semantic alignment at tile boundaries. Fixes included adjusting conditional expressions such as if guards or loop bounds, inserting synchronization mechanisms, and tuning warp-level parallelism to avoid divergence and maintain consistency. 

Fixing IR Construction and Transformation Bugs: Fixes involved patching the IR generation and lowering stages, including correcting invalid PTX/LLVM constructs, repairing operator rewrites, and enforcing semantic-preserving transformations. In several cases, transformation passes were updated to maintain type correctness, dominance relations, and predicate coverage. 

Fixing Tile Mapping and Launch Bugs: Repairs targeted launch configuration mismatches, tile size inconsistencies, and invalid thread–block mappings. Strategies included altering tile shapes, ad-justing block sizes, and refining mapping logic to preserve complete iteration coverage, particularly under partial-tile and prime dimension shapes. 

> , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2026.

Characterizing Real-World Bugs in Tile Programs for Automated Bug Detection 17 

Table 4. Manifestation strategies and assertions for detecting codegen bugs. Each cause (RC1–RC6) represents a major bug category: RC1 for control-flow and scheduling bugs, RC2 for IR construction and transformation bugs, RC3 for tile mapping and launch bugs, RC4 for memory bugs, RC5 for type and operator bugs, and RC6 for device-specific bugs. 

Technique Oracle Instantiation Manifestation Strategy Assertion Root Cause(s) 

Differential Testing Schedule variation Execute the same kernel under different warp, unroll, or scheduling parameters Outputs must match; mismatches reveal missing barriers or incorrect predication RC1 Pass-pipeline variation Compile with alternative optimization or transformation pass combinations Outputs and IR structure remain consistent; deviations indicate invalid transformations RC2 Cross -device / feature tog-gle Run identical kernels across architectures or math modes (e.g., TF32, fast-math) Results match within tolerance; divergences expose backend or device-specific bugs RC6 Metamorphic Testing Padding–cropping Pad inputs to tile-aligned sizes and crop outputs to original shape Cropped outputs must match baseline; de-tects partial-tile or masking errors RC1, RC3 Launch configuration varia-tion Change grid/block tilings with equivalent iteration space Outputs must match; mismatches reveal launch or mapping bugs RC3 Accumulator width sweep Vary compute and accumulation data types for the same operation Outputs match within tolerance; deviations expose type promotion or casting bugs RC5 Invariant or Property-Based Testing No-op IR transformations Apply semantics-preserving transforma-tions IR structure and outputs must remain iden-tical; divergence signals invalid rewrite RC2 Algebraic identity checks Validate mathematical properties (e.g., 

𝑓 (− 𝑥 ) = −𝑓 (𝑥 ))Violations reveal incorrect operator logic or fused rewrite errors RC5 Determinism check Re-run kernel with same inputs and con-figurations Output hashes must match; nondetermin-ism signals memory races or unguarded state RC4 Canary / Injection-Based Testing Tail canary overwrite Append fixed sentinel bytes after valid memory Canaries must remain unchanged; detects out-of-bounds writes at tile edges RC1, RC4 Guard-region sentinels Surround allocated buffers with known patterns All sentinels preserved; flags memory over-flow or illegal aliasing RC4 Unique ID writes Emit logical indices and check output bi-jection Every index must appear exactly once; re-veals launch or mapping bugs RC3 

Table 5. Summary of fixing strategies 

Fixing Strategy Total 

Branch and looping handling 12 Device backend specialization 3Indexing and bounds repair 27 Instruction ordering & scheduling fixes 7IR lowering and mapping repairs 39 Kernel launch and tile tuning 6Memory allocation and capacity repairs 28 Operator implementation and vectorization 87 Thread/block/tile handling 22 Type and numerical support 70 

Fixing Memory Bugs: Memory-related fixes introduced bounds checks, corrected indexing logic, and ensured legal memory allocation. Developers increased shared memory limits, fixed alignment issues, and guarded against out-of-bounds access. In some cases, aliasing-related bugs were resolved by updating key-generation or buffer reuse logic. 

Fixing Type and Operator Bugs: This was the most frequent fix category. Developers addressed incorrect or missing intrinsics, unstable floating-point expressions, and non-compliant special-value handling (e.g., NaN, Inf). Fixes included data type conversions (e.g., from float64 to float32), rounding mode adjustments, and algebraic operator rewrites to match hardware semantics. 

Fixing Device-Specific Bugs: Fixes addressed backend mismatches by adding architecture-specific specializations (e.g., PTX versions, vector width constraints) and inserting device capability checks. Some patches adjusted register usage, alignment constraints, or shared memory allocation to meet instruction set architecture (ISA) requirements across GPU generations. 

, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2026. 18 Rathnasuriya and Song, et al. 

Across all categories, most fixes required modifying the compiler’s codegen logic or transforma-tion passes, underscoring the tight coupling between tile-level abstractions and hardware-aware backend design. Fixes for memory and type bugs were often more localized, while control and IR-related fixes spanned multiple stages of the compiler pipeline. 

8 Threats to Validity 

Our findings are derived from a manual analysis of 301 real-world codegen bug reports, filtered to ensure relevance, correctness, and fix confirmation. While our methodology included independent reviews and joint resolution of disagreements, several threats remain. 

External validity. Tile programming is a relatively new framework, and its ecosystem is still maturing. The number of publicly available repositories and bug reports is limited compared to established GPU ecosystems like CUDA or DL frameworks. As a result, our dataset may not fully represent the complete spectrum of bugs that will emerge as adoption grows. Additionally, the lack of prior studies on tile-specific codegen bugs constrains comparative generalizability. 

Selection bias . Our bug corpus was collected from official and community-tracked tile pro-gramming projects, relying on publicly available issues and confirmed fixes. This excludes silent failures or unreported bugs in private codebases. While we enforced strict criteria for bug validity (e.g., closed status and linked patches), some edge cases may have been missed due to incomplete descriptions or ambiguous metadata. 

Construct validity. Root cause classification was guided by prior work on CUDA and DL bug taxonomies but adapted to tile frameworks’ unique programming model. Though reviewed by multiple authors, categorization remains subject to interpretation, especially in cases where abstraction layers obscure the exact failure mechanism. 

Scope limitations . Our goal was not to exhaustively characterize all tile codegen bugs but to surface representative patterns of bugs, their causes, and fixes. Findings are qualitative and exploratory, offering a foundation for future tool development and empirical studies. 

9 Related Work 

Prior research has extensively investigated bugs in GPU programs, particularly in handwritten CUDA kernels and low-level compiler backends [ 8, 9 , 15 , 25 , 26 , 28 – 30 , 32 , 36 , 58 , 62 , 84 ]. These studies primarily focus on developer-introduced memory errors, synchronization faults, and nu-merical inconsistencies. Tools such as GPUVerify [ 8 ] and GKLEE [ 32 ] perform static verification, while CUDA-memcheck and racecheck instrument runtime execution to detect out-of-bounds accesses and shared-memory races [ 17 ]. Simulee and GRace [ 84 ] combine guided input generation with dynamic analysis to uncover concurrency issues, and CUDAsmith [ 26 ] applies differential testing to detect backend miscompilations. Separate efforts have explored numerical correctness in GPU code [ 28 –30 ], including floating-point errors introduced by limited precision and backend-specific transformations. A parallel line of GPU compiler testing work targets the correctness of shader and kernel compiler toolchains using random program generation and metamorphic or differential testing, including CLsmith for OpenCL [ 37 ], GLFuzz [ 14 ] and ShaDiv [ 86 ] for OpenGL Shading Language (GLSL), and more recently DarthShader [ 7] and WGSLsmith [ 41 ] for WebGPU. Tile-language compilers ultimately emit lower-level code that passes through downstream GPU compiler toolchains and IRs such as NVCC, PTX, and SPIR-V, so a tile codegen bug may in principle manifest as a downstream failure observable by GPU compiler fuzzers. GPU compiler fuzzers are not designed to control tile-level input structure such as tile sizes, layouts, schedule parameters, or shape-dependent lowering decisions, and downstream symptoms typically do not localize the root cause back to tile-level generation decisions.  

> , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2026. Characterizing Real-World Bugs in Tile Programs for Automated Bug Detection 19

Bug studies in DL frameworks such as TensorFlow and PyTorch focus on operator-level issues including incorrect tensor shapes, parameter mismatches, and backend divergences [ 10 , 20 , 27 ,54 , 60 , 80 , 85 , 92 ]. Tools like TenFuzz [ 10 ] mutate unit tests to trigger shape or type errors, while CRADLE [ 54 ] and Audee [ 20 ] perform differential testing across frameworks or backend con-figurations. DL framework testing work emphasizes operator integration and cross-backend or cross-framework inconsistency, and DL framework testing work can reach tile compilation through normal operator dispatch or model compilation, particularly as DL backends increasingly rely on tile-based codegen through Triton-based compilation and operator libraries. DL framework testing work is not designed to systematically control tile-level parameters such as tile shapes, mask coverage at partial-tile boundaries, warp counts, or shared-memory staging. When a tile codegen bug is triggered by a DL-level test, the failure is typically observed only as an operator-level output discrepancy or backend inconsistency, while the actionable root cause remains in the tile generation stage that our taxonomy targets. Compiler-focused research in LLVM, MLIR, and GCC investigates miscompilations, undefined behavior, and transformation bugs [ 16 , 38 – 40 , 65 , 81 , 82 , 87 ]. Csmith stress tests backend cor-rectness using random program generation, while MLIRSmith and DESIL examine lowering path inconsistencies and undefined semantics in structured IRs. However, these tools are designed for imperative control-flow programs and lack mechanisms for tiling, predication, or hardware-specific indexing. Existing methodologies are not directly applicable to tile-based codegen. Tile programming frameworks rely on compiler-driven synthesis of control flow, tiling, and memory layout, introduc-ing transformation-induced bugs absent in handwritten kernels. Prior work focuses on performance optimization and backend fusion [ 6 , 21 , 89 , 93 , 94 ] rather than bug diagnosis or symptom analysis. To our knowledge, there has been no systematic study of real-world bugs in tile-based codegen. Existing work primarily focuses on large language model–based approaches to generate kernel code but does not address the correctness and reliability of tile-based compilation pipelines [ 33 , 52 ]. Our work fills this gap by analyzing 301 bug reports, constructing a root-cause taxonomy, and identifying how tile-specific abstractions influence bug manifestation, detection, and repair. We further observe that no existing testing tools are designed for tile codegen, leaving a critical gap in compiler validation. The findings in this paper would serve as a foundation for future community-driven development of dedicated testing and debugging infrastructure for tile compiler pipelines. 

10 Conclusion 

In this work, we present the first empirical study of codegen bugs in tile-based programming frameworks, uncovering their root causes, manifestation patterns, and detection challenges. Our analysis spans 301 real-world bugs and reveals that many bugs arise from the interaction between high-level abstractions and low-level hardware constraints, leading to subtle bugs in control-flow, memory, tiling, and type handling. To facilitate detection, we summarize bug detection strategies leveraging test input generation and test oracles. We believe this study lays a foundation for future research on verification, testing, and tooling for next-generation accelerator compilers. 

Data Availability 

Our artifacts are available at [ 2 ], containing datasets, code to reproduce the results in this paper. Our project website is available at [3]. 

> , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2026.

20 Rathnasuriya and Song, et al. 

Acknowledgments 

This work was supported in part by the Fundamental and Interdisciplinary Disciplines Breakthrough Plan of the Ministry of Education of China (No. JYB2025XDXM118), the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant Nos. U25A6023 and 92464301, and an Amazon Trust AI Research Award. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the funding agencies. 

References 

[1] S. M. Mojahidul Ahsan, Tamzidul Hoque, Md Sakib Hasan, Mrittika Chowdhury, and Anurag Dhungel. 2025. Hardware accelerators for artificial intelligence. In AI-Enabled Electronic Circuit and System Design: From Ideation to Utilization. Springer. [2] AIKernelResearch. 2025. TileBug: project repository. https://github.com/AIKernelResearch/TileCodegenBugStudy. github.io [3] AIKernelResearch. 2025. TileCodegenBug: project website. https://aikernelresearch.github.io/TileCodegenBugStudy. github.io/ [4] Apache. 2025. apache/TVM: open deep learning compiler stack for CPU, GPU and specialized accelerators. https: //github.com/apache/tvm [5] Apache Authors. 2023. [Bug][MetaSchedule] failed to run apply_trace generated by print(sch.trace) for int8 conv2d workload #14112. https://github.com/apache/tvm/issues/14112 [6] Maximilian Beck, Korbinian Pöppel, Phillip Lippe, and Sepp Hochreiter. 2025. Tiled flash linear attention: more efficient linear RNN and xLSTM kernels. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.14376 (2025). [7] Lukas Bernhard, Nico Schiller, Moritz Schloegel, Nils Bars, and Thorsten Holz. 2024. DarthShader: fuzzing We-bGPU shader translators & compilers. In Proceedings of the 2024 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security (CCS). [8] Adam Betts, Nathan Chong, Alastair Donaldson, Shaz Qadeer, and Paul Thomson. 2012. GPUVerify: a verifier for GPU kernels. In Proceedings of the 27th ACM International Conference on Object Oriented Programming, Systems, Languages, and Applications (OOPSLA). [9] Michael Boyer, Kevin Skadron, and Westley Weimer. 2008. Automated dynamic analysis of CUDA programs. In Proceedings of the Third Workshop on Software Tools for MultiCore Systems (STMCS). [10] Junjie Chen, Yihua Liang, Qingchao Shen, Jiajun Jiang, and Shuochuan Li. 2023. Toward Understanding Deep Learning Framework Bugs. ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology (TOSEM) (2023). [11] Tianqi Chen, Thierry Moreau, Ziheng Jiang, Lianmin Zheng, Eddie Yan, Meghan Cowan, Haichen Shen, Leyuan Wang, Yuwei Hu, Luis Ceze, Carlos Guestrin, and Arvind Krishnamurthy. 2018. TVM: an automated end-to-end optimizing compiler for deep learning. In Proceedings of the 13th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI). [12] Edoardo Cittadini, Mauro Marinoni, and Giorgio Buttazzo. 2025. A hardware accelerator to support deep learning processor units in real-time image processing. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence (2025). [13] Anthony Di Franco, Hui Guo, and Cindy Rubio-González. 2017. A comprehensive study of real-world numerical bug characteristics. In Proceedings of the 32nd IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE). [14] Alastair F. Donaldson, Hugues Evrard, Andrei Lascu, and Paul Thomson. 2017. Automated testing of graphics shader compilers. Proceedings of the ACM on Programming Languages (PACMPL), OOPSLA (2017). [15] Ariel Eizenberg, Yuanfeng Peng, Toma Pigli, William Mansky, and Joseph Devietti. 2017. BARRACUDA: binary-level analysis of runtime races in CUDA programs. In Proceedings of the 38th ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation (PLDI). [16] Karine Even-Mendoza, Arindam Sharma, Alastair F. Donaldson, and Cristian Cadar. 2023. GrayC: greybox fuzzing of compilers and analysers for C. In Proceedings of the 32nd ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis (ISSTA). [17] Geoff Gerfin and Vyas Venkataraman. 2012. Debugging experience with CUDA-GDB and CUDA-Memcheck. In GPU Technology Conference (GTC). [18] GitHub, Inc. 2008. GitHub. https://github.com [19] Ganesh Gopalakrishnan, Ignacio Laguna, Ang Li, Pavel Panchekha, Cindy Rubio-González, and Zachary Tatlock. 2021. Guarding numerics amidst rising heterogeneity. In Proceedings of the 5th IEEE/ACM International Workshop on Software Correctness for HPC Applications (Correctness). , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2026. Characterizing Real-World Bugs in Tile Programs for Automated Bug Detection 21 

[20] Qianyu Guo, Xiaofei Xie, Yi Li, Xiaoyu Zhang, Yang Liu, Xiaohong Li, and Chao Shen. 2020. Audee: Automated Testing for Deep Learning Frameworks. In Proceedings of the 35th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE). [21] Ahan Gupta, Yueming Yuan, Devansh Jain, Yuhao Ge, David Aponte, Yanqi Zhou, and Charith Mendis. 2025. SPLAT: a framework for optimised GPU code-generation for SParse reguLar ATtention. Proceedings of the ACM on Programming Languages (PACMPL), OOPSLA (2025). [22] Halide. 2025. halide/Halide: a language for fast, portable data-parallel computation. https://github.com/halide/Halide [23] Halide Authors. 2025. undef prunes select branch incorrectly #8667. https://github.com/halide/Halide/issues/8667 [24] Md Johirul Islam, Giang Nguyen, Rangeet Pan, and Hridesh Rajan. 2019. A comprehensive study on deep learning bug characteristics. In Proceedings of the 27th ACM Joint Meeting on European Software Engineering Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering (ESEC/FSE). [25] Mohammad Majharul Islam and Abdullah Muzahid. 2018. Bugaroo: exposing memory model bugs in many-core systems. In Proceedings of the 29th IEEE International Symposium on Software Reliability Engineering (ISSRE). [26] Bo Jiang, Xiaoyan Wang, Wing Kwong Chan, T. H. Tse, Na Li, Yongfeng Yin, and Zhenyu Zhang. 2020. CUDA-smith: a fuzzer for CUDA compilers. In Proceedings of the 44th IEEE Annual Computers, Software, and Applications Conference (COMPSAC). [27] Eliska Kloberdanz, Kyle G. Kloberdanz, and Wei Le. 2022. DeepStability: a study of unstable numerical methods and their solutions in deep learning. In Proceedings of the 44th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE). [28] Ignacio Laguna. 2019. FPChecker: detecting floating-point exceptions in GPU applications. In Proceedings of the 34th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE). [29] Ignacio Laguna and Ganesh Gopalakrishnan. 2022. Finding inputs that trigger floating-point exceptions in GPUs via Bayesian optimization. In Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM International Conference for High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis (SC). [30] Ignacio Laguna, Xinyi Li, and Ganesh Gopalakrishnan. 2022. BinFPE: accurate floating-point exception detection for GPU applications. In Proceedings of the 11th ACM SIGPLAN International Workshop on the State of the Art in Program Analysis (SOAP). [31] Chris Lattner. 2008. LLVM and Clang: next generation compiler technology. In Proceedings of the BSD Conference (BSDCan). [32] Guodong Li, Peng Li, Geof Sawaya, Ganesh Gopalakrishnan, Indradeep Ghosh, and Sreeranga P. Rajan. 2012. GKLEE: concolic verification and test generation for GPUs. In Proceedings of the 17th ACM SIGPLAN Symposium on Principles and Practice of Parallel Programming (PPoPP). [33] Jianling Li, Shangzhan Li, Zhenye Gao, Qi Shi, Yuxuan Li, Zefan Wang, Jiacheng Huang, Haojie Wang, Jianrong Wang, Xu Han, Zhiyuan Liu, and Maosong Sun. 2025. TritonBench: benchmarking large language model capabilities for generating Triton operators. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL Findings). [34] Jiashi Li and Shengyu Liu. 2025. FlashMLA: efficient multi-head latent attention kernels. https://github.com/deepseek-ai/FlashMLA [35] Wentao Li, Jianhua Sun, and Hao Chen. 2019. Detecting undefined behaviors in CUDA C. IEEE Access (2019). [36] Xinyi Li, Ignacio Laguna, Bo Fang, Katarzyna Swirydowicz, Ang Li, and Ganesh Gopalakrishnan. 2023. Design and evaluation of GPU-FPX: a low-overhead tool for floating-point exception detection in NVIDIA GPUs. In Proceedings of the 32nd ACM International Symposium on High-Performance Parallel and Distributed Computing (HPDC). [37] Christopher Lidbury, Andrei Lascu, Nathan Chong, and Alastair F. Donaldson. 2015. Many-core compiler fuzzing. In Proceedings of the 36th ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation (PLDI) .[38] Ben Limpanukorn, Jiyuan Wang, Hong Jin Kang, Eric Zitong Zhou, and Miryung Kim. 2025. Fuzzing MLIR com-pilers with custom mutation synthesis. In Proceedings of the 47th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE). [39] Vsevolod Livinskii, Dmitry Babokin, and John Regehr. 2020. Random testing for C and C++ compilers with YARPGen. Proceedings of the ACM on Programming Languages (PACMPL), OOPSLA (2020). [40] Haoyang Ma. 2023. A survey of modern compiler fuzzing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.06884 (2023). [41] Hasan Mohsin. 2022. WGSLsmith: a random generator of WebGPU shader programs. Master’s thesis, Imperial College London. [42] John Nickolls. 2007. GPU parallel computing architecture and CUDA programming model. In Proceedings of the 19th IEEE Hot Chips Symposium (HCS). [43] NVIDIA. 2021. cuBLAS: basic linear algebra on NVIDIA GPUs. https://developer.nvidia.com/cublas [44] NVIDIA. 2021. NVIDIA cuDNN. https://developer.nvidia.com/cudnn [45] NVIDIA. 2025. NVIDIA graphics cards. https://www.nvidia.com/en-us/geforce/graphics-cards/ , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2026. 22 Rathnasuriya and Song, et al. 

[46] NVIDIA. 2025. NVIDIA/cuda-tile: an MLIR-based intermediate representation for tile-based CUDA kernel optimization. https://github.com/NVIDIA/cuda-tile [47] NVIDIA. 2025. NVIDIA/warp: a Python framework for accelerated simulation, data generation and spatial computing. https://github.com/NVIDIA/warp [48] NVIDIA. 2025. Triton Inference Server. https://github.com/triton-inference-server/server [49] NVIDIA Authors. 2025. [BUG] tile operations produce unexpected results #688. https://github.com/NVIDIA/warp/ issues/688 [50] OpenAI. 2021. Introducing Triton: open-source GPU programming for neural networks. https://openai.com/index/ triton/ [51] OpenXLA. 2025. openxla/XLA: a machine learning compiler for GPUs, CPUs, and ML accelerators. https://github. com/openxla/xla [52] Anne Ouyang, Simon Guo, Simran Arora, Alex L. Zhang, William Hu, Christopher Ré, and Azalia Mirhoseini. 2025. KernelBench: can LLMs write efficient GPU kernels? arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.10517 (2025). [53] Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, Alban Desmaison, Andreas Köpf, Edward Yang, Zach DeVito, Martin Raison, Alykhan Tejani, Sasank Chilamkurthy, Benoit Steiner, Lu Fang, Junjie Bai, and Soumith Chintala. 2019. PyTorch: an imperative style, high-performance deep learning library. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS). [54] Hung Viet Pham, Thibaud Lutellier, Weizhen Qi, and Lin Tan. 2019. CRADLE: cross-backend validation to detect and localize bugs in deep learning libraries. In Proceedings of the 41st IEEE/ACM International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE). [55] PyTorch. 2025. pytorch/pytorch: tensors and dynamic neural networks in Python with strong GPU acceleration. https://github.com/pytorch/pytorch [56] PyTorch Authors. 2024. Failure in generating a kernel with 3 tile groups #141121. https://github.com/pytorch/pytorch/ issues/141121 [57] PyTorch Authors. 2025. flex_attention + dynamic=True with large batch or heads causes Triton error [CUDA]: invalid argument #157018. https://github.com/pytorch/pytorch/issues/157018 [58] Ravishka Rathnasuriya, Nidhi Majoju, Zihe Song, and Wei Yang. 2025. An investigation on numerical bugs in GPU programs towards automated bug detection. Proceedings of the ACM on Software Engineering (PACMSE), ISSTA (2025). [59] Jason Sanders and Edward Kandrot. 2010. CUDA by example: an introduction to general-purpose GPU programming. Addison-Wesley Professional. [60] Qingchao Shen, Haoyang Ma, Junjie Chen, Yongqiang Tian, Shing-Chi Cheung, and Xiang Chen. 2021. A compre-hensive study of deep learning compiler bugs. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM Joint Meeting on European Software Engineering Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering (ESEC/FSE). [61] Cristina Silvano, Daniele Ielmini, Fabrizio Ferrandi, Leandro Fiorin, Serena Curzel, Luca Benini, Francesco Conti, Angelo Garofalo, Cristian Zambelli, Enrico Calore, Sebastiano Schifano, Maurizio Palesi, Giuseppe Ascia, Davide Patti, Nicola Petra, Davide De Caro, Luciano Lavagno, Teodoro Urso, Valeria Cardellini, Gian Carlo Cardarilli, Robert Birke, and Stefania Perri. 2025. A survey on deep learning hardware accelerators for heterogeneous HPC platforms. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR) (2025). [62] Tyler Sorensen and Alastair F. Donaldson. 2016. Exposing errors related to weak memory in GPU applications. In Proceedings of the 37th ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation (PLDI) .[63] SPCL. 2025. spcl/dace: DaCe – data centric parallel programming. https://github.com/spcl/dace [64] Benjamin F. Spector, Simran Arora, Aaryan Singhal, Daniel Y. Fu, and Christopher Ré. 2024. ThunderKittens: simple, fast, and adorable AI kernels. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.20399 (2024). [65] Chenyao Suo, Jianrong Wang, Yongjia Wang, Jiajun Jiang, Qingchao Shen, and Junjie Chen. 2025. DESIL: detecting silent bugs in MLIR compiler infrastructure. Proceedings of the ACM on Programming Languages (PACMPL), OOPSLA (2025). [66] Tile-AI. 2025. tile-ai/tilelang: a domain-specific language for high-performance GPU/CPU/accelerator kernels. https: //github.com/tile-ai/tilelang [67] Tile-AI Authors. 2025. [Bug] compilation error for mma on NVIDIA Hopper GPU #101. https://github.com/tile-ai/tilelang/issues/101 [68] Tile-AI Authors. 2025. [Bug] compile/“cached” still not loading cached kernel for example in example_mha_bwd #313. https://github.com/tile-ai/tilelang/issues/313 [69] Tile-AI Authors. 2025. [BUG] incorrect __sync_thread_partial placement in generated kernel code #1604. https: //github.com/tile-ai/tilelang/issues/1604 [70] Tile-AI Authors. 2025. [BUG Report] encounter dead lock when implementing deepgemm with 8 warps on Hopper #359. https://github.com/tile-ai/tilelang/issues/359 , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2026. Characterizing Real-World Bugs in Tile Programs for Automated Bug Detection 23 

[71] Philippe Tillet, Hsiang-Tsung Kung, and David Cox. 2019. Triton: an intermediate language and compiler for tiled neural network computations. In Proceedings of the 3rd ACM SIGPLAN International Workshop on Machine Learning and Programming Languages (MAPL). [72] Devesh Tiwari, Saurabh Gupta, James Rogers, Don Maxwell, Paolo Rech, Sudharshan Vazhkudai, Daniel Oliveira, Dave Londo, Nathan DeBardeleben, Philippe Navaux, Luigi Carro, and Arthur Bland. 2015. Understanding GPU errors on large-scale HPC systems and the implications for system design and operation. In Proceedings of the 21st IEEE International Symposium on High Performance Computer Architecture (HPCA). [73] Triton-Lang. 2025. triton-lang/triton: development repository for the Triton language and compiler. https://github. com/triton-lang/triton [74] Triton-Lang Authors. 2022. Segfault in dds_matmul #443. https://github.com/triton-lang/triton/issues/443 [75] Triton-Lang Authors. 2023. Segmentation fault with matmul + argmax #1846. https://github.com/triton-lang/triton/ issues/1846 [76] Triton-Lang Authors. 2023. WSMaterialization generates invalid IR – modifies module’s num-warps field without modifying tensor layouts #2658. https://github.com/triton-lang/triton/issues/2658 [77] Triton-Lang Authors. 2024. Assertion failure in linear layouts when num_warps = 8, but passes with num_warps = 4 #5265. https://github.com/triton-lang/triton/issues/5265 [78] Triton-Lang Authors. 2025. AMD ReorderInstruction pass will reorder the global_load ahead of local_store and break the local_prefetch logic which will miss match TritonAMDGPULowerInstructionSchedHints::createLocalPrefetchSchedule code logic #6750. https://github.com/triton-lang/triton/issues/6750 [79] Dewei Wang, Wei Zhu, Liyang Ling, Ettore Tiotto, Quintin Wang, Whitney Tsang, Julian Oppermann, and Jacky Deng. 2025. ML-Triton, a multi-level compilation and language extension to Triton GPU programming. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.14985 (2025). [80] Gan Wang, Zan Wang, Junjie Chen, Xiang Chen, and Ming Yan. 2022. An empirical study on numerical bugs in deep learning programs. In Proceedings of the 37th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE). [81] Haoyu Wang, Junjie Chen, Chuyue Xie, Shuang Liu, Zan Wang, Qingchao Shen, and Yingquan Zhao. 2023. MLIR-Smith: random program generation for fuzzing MLIR compiler infrastructure. In Proceedings of the 38th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE). [82] Jiyuan Wang, Yuxin Qiu, Ben Limpanukorn, Hong Jin Kang, Qian Zhang, and Miryung Kim. 2025. DuoReduce: bug isolation for multi-layer extensible compilation. In Proceedings of the 33rd ACM International Conference on the Foundations of Software Engineering (FSE). [83] Lei Wang, Yu Cheng, Yining Shi, Zhengju Tang, Zhiwen Mo, Wenhao Xie, Lingxiao Ma, Yuqing Xia, Jilong Xue, Fan Yang, and Zhi Yang. 2025. TileLang: a composable tiled programming model for AI systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.17577 (2025). [84] Mingyuan Wu, Yicheng Ouyang, Husheng Zhou, Lingming Zhang, Cong Liu, and Yuqun Zhang. 2020. Simulee: detecting CUDA synchronization bugs via memory-access modeling. In Proceedings of the 42nd IEEE/ACM International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE). [85] Dongwei Xiao, Zhibo Liu, Yuanyuan Yuan, Qi Pang, and Shuai Wang. 2022. Metamorphic testing of deep learning compilers. Proceedings of the ACM on Measurement and Analysis of Computing Systems (POMACS) (2022). [86] Dongwei Xiao, Shuai Wang, Zhibo Liu, Yiteng Peng, Daoyuan Wu, and Zhendong Su. 2025. Divergence-aware testing of graphics shader compiler back-ends. Proceedings of the ACM on Programming Languages (PACMPL), PLDI (2025). [87] Xuejun Yang, Yang Chen, Eric Eide, and John Regehr. 2011. Finding and understanding bugs in C compilers. In Proceedings of the 32nd ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation (PLDI) .[88] Yi Yang, Ping Xiang, Mike Mantor, and Huiyang Zhou. 2012. Fixing performance bugs: an empirical study of open-source GPGPU programs. In Proceedings of the 41st IEEE International Conference on Parallel Processing (ICPP). [89] Jingyang Yuan, Huazuo Gao, Damai Dai, Junyu Luo, Liang Zhao, Zhengyan Zhang, Zhenda Xie, Y. X. Wei, Lean Wang, Zhiping Xiao, Yuqing Wang, Chong Ruan, Ming Zhang, Wenfeng Liang, and Wangding Zeng. 2025. Native sparse attention: hardware-aligned and natively trainable sparse attention. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.11089 (2025). [90] Andreas Zeller, Rahul Gopinath, Marcel Böhme, Gordon Fraser, and Christian Holler. 2023. Greybox fuzzing. https: //www.fuzzingbook.org/html/GreyboxFuzzer.html [91] Xiao Zhang, Yaoyao Ding, Yang Hu, and Gennady Pekhimenko. 2025. Hexcute: a tile-based programming language with automatic layout and task-mapping synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.16214 (2025). [92] Yuhao Zhang, Luyao Ren, Liqian Chen, Yingfei Xiong, Shing-Chi Cheung, and Tao Xie. 2020. Detecting numerical bugs in neural network architectures. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM Joint Meeting on European Software Engineering Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering (ESEC/FSE). [93] Zhendong Zhang. 2025. Flash window attention: speedup the attention computation for Swin Transformer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.06480 (2025). , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2026. 24 Rathnasuriya and Song, et al. 

[94] Size Zheng, Jin Fang, Xuegui Zheng, Qi Hou, Wenlei Bao, Ningxin Zheng, Ziheng Jiang, Dongyang Wang, Jianxi Ye, Haibin Lin, Li-Wen Chang, and Xin Liu. 2025. TileLink: generating efficient compute-communication overlapping kernels using tile-centric primitives. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.20313 (2025). , Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: May 2026.