Title: ROOT: Discovering Rewards for User-Specified Embodied Behaviors

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2610.04250v1

Published Time: Tue, 06 Oct 2026 00:33:51 GMT

Number of Pages: 13

Markdown Content:
# ROOT: Discovering Rewards for User-Specified Embodied Behaviors 

Eren Sadikoglu 1, Aditya Taparia 2, Xinyuan Liu 2, and Ransalu Senanayake 2

Abstract — Reinforcement learning for embodied control re-mains constrained by the difficulty of reward specification. Although recent large language model (LLM)-based methods can synthesize reward functions from natural-language descrip-tions, they often fail to capture subtle behavioral properties that humans care about, such as natural gait, posture, and movement style. This limitation arises because many desired behaviors are easier to recognize visually than to encode in a reward function. We introduce Reward Optimization via Observable Trees (ROOT), a framework for discovering reward functions that align learned policies with user-specified embod-ied behaviors. Rather than relying solely on scalar training statistics, ROOT casts reward design as an observation-guided search over a persistent experiment tree that stores reward programs, trained policies, and rollout observations, together with behavioral insights distilled by a video-language model, to diagnose behavioral failures and guide subsequent reward refinements. We evaluate ROOT on seven tasks across four embodiments: simulated Hopper, HalfCheetah, Ant, Unitree Go2, and as well as the real-world Unitree Go2. ROOT produces behaviors that better align with user intent than those generated by existing LLM-based reward-generation methods, achieving up to 86.8% locomotion-completeness accuracy and improving Vid-LLM behavioral alignment from 3.56/5 to 4.14/5, a 16.5% improvement over baselines. Human evaluations further sup-port these results, with ROOT preferred in 51–63% of pairwise comparisons. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Deep reinforcement learning (RL) has enabled increas-ingly capable robotic behaviors in recent years [1]–[4]. Learning these behaviors depends on reward functions that translate the desired task into a training objective. This translation is relatively straightforward when the objective is well-defined and directly measurable, such as reaching a target position or maintaining a desired speed. However, reward design becomes more challenging when the desired behavior also involves qualitative properties, such as posture, limb coordination, and movement style. For example, asking a quadruped to trot forward requires both forward motion and coordinated leg movements in a recognizable trotting motion. Such properties are often easier to recognize visually than to specify through hand-crafted reward terms. To reduce this burden of manual reward engineering, recent methods such as Eureka [5] and Text2Reward [6] use large language models (LLMs) to generate executable reward programs from natural-language instructions and environ-ment descriptions. These approaches automate reward design across diverse control tasks. However, generated rewards            

> 1Robotics and Autonomous Systems, Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona, USA
> 2School of Computing and Augmented Intelligence, Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona, USA

{esadikog, ataparia, xinyua11, ransalu }@asu.edu 1) Task 

> 3) Visual Feedback 2) Propose Reward
> Walk with a canter gait.

ROOT 

> 4) Final Policy

Simulate & Observe 

Policy Training Recording Rollout Vid-LLM Critique    

> The robot is unstable and hops erratically.
> Coordinated canter movements matching the requested gait.
> Desired Behavior Experience Tree

Fig. 1: Overview of ROOT. Given a user-specified behavior, ROOT explores a tree of candidate reward programs. Each candidate is visually audited and saved. The learned tree guides later reward generation toward policies that better match the intended behavior. may not fully capture the requested behavioral properties, allowing policies to earn high returns while deviating from the user’s intent. A quadruped instructed to trot forward, for instance, may learn to propel itself using its front legs while dragging its hind legs, earning a high reward for forward motion without exhibiting the alternating diagonal leg coordination that defines a trot. We refer to this mismatch between the user’s intended behavior and the learned policy’s behavior as the behavioral gap . Because scalar training statistics alone may not reveal this gap, recent methods incorporate visual feedback to guide reward refinement [7], [8]. Yet identifying a behavioral failure is only part of the refinement process, this feedback must also inform which past reward to revisit and what modification to test next. To that end, we present Reward Optimization via Ob-servable Trees (ROOT), which organizes reward discovery as an observation-guided search over a persistent tree of experience (Fig. 1). Each experience connects a reward program and its trained policy with rollout observations, scalar diagnostics, and distilled behavioral insights, while branches represent alternative reward refinements. A multi-agent reasoning framework uses this accumulated evidence to diagnose failures, revisit promising rewards, and pro-pose targeted refinements that address the behavioral gap. arXiv:2610.04250v1 [cs.RO] 3 Oct 2026 Across seven tasks on four simulated embodiments (Hopper, HalfCheetah, Ant, and Unitree Go2), with additional val-idation on a physical Go2, ROOT produces policies that better align with user intent and are preferred by human evaluators over existing LLM-based reward-design baselines. Our contributions are as follows: 1) We formulate reward discovery as a search over an observable “experience tree” that stores reward pro-grams, trained policies, rollout observations, scalar diagnostics, hypotheses, and behavioral insights, allow-ing subsequent generation to build on past experience. 2) We introduce ROOT, a multi-agent framework which use past evidence from the experience tree to diag-nose failures, revisit promising rewards, and propose targeted refinements. 3) We demonstrate that ROOT improves alignment with user intent over existing reward-design baselines across multiple embodied tasks, and show how past experi-ence contributes to these improvements. II. R ELATED WORK 

a) LLM-guided reward design: Reward design remains a major bottleneck in embodied RL, with 92% of practition-ers relying on manual reward tuning and 89% reporting sub-optimal rewards [9]. LLMs facilitate reward design by trans-lating task descriptions into reward signals [10], structured specifications [11], or executable code [6]. EUREKA [5] refines sampled reward programs using training statistics and optional human feedback, while REvolve [12] and CARD [13] explore evolutionary refinement and trajectory-preference evaluation. Auto MC-Reward [14] separates re-ward generation, code critique, and trajectory analysis to guide revisions. More structured approaches include R* [15], which evolves modular reward structures and learns their parameters from trajectory preferences, and ORSO [16], which interleaves reward selection with policy optimization. These approaches automate reward synthesis and refine-ment, motivating further study of how experimental feedback should guide subsequent reward-design decisions. 

b) Structured search and reuse of experimental history: 

Reflexion [17] retains textual reflections in episodic memory to guide subsequent trials. In reward design, RF-Agent [18] formulates reward optimization as Monte Carlo tree search, storing reward programs and training feedback in tree nodes and using scalar task evaluations, self-verification, and tree statistics to guide selection and expansion. ROOT empha-sizes behavioral evidence in this process: each experiment links a refinement plan to the resulting policy behavior, while parent–child relationships preserve the reference reward. Its reasoning procedure uses these records to jointly select an earlier reward to revisit and a modification to test, informed by alternative refinements and observed regressions across branches. We investigate how access to accumulated exper-imental evidence and visual feedback contributes to reward discovery. 

c) Visual feedback in reward design: A separate line of work uses vision language models (VLMs) to provide behavioral supervision through several mechanisms. VLM-RMs [19] derive rewards from image–text alignment, RL-VLM-F [20] learns reward models from visual preferences, and VLM-CaR [21] generates executable rewards to re-duce repeated VLM inference. Related preference-based approaches include LAPP [22], which learns from LLM preferences over state–action trajectories, and ReWiND [23], which learns language-conditioned rewards from demonstra-tions and adapts policies without additional task demonstra-tions. Closest to ROOT, ELEMENTAL [7] combines visual demonstrations, generated reward features, inverse reinforce-ment learning, and iterative self-reflection. VIRAL [8] refines reward code using training statistics and optional human or video-language-model feedback. ROOT uses visual critique of its own trained-policy rollouts as experimental evidence, without requiring task demonstrations. These assessments remain linked to the corresponding reward refinements and inform subsequent search decisions. III. M ETHODOLOGY 

Given an environment context E and a task T , ROOT searches for a reward program that induces a policy aligned with the user’s intended task. For an executable reward r

and a fixed policy-training procedure Train , we formalize the behavioral gap introduced in Sec. I as, 

πr = Train (E, r ),

∆H (r; T ) = Eτ ∼P πr  

> E

[dH (τ, T )] , (1) where πr is the policy obtained from a training run, P πr 

> E

is its rollout distribution, and dH (τ, T ) ≥ 0 denotes the dis-crepancy between a rollout and the user’s intended behavior. The goal is to identify a reward with a small ∆H within a search budget B.The discrepancy dH is an implicit human criterion, so 

∆H is not directly evaluated during search. Instead, ROOT uses a Vid-LLM to identify behavioral discrepancies in policy rollouts. These assessments guide reward refinements intended to reduce the behavioral gap, while an experience tree links the proposed changes to their observed outcomes. Evidence of improvements and regressions then informs which reward design to revisit and what modification to test next. The assessments and experiment history thus provide qualitative guidance toward the objective in Eq. (1). Figure 2 illustrates this process. 

A. The Experience Tree 

At iteration t, the search state comprises an experience tree Tt = ( Vt, At) and an auxiliary insights document It.Each successfully evaluated non-root node stores: 

ni = ( ri, π i, p i, c i, o i, ℓ i), (2) where ri is the reward program used for training, πi is the saved policy, and pi is a refinement plan specifying the proposed reward changes and their expected behavioral effect. The diagnostic record ci contains training statistics and quantitative evaluation metrics, oi contains rollout ob-servations, and ℓi summarizes the experimental findings and ℰ

ROOT   

> n0n1n2n6

. . . 

> n7
> ni

123

Experience Tree 𝒯 t

Reason Execute Observe Reward Function r1

Reward Function r7

Reward Function r12                       

> . . .  Output: Select Parent nparent , Edit Plan pt+1 ,Insights It+1
> Output: Reward rt+1 , Policy πt+1 , Diagnostics ct+1
> Output: Node nt+1 , Observation ot+1 , Finding ℓt+1
> Initialization Parent: Bootstrap Node
> Reward Edit: + Forward Velocity + Vertical Dynamics + Pitch Rocking + Alive Bonus
> n8
> n9
> n12
> Parent: Node 1
> Reward Edit: + Displacement + Stationary Penalty
> Parent: Node 7
> Reward Edit: - Displacement - Stationary Penalty - Vertical Dynamics + Rhythm + Phase Diversity + Vertical Oscillation + Action Penalty
> Observation: Failed to move forward.
> Observation: Stable but asymmetric limb coordination.
> Observation: Translates forward with proper movement.
> n10

. . .  

> Proposer
> Propose Hypothesis
> Critic
> Challenge Proposals
> Strategist
> Synthesize Next Steps
> Generator
> Generates Reward Function
> Trainer
> Train RL Policy
> Executor
> Execute Trained Policy
> Rollout Vid-LLM Critique
> Analyse Behaviour
> Annotator
> Extract findings

Node ni ni

Path to best Node 

Parent-child Used by Proposer 

Legend 

> n11

. . . 

T̄ 

> Walk with a canter gait.

𝐼 t

> Read/Update Insights
> Observation-Guided Search
> D

Fig. 2: Observation-guided reward search with ROOT. Each tree expansion selects a reference reward and a refinement hypothesis, generates a reward program, trains a policy, and records the observed outcome. The experience tree preserves both partial successes and unsuccessful refinements, allowing evidence from earlier experiments and other branches to condition subsequent proposals. A Vid-LLM supplies visual feedback during search. their implications for subsequent refinement. Failed attempts are also retained, with failure diagnostics saved in ci.An edge (nj , n i) records that nj was selected as the reference for the refinement tested at ni. Parent-child records therefore associate a proposed reward change with its ob-served outcome, while siblings retain alternative refinements of the same reference. Earlier nodes remain available after their descendants have been evaluated, allowing search to return to a partial success when subsequent changes regress. 

a) Initialization: ROOT first expands the task T into an environment-grounded specification ¯T that retains the intended task while identifying relevant physical signals and anticipated failure modes. It initializes I from this specifica-tion and the environment context, and creates a root node n0.The first Ninit experiments generate bootstrap reward candi-dates using varied initial design guidance within Generate .These candidates have no parent reward or refinement plan, so nparent = n0 and pi = ∅. Their experiment records form the initial children of the synthetic root and provide evidence for subsequent refinement. 

b) Experiment Memory and Expansion: Retrieval tools allow the reasoning module to inspect relevant experi-ment records and compare findings across branches without loading the full history into context. The tree preserves experiment-specific evidence, while It maintains design guidance distilled across experiments and revised during reasoning. Together, these records inform both the selection of a node to expand and the changes for its refinement. 

B. Observation-Guided Search 

Each refinement iteration comprises three stages: Reason 

selects a reference and a refinement plan, Execute tests the proposed reward through policy training, and Observe 

records its rollout behavior. The budget B counts experiment attempts, including bootstrap and failed attempts. 

a) Reason: Conditioned on ¯T and E, the reasoning module uses the relationships encoded in Tt to guide the next expansion. Parent-child comparisons connect reward refinements to their observed behavioral effects, while sibling comparisons reveal the outcomes of alternative refinements from a shared reference. Evidence across branches further allows the search to revisit earlier partial successes when sub-sequent refinements regress. Drawing on these comparisons, the module selects a parent nparent , produces a refinement plan pt+1 , and updates the insights document to It+1 . The plan identifies which reward-design elements to preserve and which remaining behavioral discrepancies to target. We implement this stage with three LLM roles. A Pro-poser examines the experimental evidence and suggests refinements. A Critic challenges the proposal by checking its reasoning against prior attempts and overlooked partial successes. They alternate for up to D rounds, after which a Strategist synthesizes the discussion into the parent selection, refinement plan, and updated insights. 

b) Execute: The generator receives ¯T , E, pt+1 , and the selected parent’s experiment record, including its reward implementation. The environment context exposes the ob-servation and action spaces, joint names, and body structure. The generator translates this information into a candidate reward program. The execution procedure Execute validates the program and applies bounded repairs before training a fresh PPO policy using Train . On success, it returns the reward im-plementation actually used for training, the resulting policy, and the diagnostic record. Reward-component curves are recorded during training, followed by quantitative policy evaluation. Since every policy is trained from scratch, tree edges represent reward-design lineage. If execution fails, the diagnostic record captures the failure and πt+1 = ∅.

c) Observe: Following successful execution, the policy is rendered from multiple views. The Vid-LLM assesses these rollout videos against ¯T to produce ot+1 , describ-ing the achieved behavior and remaining discrepancies. A lightweight annotator combines these observations with the diagnostics, parent findings, and current insights to produce 

ℓt+1 . This record summarizes whether the expected effect was observed and what the outcome suggests for further refinement. The resulting experiment record is added as a child of 

nparent , including when its outcome is a regression or an execution failure. These records remain available to inform subsequent parent selection and reward generation. After the budget is exhausted, Select align compares the task-alignment descriptions recorded for successfully evaluated policies and selects the node whose policy is judged to best match the requested behavior T . The corresponding policy ˆπ is then returned. Algorithm 1 summarizes the procedure. IV. E XPERIMENTS 

We evaluate ROOT in terms of behavioral alignment, task performance, and reward-search cost, and assess whether the learned behaviors transfer to a physical robot. Our experiments address four research questions: 

RQ1: Can ROOT improve behavioral alignment while maintaining or improving task performance? 

RQ2: How do the experience tree and VLM-based behav-ioral feedback contribute to improved alignment? 

RQ3: How does ROOT compare with the baselines in behavioral alignment for a given search cost? 

RQ4: How well do policies trained for behavioral align-ment in simulation retain the requested behaviors when deployed on a physical robot? 

A. Experimental Setup a) Tasks and environments: As shown in Fig. 4, we evaluate ROOT in two distinct simulators and validate the resulting policy on a physical Unitree Go2 quadruped. The simulation evaluation covers seven simulated tasks across Algorithm 1: ROOT: Observation-Guided Reward Search 

Require: Task T , environment E, bootstrap count Ninit ,experiment budget B ≥ Ninit ≥ 1

Ensure: Selected policy ˆπ, or failure  

> 1:

¯T ← Expand (T, E) 

> 2:

I ← InitializeInsights ( ¯T , E) 

> 3:

Initialize tree T with synthetic root n0 

> 4:

Set r0 = ℓ0 = ∅ 

> 5:

for i = 1 , . . . , B do  

> 6:

if i ≤ Ninit then ▷ Bootstrap  

> 7:

(nparent , p i) ← (n0, ∅) 

> 8:

else  

> 9:

(nparent , p i, I ) ← Reason (T , I ; ¯T , E) 

> 10:

end if  

> 11:

ri ← Generate ( ¯T , E, p i, n parent ) 

> 12:

(ri, π i, c i) ← Execute (E, r i) 

> 13:

oi ← ∅ 

> 14:

if πi̸ = ∅ then  

> 15:

vi ← Render (πi) 

> 16:

oi ← Observe (vi, ¯T , p i, c i) 

> 17:

end if  

> 18:

ℓi ← Annotate (oi, c i, p i, ℓ parent , I ) 

> 19:

Add ni = ( ri, π i, p i, c i, o i, ℓ i)

as a child of nparent in T 

> 20:

end for  

> 21:

ˆn ← Select align (T , T ) 

> 22:

return policy ˆπ stored at ˆn

four embodiments: Ant crab-crawl and spider-creep; Uni-tree Go2 pace, trot, and canter; and forward running with Hopper and HalfCheetah. Hopper and HalfCheetah provide conventional locomotion benchmarks for comparison with prior reward-design methods. The remaining tasks require specific direction, posture, or limb-coordination properties beyond forward progress, allowing us to examine alignment with qualitatively specified behaviors. To emphasize the challenge of the “behavioral gap,” all tasks are specified by natural language rather than formal mathematical objectives, summarized in Table I; quantitative evaluation criteria are defined separately below. Hopper, HalfCheetah, both Ant tasks, and Go2 canter use MJX (MuJoCo XLA) [24], while Go2 pace and trot use Isaac Lab [25]. We additionally deploy a learned trot policy on a physical Unitree Go2 to assess sim-to-real transfer. 

b) Baselines and implementation: We compare ROOT against five state-of-the-art LLM-based reward engineer-ing frameworks: Eureka [5], Text2Reward [6], L2R [11], CARD [13], and LAPP [22]. Within each simulator backend, methods share task descriptions, PPO configurations, and per-candidate training budgets: 20M environment steps on MJX (30M for Go2 canter) and approximately 98M on Isaac Lab. Candidate counts and policy-selection rules follow method-specific protocols. We evaluate a preference-only adaptation of LAPP on both simulator backends, removing the handcrafted environment reward ( r = βr p) and matching TABLE I: Behavioral Alignment across Simulated Embodiments. We report task performance and Vid-LLM alignment; higher is better. Best and second-best scores are bold and underlined. Locomotion completeness accuracy uses task-specific metrics defined in Sec. IV-A and reports mean and standard deviation across three evaluation seeds. Alignment reports mean Vid-LLM scores. ∗native score denotes mean velocity multiplied by mean survival. ROOT achieves the best behavioral alignment while maintaining comparable or higher task performance across tasks.                                                                                                                

> Robot Task Metric Eureka Text2 Language CARD LAPP ROOT Reward 2Reward (Ours)
> Align. Score 4.67 4.50 4.61 4.67 3.94 4.67
> Walk forward with a trot gait. Acc. (%) 79 .6±0.778 .1±0.19.8±0.379 .5±0.40.0±0.086 .8±0.3
> Align. Score 4.56 4.39 4.39 4.50 4.17 4.50 Walk forward with a pace gait. Acc. (%) 74 .9±0.277 .5±0.313 .7±1.576 .1±0.57.48 ±0.978 .4±0.1
> Align. Score 2.78 2.72 2.22 3.50 3.22 3.61
> Unitree Go2
> Move forward with a canter gait. Acc. (%) 0.8±0.267 .8±2.41.4±1.119 .1±1.470 .8±3.670 .5±4.0
> Align. Score 2.56 2.72 3.67 2.56 3.39 4.44 Move sideways with a
> crab-crawling gait. Acc. (%) 1.8±0.165 .2±13 .532 .3±1.61.4±0.531 .2±22 .747 .67 ±2.64
> Align. Score 2.06 3.56 3.56 1.17 3.89 3.89
> Ant
> Move forward with a
> spider-creeping gait. Acc. (%) 1.0±0.815 .9±9.835 .0±2.512 .6±14 .654 .4±2.835 .50 ±4.8
> Align. Score 1.39 1.33 2.11 3.56 1.39 3.56
> Hopper
> Hop forward as fast as possible. Native Score ∗0.19 ±0.04 0.73 ±0.00 0.75 ±0.08 1.71 ±0.01 0.10 ±0.00 1.82 ±0.45
> Align. Score 4.11 4.11 4.33 4.33 4.33 4.33
> Half Cheetah
> Run forward as fast as possible. Native Score ∗1.79 ±0.54 7.08 ±0.00 6.50 ±0.01 6.75 ±0.07 3.42 ±0.03 6.99 ±0.04

its environment-step budget to ROOT’s total training budget. All methods use Claude 4.5 Sonnet as the same backbone language model for reasoning and reward code generation. In ROOT’s observation stage, we employ Gemini 3.1 Pro as the Vid-LLM model to evaluate rendered rollout videos and produce structured behavioral feedback. 

c) Evaluation Metrics: We compute task metrics from simulator states independently of the generated reward. For Hopper and HalfCheetah, we report native score : mean for-ward velocity multiplied by mean survival. For gait tasks, we report locomotion completeness accuracy , defined as contact-based accuracy during locomotion for Ant; the product of survival, velocity tracking, contact coordination, and smooth-ness for Go2 pace/trot; and the fraction of detected cycles matching the target footfall pattern, weighted by survival. These tasks use a 0.5 m /s forward command with pushes disabled. Metrics are compared within tasks. We report mean and standard deviation across three eval-uation seeds using a 1,000 -step horizon. This uncertainty re-flects rollout variability for the selected policy. The alignment score is the mean Vid-LLM rating across Seed 2.1 Turbo, Gemma 4 31B, and GLM-4.6V, which assess posture/style and limb coordination on a 1–5 scale using three-view videos, task descriptions, and simulator-derived facts. 

B. RQ1: Behavioral Alignment and Task Performance 

Table I shows that ROOT remains competitive across the task suite, ranking first or second in mean task performance on all seven tasks. The strongest baseline varies across behaviors, whereas ROOT performs well on both forward locomotion and specified gaits. Human evaluation provides a focused assessment of crab-crawl, spider-creep, and canter (Fig. 3), favoring ROOT over the pooled baselines on all 

Fig. 3: Human preferences across pairwise comparisons of ROOT against pooled baselines on three behaviors. three. Notably, this preference holds on the Ant tasks de-spite ROOT’s lower contact-based accuracy than the leading methods, suggesting that contact agreement alone does not fully capture perceived adherence to the requested behavior. Across the full suite, the VLM panel assigns ROOT the highest or joint-highest alignment score on six of seven tasks, averaging 4.14 versus 3.56 for the strongest baseline. However, favorable ratings for LAPP on pace and trot despite low locomotion completeness accuracy show that VLM scores alone cannot establish correct coordination. We therefore interpret these scores alongside state-based metrics and human preferences: together, they support competitive task performance and favorable perceived alignment. 

C. RQ2: The Role of Tree Memory and Visual Feedback 

We investigate how experimental memory (experience tree) and Vid-LLM visual feedback contribute to behavioral alignment and task performance. We compare full ROOT with two ablated variants: (i) without history , which removes access to prior experiment records, and (ii) without history and visual feedback , which additionally removes Vid-LLM Hopper 

> Hop as fast as possible.

Ant 

> Spider-creep gait.

Unitree Go2 (Sim) 

> Canter gait.

Unitree Go2 (Real-world) 

> Trot gait.

Fig. 4: Qualitative rollouts of policies learned with ROOT. From top to bottom: Hopper hopping, Ant spider-creeping, and Unitree Go2 cantering in simulation, followed by a simulation-trained trotting policy deployed on a physical Unitree Go2. Frames progress from left to right. 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0    

> GPU-Hours (↓)
> 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0 4.5
> Avg. Behaviour Alignment (↑)
> Training Compute
> 20 50 100 200
> LLM/VLM Requests (↓)
> Model Requests

(a) Ant: Crab-crawling 0 5 10 15 20     

> GPU-Hours (↓)
> 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0
> Avg. Behaviour Alignment (↑)
> Training Compute
> 20 50 100 200
> LLM/VLM Requests (↓)
> Model Requests

(b) Unitree Go2: Canter Fig. 5: Avg. behavioral alignment versus training compute (GPU-hours, left) and LLM/VLM requests (right) on Ant crab-crawling and Go2 canter. Higher alignment and lower cost are better. TABLE II: We compare ROOT with variants that remove experimental history (or tree) and both history and Vid-LLM feedback during reward search. We report locomotion completeness accuracy (mean ± SD across three evaluation seeds) and mean Vid-LLM alignment.) and mean Vid-LLM alignment; higher is better. ROOT results are bold.                                    

> Configuration Metric Ant Unitree Go2 Crab Spider Canter ROOT (Full) Acc. (%) 47 .67 ±2.64 35 .50 ±4.870 .5±4.0
> Align. Score 4.44 3.89 3.61
> No History (No Tree) Acc. (%) 2.97 ±2.49.63 ±11 .119 .63 ±0.35
> Align. Score 2.83 2.67 2.89 No Vid-LLM and History Acc. (%) 0.97 ±0.06 3.40 ±2.97 1.37 ±0.06
> Align. Score 2.56 1.89 1.06

feedback from reward search. We evaluate these configura-tions on Ant crab-crawling and spider-creeping, and Unitree Go2 cantering. As shown in Table II, full ROOT achieves the highest behavioral alignment and task accuracy on all three tasks. On an average, removing experimental history across tasks reduces the alignment score from 3.98 to 2.80 and task accu-racy from 51.22% to 10.74%, corresponding to decreases of 1.18 score points and 40.48 percentage points, respectively. Additionally removing visual feedback lowers average align-ment and accuracy to 1.84 and 1.91%, respectively, yielding further decreases of 0.96 score points and 8.83 percentage points. These results support the importance of retaining exper-imental history to inform subsequent reward refinements. Furthermore, visual feedback also provides useful guidance when history is unavailable, as removing it further degrades both metrics across all three tasks. 

D. RQ3: Behavioral Alignment versus Search Cost 

Fig. 5 compares behavioral alignment against policy-training GPU-hours and LLM/VLM requests per search run on Ant crab-crawling and Go2 canter. ROOT achieves the highest mean Vid-LLM alignment on both tasks while using less training compute than Eureka, and less than LAPP Fig. 6: Foot contact timelines and foot-force signals for two Unitree Go2 locomotion gaits. (Left) Trotting on a real Unitree Go2 quadruped, showing characteristic alternating diagonal leg pairs (FL/RR and FR/RL) with regular, synchronised contact phases. (Right) Pacing in simulation, where ipsilateral leg pairs (FL/RL and FR/RR) move together, producing a distinctly different contact pattern. 

Fig. 7: Gait quality metrics comparing three locomotion policies on a real Unitree Go2 robot across 7–8 trials per policy (mean ± SD). Metrics are grouped into three categories. Motion Quality (a–c): Contact Smoothness measures the regularity of foot touchdown transitions ( ↑ better); Joint Jerk is the RMS rate of change of joint acceleration in rad/s 3 (↓ better); Joint-motion magnitude is the RMS angular velocity across all joints in rad/s ( ↓ better). Gait Regularity (d–e): Stride Frequency is the mean stepping cadence in Hz; Cadence Entropy measures irregularity in inter-stride intervals in bits ( ↓ better). Inter-leg Coordination (f–g): Phase Consistency quantifies the stability of diagonal leg synchronization on a 0–1 scale ( ↑ better); Phase Offset is the mean phase difference between diagonal leg pairs in degrees, where a trot ideally exhibits a phase offset of approximately 0◦. These measurements characterize the recorded policies; joint angular velocity is a motion proxy and does not establish energy efficiency. on crab-crawling. Conversely, CARD requires substantially less compute but achieves lower alignment. These results suggest that greater policy-training expenditure alone does not guarantee better behavioral alignment. ROOT allocates more model queries to observation and reasoning than the reward-code baselines, while using fewer queries than LAPP on both tasks. Taken together, the results show that ROOT achieves stronger measured alignment without incurring the highest training compute or query count. They support a favorable empirical balance between alignment and search cost, although they do not isolate the efficiency gains of individual components. Comparisons use method-specific budgets, and query counts indicate interac-tion volume rather than monetary cost. 

E. RQ4: Sim-to-Real Transfer of Behavioral Alignment 

We examine trotting on a physical Unitree Go2 and pacing in simulation to assess whether ROOT captures the coordination specified by each instruction. Fig. 6 illustrates the resulting contact patterns. Trotting synchronizes diagonal FL/RR and FR/RL pairs (left), while pacing synchronizes same-side FL/RL and FR/RR pairs (right). These distinct pairings show that the learned behaviors reflect the requested gait structure beyond achieving forward motion. We further transfer the selected trotting policy to a phys-ical Go2 and compare it with Unitree’s MPC controller and an RL controller trained using a hand-engineered locomotion reward. The hardware contact traces in Fig. 6 (left) retain the alternating diagonal pattern, indicating that the learned coordination survives the transition from simulation to hard-ware. Furthermore, the quantitative results in Fig. 7 show improvements in both motion smoothness and coordination regularity. ROOT’s higher mean contact smoothness and lower joint jerk relative to MPC indicate gentler foot-contact transitions and less abrupt joint motion. Among the evaluated controllers, it achieves the lowest mean cadence entropy and highest mean phase consistency, indicating a more regular stepping rhythm with stable diagonal coordination. This reg-ularity is maintained at a lower stride frequency than either baseline. MPC achieves a mean phase offset closer to zero, while ROOT maintains more consistent phase relationships over time. Together, these results show that ROOT preserves a repeatable trotting pattern, supporting transfer of ROOT’s ability for behavioral alignment on hardware. V. C ONCLUSION 

We introduce ROOT, a framework for discovering reward functions that align learned policies with user-specified be-haviors. ROOT combines visual feedback and multi-agent reasoning with a persistent experiment tree, using observed successes and failures to guide subsequent reward refine-ments. Experiments across multiple tasks and embodiments demonstrate improved behavioral alignment while maintain-ing competitive task performance and a favorable trade-off between alignment and search cost. Additionally, in our human survey, participants preferred behaviors produced by ROOT over those of the baselines when judging align-ment with the specified task. Furthermore, deployment on a physical Unitree Go2 demonstrates that policies trained in simulation using rewards discovered by ROOT can transfer to the real world. Future work could extend observation-guided reward discovery to manipulation and longer-horizon behaviors, where alignment requires coordinating multiple stages of a task. Another promising direction is to reuse behavioral insights stored in the experiment tree across related tasks and embodiments, allowing prior experience to guide reward discovery for new specifications. Overall, our findings highlight the value of grounding reward design in observed behavior and accumulated experimental evidence to bring learned policies into closer alignment with user intent. REFERENCES [1] Y.-S. Luo, J. H. Soeseno, T. P.-C. Chen, and W.-C. Chen, “Carl: Con-trollable agent with reinforcement learning for quadruped locomotion,” 

ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) , vol. 39, no. 4, pp. 38–1, 2020. [2] L. Han, Q. Zhu, J. Sheng, C. Zhang, T. Li, Y. Zhang, H. Zhang, Y. Liu, C. Zhou, R. Zhao et al. , “Lifelike agility and play in quadrupedal robots using reinforcement learning and generative pre-trained models,” Nature Machine Intelligence , vol. 6, no. 7, pp. 787– 798, 2024. [3] I. Radosavovic, T. Xiao, B. Zhang, T. Darrell, J. Malik, and K. Sreenath, “Real-world humanoid locomotion with reinforcement learning,” Science Robotics , vol. 9, no. 89, p. eadi9579, 2024. [4] Y. Zhang, Y. Yuan, P. Gurunath, I. Gupta, S. Omidshafiei, A.-a. Agha-mohammadi, M. Vazquez-Chanlatte, L. Pedersen, T. He, and G. Shi, “FALCON: Learning force-adaptive humanoid loco-manipulation,” in 

Proceedings of the 8th Annual Learning for Dynamics and Control Conference , 2026. [5] Y. J. Ma, W. Liang, G. Wang, D.-A. Huang, O. Bastani, D. Jayaraman, Y. Zhu, J. Fan et al. , “Eureka: Human-level reward design via cod-ing large language models,” in International conference on learning Representations , vol. 2024, 2024, pp. 26 516–26 560. [6] T. Xie, S. Zhao, C. Wu, Y. Liu, Q. Luo, V. Zhong, Y. Yang, and T. Yu, “Text2reward: Reward shaping with language models for reinforcement learning,” in International Conference on Learning Representations , vol. 2024, 2024, pp. 35 663–35 699. [7] L. Chen, N. M. Moorman, and M. C. Gombolay, “ELEMENTAL: Interactive Learning from Demonstrations and Vision-Language Models for Reward Design in Robotics,” Jun. 2025. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/forum?id=grlezgVg4s [8] V. Cuzin-Rambaud, E. Komlenovic, A. Faure, and B. Yun, “Viral: Vision-grounded integration for reward design and learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.22092 , 2025. [9] S. Booth, W. B. Knox, J. Shah, S. Niekum, P. Stone, and A. Allievi, “The perils of trial-and-error reward design: misdesign through over-fitting and invalid task specifications,” in Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , vol. 37, no. 5, 2023, pp. 5920– 5929. [10] M. Kwon, S. M. Xie, K. Bullard, and D. Sadigh, “Reward design with language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.00001 , 2023. [11] W. Yu, N. Gileadi, C. Fu, S. Kirmani, K.-H. Lee, M. G. Arenas, H.-T. L. Chiang, T. Erez, L. Hasenclever, J. Humplik, B. Ichter, T. Xiao, P. Xu, A. Zeng, T. Zhang, N. Heess, D. Sadigh, J. Tan, Y. Tassa, and F. Xia, “Language to rewards for robotic skill synthesis,” in Proceedings of The 7th Conference on Robot Learning , ser. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, J. Tan, M. Toussaint, and K. Darvish, Eds., vol. 229. PMLR, 06–09 Nov 2023, pp. 374–404. [Online]. Available: https://proceedings.mlr.press/v229/yu23a.html [12] R. Hazra, A. Sygkounas, A. Persson, A. Loutfi, and P. Zuidberg Dos Martires, “Revolve: Reward evolution with large language models using human feedback,” in International Conference on Learning Representations , vol. 2025, 2025, pp. 101 949–101 990. [13] S. Sun, R. Liu, J. Lyu, J.-W. Yang, L. Zhang, and X. Li, “A large language model-driven reward design framework via dynamic feedback for reinforcement learning,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.14660 [14] H. Li, X. Yang, Z. Wang, X. Zhu, J. Zhou, Y. Qiao, X. Wang, H. Li, L. Lu, and J. Dai, “Auto MC-Reward: Automated Dense Reward Design with Large Language Models for Minecraft,” in 2024 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , Jun. 2024, pp. 16 426–16 435, iSSN: 2575-7075. [Online]. Available: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/10658032 [15] P. Li, J. Hao, H. Tang, Y. Yuan, J. Qiao, Z. Dong, and Y. Zheng, “R*: Efficient Reward Design via Reward Structure Evolution and Parameter Alignment Optimization with Large Language Models,” in Proceedings of the 42nd International Conference on Machine Learning . PMLR, Oct. 2025, pp. 34 509–34 527. [Online]. Available: https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/li25v.html [16] C. B. C. Zhang, Z.-W. Hong, A. Pacchiano, and P. Agrawal, “ORSO: Accelerating Reward Design via Online Reward Selection and Policy Optimization,” International Conference on Learning Representations ,vol. 2025, pp. 38 981–39 024, May 2025. [17] N. Shinn, F. Cassano, A. Gopinath, K. Narasimhan, and S. Yao, “Reflexion: language agents with verbal reinforcement learning,” in 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 36. Curran Associates, Inc., 2023, pp. 8634–8652. [18] N. Gao, X. Zhang, X. Jiang, M. You, M. Zhang, and Y. Deng, “RF-Agent: Automated Reward Function Design via Language Agent Tree Search,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 38, Main Conference. Curran Associates, Inc., 2025, pp. 172 532– 172 577. [19] J. Rocamonde, V. Montesinos, E. Nava, E. Perez, and D. Lindner, “Vision-language models are zero-shot reward models for reinforce-ment learning,” in International Conference on Learning Representa-tions , vol. 2024, 2024, pp. 28 446–28 463. [20] Y. Wang, Z. Sun, J. Zhang, Z. Xian, E. Biyik, D. Held, and Z. Erickson, “Rl-vlm-f: Reinforcement learning from vision language foundation model feedback,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03681 , 2024. [21] D. Venuto, S. N. Islam, M. Klissarov, D. Precup, S. Yang, and A. Anand, “Code as reward: Empowering reinforcement learning with vlms,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.04764 , 2024. [22] P. Jian, X. Wei, Y. Liu, S. A. Moore, M. M. Zavlanos, and B. Chen, “LAPP: Large Language Model Feedback for Preference-Driven Reinforcement Learning,” Transactions on Machine Learning Research , 2025. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/forum?id=cq76wx7T9F [23] J. Zhang, Y. Luo, A. Anwar, S. A. Sontakke, J. J. Lim, J. Thomason, E. Biyik, and J. Zhang, “ReWiND: Language-Guided Rewards Teach Robot Policies without New Demonstrations,” Sep. 2025. [24] E. Todorov, T. Erez, and Y. Tassa, “Mujoco: A physics engine for model-based control,” in 2012 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems . IEEE, 2012, pp. 5026–5033. [25] M. Mittal, P. Roth, J. Tigue, A. Richard, O. Zhang, P. Du, A. Serrano-Munoz, X. Yao, R. Zurbr¨ ugg, N. Rudin et al. , “Isaac lab: A gpu-accelerated simulation framework for multi-modal robot learning,” 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.04831 , 2025. APPENDIX ATASK SPECIFICATIONS 

Table III lists the natural-language behavior specifications for the seven simulated tasks. Each method receives the same task description and environment context. The descriptions specify the intended behavior; state-based evaluation criteria are defined separately in Appendix C. FL, FR, RL, and RR denote the front-left, front-right, rear-left, and rear-right legs, respectively. The hardware experiment evaluates whether the simulation-trained policy retains a stable trot after deployment. Its target behavior is straight-line locomotion with alternating diagonal leg pairs. We treat hardware deployment as a transfer evaluation of the learned behavior, rather than an additional reward-search task. APPENDIX BIMPLEMENTATION DETAILS 

A. Language Models and Reward Search 

All methods use Claude Sonnet 4.5 for language-model reasoning and reward-code generation. The reward-generation temperature is 0.7. In ROOT, the Proposer, Critic, and Strategist use temperature 0.4, while Gemini 3.1 Pro provides rollout-video feedback during the Observe stage, with a maximum output length of 1500 tokens. The reasoning agents use retrieval tools to inspect indi-vidual experiment records and compare refinements across branches without loading the full history into context. They also update an auxiliary insights document with guidance dis-tilled from these experiments. The selected parent’s reward code is supplied to the generator together with the refinement plan. Each candidate policy is trained from scratch. The search budget B counts experiment attempts, includ-ing initialization and unsuccessful execution attempts. Failed attempts retain their diagnostics and remain available to subsequent reasoning. After search, ROOT selects a success-fully evaluated policy using the task-alignment descriptions recorded in the tree. This search-time selection is separate from the final VLM-panel and human evaluations described in Appendix C. 

B. Policy Training and Baselines 

Within each simulator backend, methods share the task descriptions, environment configuration, PPO settings, and training steps per candidate. MJX candidates receive 20 

million environment steps, except Go2 canter, which receives 

30 million. Isaac Lab Go2 candidates receive approximately 

98 million steps. Table IV summarizes the PPO settings for the Ant and Go2 experiments. We compare with Eureka, Text2Reward, L2R, CARD, and LAPP. Candidate counts and policy-selection rules follow each method’s protocol, rather than a common candidate cap. The LAPP adaptation uses only the preference reward, 

r = βr p, with the handcrafted environment reward removed. Its total environment-step budget is matched to that of ROOT. All selected policies are assessed with the same final evaluation protocol within each task. 

C. Ablation Configurations 

The ablations in RQ2 evaluate Ant crab-crawl, Ant spider-creep, and Go2 canter. The No History variant removes access to prior experiment records and accumulated insights while retaining visual feedback on the current rollout. The No Vid-LLM and History variant additionally removes rollout-video feedback, leaving reward search without either source of behavioral evidence. Both variants use the same task definitions and final evaluation metrics as the full method. This comparison measures the effect of history when visual feedback is available, followed by the effect of visual feedback when history is absent. It does not separately measure the effect of removing visual feedback from the full history-enabled method. APPENDIX CEVALUATION PROTOCOLS 

We evaluate task performance using simulator states, behavioral alignment using an external VLM panel, and perceived adherence using human preferences. These mea-surements capture complementary aspects of behavior. In simulation, each selected policy is evaluated over a 1000 -step horizon with three seeds. The mean and standard deviation of task performance describe rollout variability for that policy, rather than variability across independently repeated reward searches. 

A. State-Based Task Performance 

Task metrics are computed independently of the generated reward. For Hopper and HalfCheetah, the native score is mean forward velocity multiplied by mean survival. For the other tasks, locomotion completeness accuracy measures task-specific coordination during locomotion. Because its definition differs across embodiments and gaits, we compare accuracy within each task. 

a) Contact extraction: For contact-based MJX evalu-ation, a foot is marked as in contact when its height is below 0.05 m. If this threshold detects contact for fewer than half of the feet, an adaptive per-foot threshold uses the lowest 30% of that foot’s height range. Contact signals are smoothed with a 5-step moving window. Feet are identified from body names, with initial position quadrants used as a fallback. Locomotion is considered active when horizontal speed exceeds 0.1 m/s. 

b) Ant crab-crawl and spider-creep: The Ant score measures agreement with the target contact-coordination pat-tern during active locomotion. Spider-creep requires forward motion ( vx > 0.1 m/s) with diagonal coordination (FL/RR and FR/RL). Crab-crawl requires lateral motion ( |vy | >

0.1 m/s) with ipsilateral coordination (FL/RL and FR/RR), together with checks on vertical and angular motion. These contact criteria provide a measurable proxy for coordination; the VLM and human evaluations additionally assess posture and movement style. TABLE III: Natural-language behavior specifications and simulator backends. The Go2 trot policy is also evaluated on a physical robot. 

Environment Task Behavior specification 

Hopper (MJX) Forward hopping Hop forward as fast as possible. HalfCheetah (MJX) Forward running Run forward as fast as possible. Ant (MJX) Spider-creep Make the ant creep forward like a spider, using all four legs in a coordinated crawling gait while keeping its body close to the surface. Ant (MJX) Crab-crawl Make the ant crawl sideways like a crab, moving laterally using coordinated leg movements while keeping its body low and stable. Go2 (Isaac Lab) Pace Train the Go2 to pace forward—legs on the same side (FL+RL, then FR+RR) move together in a lateral two-beat gait with steady forward velocity. Go2 (Isaac Lab) Trot Train the Go2 to perform a trot gait—a two-beat diagonal pattern where diagonally opposite legs (FL+RR, then FR+RL) move together in alternation with steady forward velocity. Go2 (MJX) Canter Train the Go2 to perform a canter gait—a three-beat asymmetric running pattern where one hind leg leads, followed by the other hind leg together with the diagonal foreleg, then the remaining foreleg. 

TABLE IV: PPO settings for ROOT. Ant includes both crab-crawl and spider-creep. MJX tasks use Brax PPO; Isaac Lab tasks use RSL-RL PPO. Training budgets are environment transitions per reward candidate. Dashes indicate unspecified or inapplicable settings. 

Parameter Ant / Hopper (MJX) HalfCheetah (MJX) Go2 canter (MJX) Go2 pace/trot (Isaac Lab) 

Parallel environments 4096 4096 8192 4096 

Episode limit (control steps) 1000 1000 1000 1000 

Transitions per candidate 2 × 10 7 10 7 3 × 10 7 98 ,304 ,000 

Training iterations (RSL-RL) — — — 1000 

Learning rate 3 × 10 −4 3 × 10 −4 3 × 10 −4 10 −3

Learning-rate schedule Constant Constant Constant Adaptive Discount γ 0.97 0.97 0.97 0.99 

GAE λ 0.95 0.95 0.95 0.95 

PPO clipping parameter 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2

Sequences per minibatch (Brax) 1024 1024 256 —Transitions per minibatch 10 ,240 10 ,240 5120 24 ,576 

Minibatches per epoch 32 32 32 4

Optimization epochs per batch 8 8 4 5

Rollout sequence length 10 10 20 24 

Transitions per PPO batch 327 ,680 327 ,680 163 ,840 98 ,304 

Reward scaling 0.1 0.1 1.0 —Entropy coefficient 0 0 10 −2 10 −2

Observation normalization Yes Yes Yes —           

> Brax’s batch size counts rollout sequences per minibatch; each sequence contains the listed rollout length. Thus, transitions per minibatch equal
> batch size times rollout length, and transitions per PPO batch additionally multiply by the number of minibatches. For RSL-RL, the corresponding counts are 4096 ×24 /4 = 24 ,576 transitions per minibatch and 4096 ×24 = 98 ,304 transitions per iteration.

c) Go2 pace and trot: Accuracy combines survival, velocity tracking, contact coordination, and smoothness: 

Apace /trot = 100 S V C M, (3) where S, V , C, and M denote the component scores used by the evaluator. Pace targets synchronized ipsilateral pairs, whereas trot targets synchronized diagonal pairs, with alternating support between the two pairs. Evaluation uses a forward command of 0.5 m/s with external pushes disabled. 

d) Go2 canter: Accuracy is the fraction of detected gait cycles that match the target three-beat footfall pattern, weighted by survival: 

Acanter = 100 S Nmatch 

Ndetected 

. (4) Here, Ndetected is the number of detected cycles and Nmatch 

counts those satisfying the evaluator’s canter criterion. 

B. VLM Behavioral Alignment 

Final alignment is assessed by Seed 2.1 Turbo, Gemma 4 31B, and GLM-4.6V, a panel separate from the Gemini 3.1 Pro model used for search-time observation. Each judge receives the task description, three-view rollout videos, and simulator-derived facts. The views show the robot from the left, right, and above. Method identities, reward code, and training curves are not shown to the judges. Judges score posture and style and limb coordination on integer scales from 1 to 5, with a short justification. The reported alignment score averages the two dimensions across judges and evaluation rollouts. VLM ratings are interpreted alongside state-based metrics because visually plausible movement does not necessarily imply the correct contact pattern. 

C. Human Preferences 

Human evaluation focuses on Ant crab-crawl, Ant spider-creep, and Go2 canter. Raters receive the behavior descrip-tion and a pair of rollout videos showing ROOT and a baseline. Videos are labeled A and B, with randomized ordering and no method identifiers. The primary question asks which video better matches the requested behavior. Raters may select either video or indicate no clear distinction. For a task, the preference for ROOT against pooled baselines is 

PROOT = WW + L , (5) where W and L are the numbers of non-tied judgments preferring ROOT and a baseline, respectively. Ties are excluded from this percentage. Pooling uses the judgments across baseline comparisons for the same task. 

D. Reward-Search Cost 

RQ3 compares alignment with policy-training GPU-hours and the number of LLM/VLM requests per search run on Ant crab-crawl and Go2 canter. GPU-hours measure policy-training compute, while request counts measure model inter-action volume. Candidate budgets and selection procedures remain method-specific. These comparisons characterize the observed balance between alignment and search cost; they do not isolate the cost contribution of an individual ROOT component or equate model requests with monetary cost. APPENDIX DPHYSICAL -R OBOT EXPERIMENTS 

A. Policy Training and Deployment 

We deploy the learned trot policy on a Unitree Go2 with 12 

actuated joints, three per leg. Training uses PPO in Isaac Lab with 4096 parallel environments and an asymmetric actor– critic. The critic receives privileged observations, including ground-truth base linear velocity. The actor uses a 45 -dimensional observation comprising joint positions and ve-locities, base angular velocity, projected gravity, commanded velocities, and the previous action. Training randomizes friction coefficients uniformly over 

[0 .3, 1.2] and base-mass perturbations over [−1, +3] kg. A PD actuator model includes a torque–speed limit and action-execution delay. After training, the actor is exported to ONNX with a configuration specifying observation scales and command ranges. The policy is deployed without fine-tuning. Inference runs on a desktop computer at 50 Hz through the Unitree SDK low-level interface. Joint positions and velocities come from encoders, base angular velocity from the IMU, and projected gravity from its orientation estimate. Deployment uses the exported observation and action scales. Commands are re-stricted to straight-line locomotion, with forward velocity in 

[−0.6, 0.6] m/s and zero lateral and yaw velocity. 

B. Controller Comparison 

We compare the transferred policy with Unitree’s MPC controller and an RL controller trained with a hand-engineered locomotion reward. Each trial begins from stand-ing and ends when the robot leaves the camera view or requires operator intervention. The current comparison con-tains 7–8 trials per controller and reports mean and standard deviation across trials. These hardware statistics are separate from the three-seed simulation evaluation. 

C. Gait-Quality Metrics 

The seven metrics reported in the main paper characterize contact transitions, joint motion, stepping rhythm, and diag-onal coordination. They are computed from recorded foot-force and joint-angle signals. 

a) Contact smoothness: This score summarizes the rate of change of the foot-force signal: 

Qcontact = 11 + ¯ sF

, (6) where ¯sF is the mean force-signal slope used by the eval-uator. Higher scores indicate less abrupt measured contact transitions. The score depends on force scaling and temporal sampling, which must be consistent across controllers. 

b) Joint jerk: For joint angle qj (t), jerk is the third time derivative, ... 

q j (t). We report root-mean-square jerk across joints and samples in rad /s3. Lower values indicate less abrupt joint motion. 

c) Joint-motion magnitude: We report the root-mean-square joint angular velocity in rad /s. This measures the magnitude of joint motion. Without torque or power mea-surements, it does not establish mechanical work or energy efficiency. 

d) Stride frequency: Touchdown events are detected from threshold crossings in foot-force signals. Stride fre-quency summarizes the stepping cadence in Hz. A higher or lower frequency is descriptive and is not, by itself, evidence of a better gait. 

e) Cadence entropy: The entropy of the inter-stride interval distribution is 

H = − X

> b

pb log 2 pb, (7) where pb is the fraction of intervals in bin b, and zero-probability terms contribute zero. Lower entropy indicates more concentrated stride timing under a common discretiza-tion. f) Phase consistency: This 0–1 score measures how consistently diagonal leg pairs maintain their relative phase across short recording windows. Higher values indicate less temporal drift in diagonal coordination. 

g) Diagonal phase offset: Cross-correlation of foot-force signals estimates the timing lag within FL/RR and FR/RL pairs. The lag is expressed as a phase difference in degrees relative to stride timing. Values near 0◦ indicate synchronized diagonal legs. Phase offset describes average synchronization, whereas phase consistency describes its stability over time. APPENDIX EREASONING AND EVALUATION PROMPTS 

Figures 8–12 present condensed prompt templates for reasoning, reward generation, and final behavioral evaluation. Bracketed text denotes task-specific inputs. The reasoning agents inspect the experience tree, individual experiment records, and accumulated insights through retrieval tools. The templates below summarize the MJX reasoning roles; Isaac Lab uses locomotion-specific versions and names the Proposer the Scientist . Its Strategist also selects a reward-design archetype. The final behavioral evaluator is distinct from the Vid-LLM that provides feedback during reward search. Search-time observation and final behavioral evaluation serve different purposes. The Observe stage supplies feed-back for subsequent reward refinement, whereas the external panel scores the selected policies after search. The annotator combines search-time observations, diagnostics, refinement plans, parent findings, and current insights into the findings stored with each experiment. 

Reason: Proposer System Prompt 

You are a reward-function research proposer analyzing an experiment tree. Identify cross-branch patterns, partial successes, and a promising next experiment. Inspect the full tree using get thought tree() and retrieve relevant records using get node detail() .Compare task-alignment observations with survival, velocity, posture, and training diagnostics. When visual descriptions conflict with measured survival or motion, use the measurements to resolve the discrepancy. A surviving policy with low forward velocity is alive but not moving; a policy that terminates after only a few steps is failing even if the video summary suggests otherwise. Distinguish useful motor coordination without translation from true inactivity. High limb range of motion and periodicity indicate a valuable partial success even when forward velocity is near zero. If action magnitudes are large but the visual summary reports only twitching, inspect the node in detail. Compare reward-component training curves to identify convergence, plateaus, and terms that dominate optimization. 

Reason: Proposer (continued) 

Read accumulated insights and avoid repeating falsified hypotheses. A branch with at least two children showing only lateral changes or regressions is stuck: choose another parent or a fundamentally different reward structure. Returning to the root is allowed when a clean change of direction is needed. Conclude with Task Alignment Status , Stuck Branches ,

Cross-Branch Patterns , Partial Successes Worth Exploring ,and Proposed Direction . Specify the parent, changes, testable hypothesis, and evidence that the proposal does not repeat a failed pattern. 

User Prompt 

Analyze the experiment journal for the following task and propose the next experiment. Begin by inspecting the full tree. 

[Task description or grounded behavioral specification] 

Fig. 8: Condensed Proposer prompt for MJX reward search. 

Reason: Critic System Prompt 

You are a critical reviewer challenging the Proposer’s analysis of a reward-search tree for [Task description] . Check whether the proposal addresses the requested behavior rather than merely increasing native return. Verify claims against quantitative diagnostics and experiment records. Challenge unsupported interpretations of training dynamics, repeated hypotheses, and proposals that continue a stuck branch. Retrieve specific nodes to support your objections. You must identify at least one overlooked node and at least one flaw or weak assumption in the proposed direction. Return your task-alignment assessment, overlooked nodes, challenges to the hypothesis, relevant prior experiments, and concerns that the Strategist must address. 

User Prompt 

Review the Proposer’s latest position using the debate history and retrieval tools. If earlier concerns have been resolved, acknowledge this and identify new concerns or deeper issues. 

[Proposer’s analysis and debate history] 

Fig. 9: Condensed Critic prompt for MJX reward search. 

Reason: Strategist System Prompt 

You are a strategist synthesizing a Proposer–Critic debate into one concrete reward-refinement experiment. Your prescription must be self-contained because the generator does not receive the debate. Address each remaining Critic concern and justify the selected parent. Include relevant parent-code snippets, the components to preserve or change, exact formulas and coefficient ranges, observation indices or information keys, and the expected magnitude of each term. Ground the changes in the recorded evidence. Reason: Strategist (continued) 

Return the following sections: Selected Parent , Hypothesis ,

Prescription for GENERATE , Addressing Critic’s Concerns ,and Current Best Node . State what outcomes would confirm or refute the hypothesis. The current best node may differ from the selected parent. Use update insights() when the evidence warrants an update to the accumulated principles. 

User Prompt 

Synthesize the debate into a complete prescription for the next experiment. Use retrieval tools to review the cited nodes and explicitly address the Critic’s remaining concerns. Optimizing native return alone is insufficient. 

[Task description; complete debate transcript] 

Fig. 10: Condensed Strategist prompt for MJX reward search. 

Execute: Reward Generator System Prompt: MJX 

You are an expert reinforcement-learning reward engineer. Write a Python reward function for a fresh PPO policy using only the available observation, action, and information signals. Use the provided indices and prefer information keys when available. Return a finite scalar reward and a dictionary of named component values. Use only the supplied NumPy and math interfaces; include no imports. 

User Prompt: MJX 

Write a reward function that follows the Strategist’s prescription exactly. Preserve components designated to remain unchanged and respect the specified formulas and coefficient ranges. 

[Task specification; environment specification; Strategist’s prescription, including parent reference code] 

Return only JSON with reasoning ,

component formulas , and code . The code implements 

compute reward(obs, action, raw reward, terminated, truncated, info) and returns 

(total reward, components dict) .For initialization, replace the prescription with a bootstrap strategy and available prior insights; no parent experiment is provided. 

System and User Prompts: Isaac Lab 

Reason about locomotion failure modes and design reward components that address them. Follow the supplied Go2 environment-data schema, gait-specific constraints, and design archetype. When supplied, the Strategist’s prescription takes priority over the archetype. 

[Task description; Go2 environment-data schema and constraints; archetype; optional prescription and prior video feedback] 

Execute: Reward Generator (continued) 

Return a JSON code block containing components . Each component specifies name , default weight , and code ;custom code returns a tensor of shape [num envs] . Use the designated component names for contact-based terms and obey the required component count of 6–12. Include the mandatory orientation, base-height, feet-air-time, gait-contact-phase, and lateral-foot-spacing components. 

Fig. 11: Condensed generation templates and output in-terfaces for MJX and Isaac Lab. In MJX, parent code is included in the prescription rather than passed as a separate experiment record. 

Evaluate: Behavioral Evaluator System Prompt 

You are an expert robotics evaluator scoring locomotion policies. 

User Prompt 

Evaluate the rollout for [Task description] using all supplied camera views, or temporally ordered frames. Judge a reasonable approximation of the requested behavior given the robot’s physical constraints. The camera follows the robot: assess travel relative to the floor rather than screen position. Ignore the frozen initial padding. Use the supplied simulator facts about termination and torso flips to resolve apparent falls; your fall description must agree with these facts. 

[Rollout videos or ordered frames; simulator episode facts] 

First describe falls , progress , torso , and legs . Then assign integer scores from 1 to 5: 

Posture and movement style. 1: fallen, flipped, stuck, or no meaningful motion; 2: upright but wrong direction or orientation; 3: approximately correct motion with noticeable posture issues; 4: good posture and direction with minor deviations; 5: close match to the requested posture and movement style. 

Limb coordination. 1: chaotic, flailing, or still; 2: leg motion without a recognizable coordination pattern; 3: rhythmic motion without a clear match to the target gait; 4: coordinated motion mostly resembling the target gait; 5: clear, sustained coordination closely matching the target gait. Return only JSON with observations ,

posture style , limb coordination , and 

reasoning . Keep the explanation to one or two sentences linking the observations to the scores. 

Fig. 12: Condensed final behavioral-evaluation template (v3 ), including observation-first scoring and simulator episode facts.