Title: Deferred Cyclotomic Representation for Stable and Exact Evaluation of q-Hypergeometric Series

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.13196v1

Published Time: Thu, 16 Apr 2026 00:06:10 GMT

Number of Pages: 17

Markdown Content:
# Deferred Cyclotomic Representation for Stable and Exact Evaluation of q-Hypergeometric Series 

Seth K. Asante 1, ∗

> 1

Department of Mathematics and Statistics, University of New Brunswick, Fredericton, NB, E3B 5A3, Canada 

We introduce a cyclotomic representation for finite q-hypergeometric series and q-deformed am-plitudes that separates algebraic structure from evaluation. By expressing each summand in a sparse exponent basis over irreducible cyclotomic polynomials, all products and ratios of quantum factorials reduce to integer vector arithmetic. This ensures that cancellations between numerator and denominator are resolved exactly prior to any evaluation. This formulation yields the deferred cyclotomic representation (DCR), a parameter-independent combinatorial object of the series, from which evaluation in any target field is realized as a ring homomorphism. For quantum recoupling coefficients, we demonstrate that this framework achieves linear memory scaling in the compilation phase, eliminates intermediate expression swell in exact arithmetic, and substantially extends the range of reliable double-precision computation by reducing cancellation-induced error amplification. Beyond its computational advantages, the DCR provides a unified perspective on q-deformed amplitudes. Structural properties like admissibility at roots of unity, and the classical limit all emerge as intrinsic properties of a single underlying combinatorial object. 

I. INTRODUCTION 

Finite alternating q-hypergeometric series arise in a wide range of applications including representation the-ory, quantum topology, and mathematical physics. They encode the algebraic structure of quantum groups [1, 2], appear in the construction of topological quantum field theories and knot invariants [3–5], and govern recoupling coefficients such as quantum 6 j-symbols [6, 7]. These same series are used to define fundamental transition am-plitudes in state-sum models of three-dimensional quan-tum gravity [8–13], as well as in tensor network formula-tions of topological phases of matter [14–16]. Despite their fundamental importance, the evaluation of q-hypergeometric series remains computationally chal-lenging. Exact symbolic approaches suffer from severe intermediate expression swell [17, 18], since the ratio-nal functions grow rapidly in size with the summation range. Numerical evaluation, on the other hand, is lim-ited by catastrophic cancellation , where alternating sums of exponentially large terms lead to substantial loss of precision [19–21]. These difficulties are particularly acute at roots of unity and in semiclassical regimes, where the 

condition number of the summation grows rapidly with the parameters. These limitations reflect not only algorithmic ineffi-ciency, but a deeper issue related to the underlying repre-sentation. In conventional approaches, q-hypergeometric series are expressed as dense rational or polynomial func-tions of the deformation parameter q. This representa-tion obscures the underlying multiplicative structure of quantum factorials and forces cancellations to occur only after numerical or symbolic expansion. As a result, both exact and floating-point computations are exposed to un-necessary intermediate complexity.  

> ∗seth.asante@unb.ca

In this work, we introduce a representation that is in-trinsic to q-hypergeometric series, and separates its al-gebraic structure from evaluation. The central idea is to express quantum integers and factorials through their cy-clotomic factorization and to encode the resulting expres-sions as products of the irreducible cyclotomic generators 

{q, Φd(q2)}d≥2. We refer to this construction as the de-ferred cyclotomic representation (DCR). Within this rep-resentation, each q-hypergeometric summand is encoded as a sparse vector of integers corresponding to exponents of the cyclotomic basis. As a result, all multiplicative operations reduce to integer arithmetic. The key conceptual shift is that the dependence on the deformation parameter q is removed from the algebraic representation and reintroduced only at the level of eval-uation. In this framework, a q-hypergeometric amplitude is not a function to be recomputed for each value of q,but the evaluation of a fixed combinatorial object under a family of projection maps. This perspective unifies ex-act symbolic computation, floating-point evaluation, and asymptotic limits within a single representation. 

Main contributions. We summarize the main contri-butions of this work as follows: (1) Cyclotomic representation. We show that finite q-hypergeometric amplitudes admit a representation in a sparse cyclotomic exponent basis, revealing the multiplicative structure of quantum factorials. (2) Deferred evaluation. We introduce the deferred cyclotomic representation (DCR), which separates a one-time combinatorial compilation from subse-quent evaluation via projection into a target field. (3) Complexity reduction. We show that the construc-tion of the DCR scales near-linearly in the summa-tion length and avoids the expression swell inherent in polynomial representations. 

> arXiv:2604.13196v1 [math-ph] 14 Apr 2026

2(4) Numerical stability. We show that the DCR per-forms algebraic cancellations prior to evaluation. This reduces the dynamic range of intermediate quantities and mitigate cancellation-driven loss of precision in floating-point arithmetic. (5) Structural unification. We demonstrate that admis-sibility at roots of unity, q-deformation, and classi-cal limits manifest as intrinsic properties of a single DCR combinatorial object. From a computational standpoint, this separation yields several advantages. By encoding all multiplicative structure at the level of integer exponents, the DCR elim-inates intermediate polynomial growth and reduces mem-ory usage in exact arithmetic. At the same time, it acts as an algebraic preconditioner for numerical evaluation, per-forming exact cancellations prior to floating-point com-putation and thereby reducing error amplification. Once constructed, the representation can be reused across multiple parameter regimes, enabling efficient amortized computation over large parameter spaces. Beyond computational considerations, the cyclotomic representation exposes structural features of q-deformed amplitudes that are less transparent in conventional formulations. In particular, admissibility at roots of unity corresponds to the vanishing of specific cyclotomic modes, while the classical limit q → 1 reduces the expo-nent data to the prime factorization of classical factorials. More generally, the representation suggests an interpre-tation of q-hypergeometric summation as a discrete flow in an integer exponent space, independent of the choice of evaluation field. These structural aspects are discussed in Section V. We develop this framework in detail and analyze its properties both theoretically and empirically. Using the quantum 6 j-symbol as a benchmark, we demonstrate lin-ear memory scaling in the construction phase, improved numerical stability in floating-point arithmetic, and ef-ficient amortized evaluation across continuous ranges of 

q. The 6 j-symbol provides a canonical test case in which factorial growth, oscillatory summation, and semiclassi-cal behaviour are all present, making it a controlled and representative benchmark for both symbolic and numer-ical performance. The remainder of this paper is organised as follows. Section II reviews the structure of q-hypergeometric se-ries and the limitations of conventional evaluation meth-ods. Section III introduces the cyclotomic representa-tion and the deferred evaluation framework. Section IV defines projection maps and describes their implementa-tion. Section V develops structural and algebraic con-sequences of the representation. Section VI analyses computational complexity and numerical stability. Sec-tion VII presents empirical benchmarks. Section VIII states the conclusions and directions for future work.  

> II. PRELIMINARIES AND LIMITATIONS OF POLYNOMIAL REPRESENTATIONS

The evaluation of q-hypergeometric series is often lim-ited by intrinsic computational difficulties rather than implementation details. In particular, when evaluated at roots of unity, these series combine rapidly growing facto-rial terms with strongly oscillatory summation patterns. This interplay leads simultaneously to severe numerical cancellation in floating-point arithmetic and substantial intermediate expression growth in exact symbolic compu-tation. As a result, standard “eager” evaluation strate-gies, whether numerical or symbolic, become unreliable or prohibitively expensive as problem sizes increase. These computational difficulties are not merely techni-cal. They reflect a deeper representation-level mismatch. In conventional approaches, q-hypergeometric series are expressed as dense polynomial or rational functions in the deformation parameter q. However, this representation is not intrinsic to the multiplicative structure of quantum integers and factorials. In particular, it obscures their underlying cyclotomic factorization and forces cancella-tions to occur only after full expansion. This misalignment has two immediate consequences. First, both symbolic and numerical methods are forced to operate on representations that artificially inflate in-termediate complexity. Second, the cost of evaluation becomes dominated not by the combinatorics of the sum itself, but by the overhead introduced by the chosen alge-braic form. From this perspective, the primary obstacle is not algorithmic but structural. The polynomial represen-tation fails to respect the natural algebraic organization of the series. In this section, we formalize the structure of q-hypergeometric series, introduce the quantum 6 j-symbol as a canonical example, and analyze the limitations of conventional evaluation strategies. This analysis will mo-tivate the need for a representation that preserves multi-plicative structure and enables cancellation prior to ex-pansion.   

> A. Algebraic Structure of q-Hypergeometric Series

In the representation theory of quantum groups and in quantum topology [7, 22], the basic building blocks of amplitudes are the quantum integers [n]q = qn − q−n

q − q−1 , n ∈ Z, (1) and the associated quantum factorials [ n]q ! = Qnm=1 [m]q ,with [0] q ! = 1, where q is treated as a formal parameter. A broad class of quantities of interest and invariants can be written as finite sums of the form 

S(q) = 

> zmax

X

> z=zmin

(−1) z qf (z)

Q

> i

[Ai(z)] q !

Q 

> j

[Bj (z)] q ! , (2) 3where Ai(z) and Bj (z) are affine functions of the summa-tion variable z and of external parameters (e.g. angular momentum spins j), and f (z) is a linear or quadratic phase. The summation bounds zmin and zmax are deter-mined by admissibility conditions ensuring that all fac-torial arguments are non-negative. Such expressions arise in recoupling theory for Uq (sl 2)and in the evaluation of state-sum invariants in topolog-ical quantum field theory [4–6]. Even in this abstract form, two key structural features are apparent: (i) ratios of factorials produce rapidly varying magnitudes across the summation range, and (ii) the alternating sign ( −1) z

leads to oscillatory interference. These features are in-trinsic and persist across essentially all non-trivial exam-ples.   

> B. The Quantum 6j-Symbol

A canonical example of the series Eq. (2) is the quantum 6 j-symbol (or q-deformed Racah–Wigner co-efficient), which governs recoupling transformations in 

Uq (sl 2) representation theory [5, 7]. Beyond its algebraic significance, it serves as the fundamental building block of state sum models in quantum topology and quantum gravity [4, 23]. From a computational standpoint, the quantum 6 j-symbol provides a minimal nontrivial setting in which the key computational challenges of evaluating oscillatory q-hypergeometric series become manifest. These include factorial growth, alternating sums, and severe cancella-tion between large intermediate contributions. For admissible spins {j1, . . . , j 6} associated with a ge-ometric tetrahedron, the quantum 6 j-symbol is defined by the Racah-type expression [5, 6] 

j1 j2 j3

j4 j5 j6



> q

= ∆ j1j2j3 ∆j1j5j6 ∆j2j4j6 ∆j3j4j5 ×

> zmax

X

> z=zmin

(−1) z [z + 1] q !

Q4

> i=1

[z − ai]q ! Q3

> y=1

[by − z]q ! . (3) The summation limits zmin = max i(ai) and zmax =min y (by ) are governed by the linear combinations 

a1 = j1 + j2 + j3, b1 = j1 + j2 + j4 + j5,a2 = j1 + j5 + j6, b2 = j1 + j3 + j4 + j6,a3 = j2 + j4 + j6, b3 = j2 + j3 + j5 + j6. (4) 

a4 = j3 + j4 + j5,

The coefficients ∆ abc represent the geometric triangle co-efficients (the radical prefactors), and are given by ∆abc =

s

[a + b − c]q ![ a − b + c]q ![ −a + b + c]q ![a + b + c + 1] q ! , (5) where the triad ( a, b, c ) satisfies the standard triangle in-equalities ( |a − b| ≤ c ≤ a + b) and the integer sum condition ( a + b + c ∈ Z). At roots of unity, 

q = exp 

 iπ h



, where h = k + 2 . (6) the theory becomes finite (a modular tensor category as-sociated with SU(2) k, where k ∈ Z), with quantum inte-gers reducing to trigonometric functions and admissibil-ity imposing a hard cutoff. Despite this finiteness, the computational difficulties persist and, in fact, become more pronounced due to enhanced oscillatory behavior.  

> C. Cancellation and Numerical Conditioning

Let Tz denote the magnitude of the z-th summand in Eq. (2), so that S = P 

> z

(−1) z Tz . A central difficulty arises from the large disparity between the scale of indi-vidual terms and the final sum. A useful measure of this effect is the condition number 

defined by 

κ =

P 

> z

|Tz ||S| , (7) which captures the scale separation between individual terms and the final sum. In floating-point arithmetic, the number of digits lost due to cancellation scales as log 10 (κ) [19]. In the semiclassical regime of the 6j-symbol, one has |S| ∼ j−3/2 [8, 24, 25], while individual terms grow rapidly with j. As a result, κ increases super-polynomially, leading to catastrophic cancellation. Cru-cially, this instability is not a numerical artifact but an intrinsic property of the series. Even perfectly imple-mented floating-point algorithms cannot avoid precision loss once κ becomes large. To be precise, Table I tracks the algebraic growth of the quantum 6 j-symbol Eq. (3) for equal spins ji = j at level k = 4 j. At j = 100, the precision loss of ∆ loss = 13 .6 pushes 64-bit hardware to the extreme. By j = 200, the maximum term reaches 10 24 , requiring a minimum of 28 digits of precision to distinguish the signal from numerical noise.                                                         

> TABLE I. Condition number proxy and precision loss ∆ loss =log 10 (max z|Tz|/|S|) for symmetric 6 j-symbols ( ji=j) at level k= 4 j.IEEE 754 double precision provides 15 .9 sig-nificant digits.
> Spin jLevel kmax z|Tz||S|∆loss
> 50 200 6.03 ×10 32.19 ×10 −36.4 100 400 2.96 ×10 10 7.80 ×10 −413.6 200 800 2.82 ×10 24 2.77 ×10 −428.0 300 1200 4.74 ×10 38 1.51 ×10 −442.5 400 1600 1.01 ×10 53 9.80 ×10 −557.0

Standard remedies, such as logarithmic rescaling via the Log-Sum-Exp (LSE) transformation [26], mitigate overflow but do not resolve cancellation. High-precision 4arithmetic (using BigFloat ) delays failure but introduces significant computational overhead and does not address the underlying structural cause.  

> D. Complexity of Exact Evaluation

Exact evaluation avoids numerical instability but in-troduces a different bottleneck: expression swell. At roots of unity, quantum integers can be represented ex-actly in cyclotomic fields Q(ζ2h) [27]. However, in stan-dard computer algebra systems (CAS), this requires rep-resenting factorials as polynomials in q and performing repeated rational operations [28]. Each summation step combines rational functions as 

PA(q)

PB (q) + PC (q)

PD (q) = PA(q)PD (q) + PC (q)PB (q)

PB (q)PD (q) , (8) leading to rapid growth in both degree and coefficient size. Simplification requires polynomial greatest com-mon divisor (GCD) computations, which are themselves costly. As a result, intermediate expressions become sig-nificantly larger than the final result. This phenomenom, known as expression swell, is well documented in sym-bolic computation [17, 18, 29]. It is inherent to the poly-nomial representation and leads to rapid growth in mem-ory usage and runtime. Symbolic summation algorithms can reduce or trans-form q-hypergeometric expressions [30], however, they do not alter the evaluation complexity of individual terms once expanded, nor do they mitigate cancellation effects in finite-precision arithmetic.  

> E. Origin of Computational Complexity

The preceding analysis reveals that both numerical in-stability and symbolic expression swell arise from evalu-ating the q-hypergeometric series in an expanded poly-nomial representation or rational form. In this represen-tation, multiplicative structure is destroyed by expansion into dense polynomials in q. Moreover, common factors are introduced but only eliminated after expensive sim-plification and cancellation is deferred to the final stages of computation. These effects are not artifacts of implementation, but consequences of representing inherently multiplicative objects in an additive algebraic form. Thus, the compu-tational complexity of q-hypergeometric series is largely a consequence of representation choice rather than intrin-sic combinatorial difficulty. An effective computational framework must therefore preserve multiplicative struc-ture throughout, enable cancellation prior to expansion and avoid dense polynomial arithmetic altogether. This observation motivates the representation intro-duced in the next section, in which quantum integers and factorials are encoded directly via their irreducible cyclotomic factors. In this formulation, multiplicative al-gebra is reduced to sparse integer arithmetic, eliminating both expression swell and representation-induced numer-ical instability.  

> III. CYCLOTOMIC REPRESENTATION AND THE DEFERRED EVALUATION

In this section, we introduce a representation that di-rectly resolves the structural and computational limita-tions identified in Section II. The central idea is to sep-arate the algebraic structure of q-hypergeometric series from their numerical realization by encoding quantum in-tegers and factorials through their cyclotomic factoriza-tion. These factorizations are represented as sparse inte-ger exponent vectors, ensuring that multiplicative struc-ture is preserved throughout the computation. This approach eliminates the need to construct dense polynomial expressions altogether. As a result, cancel-lations that were previously deferred to late stages of symbolic or numerical evaluation are instead performed exactly and immediately at the level of integer exponents. This representation naturally leads to a deferred evalu-ation strategy where the algebraic structure of the series is compiled once into an abstract combinatorial object, and evaluation in a specific numerical or algebraic field is postponed to a final projection step. In this way, the representation itself acts as a bridge between exact and approximate computation, while avoiding the intermedi-ate complexity that plagues traditional approaches.  

> A. Cyclotomic Factorization of Quantum Integers and Factorials

We begin with the quantum integer [n]q = qn − q−n

q − q−1 . (9) Factoring out the phase q1−n yields [n]q = q1−n 1 − (q2)n

1 − q2 = q1−nn−1X

> k=0

q2k. (10) It is a classical result that the polynomial xn − 1 admits a unique factorization into cyclotomic polynomials [31], 

xn − 1 = Y

> d|n

Φd(x), (11) where each Φ d(x) is irreducible over Q.

Proposition 1 (Cyclotomic factorization) . For any pos-itive integer n ≥ 1, the quantum integer and quantum 5

factorial admit the factorization 

[n]q = q1−n Y

> d|nd> 1

Φd(q2), (12) [n]q ! = q n(1 −n)2

> n

Y

> d=2

Φd(q2)⌊n/d ⌋ (13) 

respectively, where Φd denotes the d-th cyclotomic poly-nomial. Proof. Equation (12) follows by substituting x = q2

into (11) and cancelling Φ 1(q2) = q2 − 1 against the de-nominator of (10). For the factorial, apply (12) to each factor of [ n]q ! = Qnm=1 [m]q . The phase exponent collects into the sum 

Pnm=1 (1 − m) = n − n(n+1) 2 = n(1 −n)2 . The exponent of Φ d(q2) counts the number of integers m ∈ { 1, . . . , n }

with d | m, which is exactly ⌊n/d ⌋.The key consequence of Proposition 1 is that quan-tum integers and factorials admit a canonical multiplica-tive decomposition into irreducible cyclotomic compo-nents. Unlike polynomial expansions, this factorization is sparse, structured, and directly aligned with the arith-metic of roots of unity. It is precisely this structure that is obscured in conventional representations and recovered here.  

> B. Cyclotomic Exponent Basis

The factorizations above suggest representing algebraic expressions through their exponents with respect to the basis {q, Φd(q2)}. We formalize this as follows: 

Definition 2 (Cyclotomic exponent vector) . Let Dmax ∈

N. A cyclotomic exponent vector is a map 

e : {2, 3, . . . , D max } → Z. (14) 

Equivalently, fixing the natural ordering of indices, we identify e with the vector (e2, e 3, . . . , e Dmax ) ∈ ZDmax −1,with sparse support. The support size is defined by 

∥e∥0 = # {d : ed̸ = 0 }.

The exponent vectors are stored in sparse form (e.g. hash maps or compressed index-value arrays), so that arithmetic operations scale linearly in the support size 

∥e∥0. This replaces dense polynomial algebra with sparse integer arithmetic, with direct consequences for both computational complexity and numerical stability. 

Definition 3 (Cyclotomic monomial) . Let q be a formal variable. A cyclotomic monomial M is a tuple 

M = ( σ, P, e), (15) 

where σ ∈ {− 1, 1}, P ∈ Z, and e is a cyclotomic expo-nent vector. 1 It represents the formal expression 

M(q) = σ q P Y

> d≥2

Φd(q2)ed . (16) The cyclotomic monomials thus, form a free abelian multiplicative group on formal generators q and {Φd},with integer exponent vectors. This representation con-verts multiplicative algebra into additive integer struc-ture. In particular, multiplication and division corre-spond to component-wise integer operations 

MA × M B 7 → (σAσB , P A + PB , eA + eB ),

MA

MB

7 → (σAσB , P A − PB , eA − eB ). (17) Crucially, cancellations that would require polynomial GCD computations in the standard representation are realized here as exact integer subtractions. This directly addresses the representation-level inefficiencies identified in Section II E.  

> C. Hypergeometric Update Structure

To avoid recomputation of large factorial expressions, the q-hypergeometric series Eq. (2) are evaluated using their defining recurrence relations between consecutive summands. Let Mz denote the cyclotomic representa-tion of the z-th summand. Then 

Mz+1 = Mz · R z , (18) where Rz is a rational function involving only local quan-tum integers. For the quantum 6 j-symbol, one obtains the explicit ratio 

Rz = − [z + 2] q

Q4

> i=1

[z + 1 − ai]q

Q3

> y=1

[by − (z + 1)] q

. (19) This recurrence structure is essential: it ensures that the global factorial growth observed in Section II C is never explicitly realized. Instead, the computation proceeds through local multiplicative updates. In the cyclotomic representation, each factor in Rz can be decomposed independently, and each update reduces to sparse integer addition 

ez+1 = ez + eRz , Pz+1 = Pz + PRz (20) with intial data at z = zmin . The cost of propagating the full summation is therefore governed by the number of nonzero entries in these exponent vectors and the length of the summation range.       

> 1For generalized or weighted cyclotomic monomials, σmay be extended to Qor R, while retaining the same exponent structure.

6 

> D. Deferred Cyclotomic Representation

The construction above naturally lead to a separation between algebraic compilation and numerical evaluation. For a given finite q-hypergeometric series, we encode the algebraic structure of each summand in a cyclotomic ex-ponent basis and organize the result into a compact rep-resentation: 

Definition 4 (Deferred cyclotomic representation (DCR)) . Let S(q) be a finite q-hypergeometric series with summation range z ∈ [zmin , z max ]. A deferred cyclo-tomic representation of S is the tuple 

SDCR =  Mbase , {R z }zmax −1 

> z=zmin

, Mroot , Mrad 

 , (21) 

where Mbase is the cyclotomic monomial of the initial summand at zmin , {R z } is the sequence of multiplicative update ratios computed via Eq. (19) , and (Mroot , Mrad )

are the square and square-free parts of the global geomet-ric prefactor (as in Eq. (22) ). This object encodes the full algebraic structure of the series independently of any numerical value of q.

The DCR transforms the evaluation problem of q-hypergeometric series S(q) into two distinct stages (See Figure1): 

• Compilation stage: construction of a combinato-rial object SDCR over Z encoding all multiplicative structure, 

• Projection stage: evaluation in a chosen target field. This separation directly resolves the dual bottlenecks identified in Section II, i.e., expression swell is avoided because no dense expressions are formed, and numeri-cal instability is mitigated because cancellations are per-formed exactly prior to evaluation. We use the term deferred cyclotomic representation (DCR) in two closely related senses, as the underlying combinatorial exponent data, and as the two-stage frame-work in which this data is constructed and subsequently evaluated via a projection map. The intended meaning will be clear from context. 

Exact square-root decomposition. A distinctive fea-ture of quantum recoupling coefficients like Eq. (3) is the presence of square roots of quantum factorial ratios in global geometric prefactors, such as the triangle coeffi-cients ∆ abc of Eq. (5). In the polynomial representation, such square roots require algebraic field extensions. One cannot remain in Q(q) and must adjoin square roots of polynomials, inflating the arithmetic cost. In the cyclotomic monomial representation, square roots are handled exactly at the exponent level, avoid-ing algebraic field extensions during compilation. This is achieved by separating the exponents of the geometric prefactors denoted by Mgeom into even and odd parts 

Mgeom = Mroot · pMrad . (22) Here, Mroot collects all cyclotomic factors with even ex-ponents (a perfect square) and Mrad collects the square-free part ( ed ∈ {− 1, 0, 1} for all d). Both components have integer exponents and are evaluated exactly by in-teger arithmetic. The entire square root is resolved at the exponent level, without field extension and without any polynomial computation. This is an exact, algebraic capability that has no direct analogue in the polynomial representation. 

The DCR as algebraic preconditioner. Because all al-gebraic simplifications including phase factors, factorial cancellation, and square-root extraction, are performed at the integer level during compilation, before any value of q is assigned, the DCR delivers the summand to the evaluation stage in its maximally reduced form. This has a precise computational consequence: the dy-namic range of intermediate quantities is drastically re-duced relative to the polynomial representation. In par-ticular, the large intermediate cancellations to resolve the condition number κ in Section II C are no longer real-ized numerically, but are instead resolved exactly at the algebraic level. In this sense, the DCR acts as an alge-braic preconditioner . It reorganizes the computation so that the representation itself performs the cancellations that would otherwise occur approximately under finite precision arithmetic. This explains the qualitative im-provement in numerical stability and the extension of re-liable double-precision computation demonstrated in Sec-tion VII. We summarize the construction of the deferred repre-sentation for a generic q-hypergeometric series in Algo-rithm 1. 

Algorithm 1 Deferred cyclotomic compilation                                                       

> Require: Aq-hypergeometric series S(q) with external pa-rameters (e.g. spins j)
> Ensure: Deferred cyclotomic representation SDCR
> 1: zmin , z max ←determine summation bounds from admis-sibility conditions
> 2: Mgeom ←construct geometric prefactors (e.g. ∆ abc ) via Proposition 1 ▷integer arithmetic only
> 3: (Mroot ,Mrad )←extract perfect squares from Mgeom
> 4: construct Mbase at z=zmin
> 5: {R z} ← [] ▷Initialize ratio sequence
> 6: for z=zmin to zmax −1do
> 7: Rz←compute cyclotomic factorization of the ratio via Eq. (19)
> 8: Append Rzto {R z}
> 9: end for
> 10: return (Mbase ,{R z},Mroot ,Mrad )

Once constructed, the DCR can be specialized to dif-ferent target domains through a projection step. The same representation is reused in all cases, while only the evaluation map depends on the chosen numerical or al-gebraic setting. This separation allows a single compiled object to support consistent evaluation across exact and approximate regimes, and underlies the stability and ef-ficiency gains analyzed below. In this sense, the DCR 7                    

> q-hypergeometric series
> S(q)
> Deferred Cyclotomic Representation
> SDCR ∈Z
> Exact Field
> T∈Q(ζ2h)
> Floating-point
> T∈R,C
> Classical limit (q→1)
> Cyclotomic
> factorization
> Projection Π T
> FIG. 1. The deferred cyclotomic architecture. Aq-hypergeometric series is compiled once into the DCR as a parameter-independent combinatorial object over Zencoding its full algebraic content without assuming any value of q. Evaluation in a target field Tis a projection Π Tapplied to this fixed object. Exact arithmetic, floating-point evaluation, and the classical limit
> q→1 are all instances of projection.

acts as a representation-level preconditioner, reorganiz-ing the computation prior to any numerical or symbolic realization.  

> IV. UNIVERSAL FIELD PROJECTIONS

The deferred cyclotomic representation (DCR) pro-vides a unified representation of q-hypergeometric series in terms of cyclotomic exponent data. Evaluation is re-alized as a projection of the representation into a chosen target field T by assigning concrete values to the cyclo-tomic basis elements. This formulation elevates evaluation from a computa-tional procedure to a structural operation. Rather than constructing distinct algebraic expressions for each spe-cialization of q, the DCR defines a single universal object together with a family of projection maps. In this sense, 

q-dependence is no longer an intrinsic feature of the rep-resentation itself, but an external parameter introduced only at the level of evaluation. This separation is the key conceptual mechanism underlying both the compu-tational efficiency and the structural consequences devel-oped later in Section V. More precisely, each cyclotomic monomial M Eq. (16) corresponding to a summand in the series, is encoded by a sign σ, an integer power P of q, and a sparse collection of exponents {ed}. A projection into T is specified by the following definition. 

Definition 5 (Field projection) . Let T be a target field. A field projection is a map 

ΠT : M → T

defined on cyclotomic monomials by 

ΠT(M) = σ ΠT(q)P Y

> d≥2

ΠT(Φ d(q2)) ed , (23) 

where σ ∈ {± 1}, P ∈ Z, and {ed} are the cyclotomic exponents. The images of q and Φd(q2) are specified by the structure of the target field T.

The map Π T is multiplicative by construction and ex-tends linearly to sums of cyclotomic monomials, ensuring compatibility with the hypergeometric summation struc-ture. Thus, the evaluation of a full q-hypergeometric series proceeds by iterating the update relations encoded in the DCR and applying Π T to each intermediate mono-mial. Since the representation itself is independent of T,the same compiled object can be reused across all projec-tion regimes. This perspective recasts evaluation as the application of a family of field-dependent maps to a fixed combinatorial object.  

> A. Projection Regimes

We distinguish several natural projection regimes rele-vant to applications in quantum topology and numerical analysis. 

1. Root-of-unity evaluation. Let q = exp( iπ/h ), so that q2 = exp(2 πi/h ) is a primitive h-th root of unity. In this case, the cyclotomic polynomials satisfy Φd(q2) = 0 if and only if d = h. (24) Thus, the vanishing locus is supported on a single cy-clotomic index. Any cyclotomic monomial containing a factor Φ h(q2) with positive exponent vanishes identi-cally, while a negative exponent produces a pole. This leads to immediate simplifications, since contributions can be identified and eliminated early in evaluation, al-lowing early termination in the evaluation of individual summands. Notably, despite the presence of arbitrarily large indices d in the deferred cyclotomic representation, only the single index d = h governs singular behaviour upon specialization. This sharply reduces the number of nonzero terms and is particularly effective in the compu-tation of Turaev–Viro type invariants. 8

2. Exact algebraic projection. For symbolic evalua-tion, one may take T = Q(ζ2h), the cyclotomic number field generated by a primitive root ζ2h. The projection Πζ (M) = σ ζ P Y

> d≥2

Φd(ζ2)ed (25) is then computed using exact arithmetic. Because cancellations between numerator and denom-inator are resolved at the level of exponent vectors, the projection avoids intermediate polynomial division and reduces reliance on expensive greatest common divisor computations. As a result, it is well suited for imple-mentations in computer algebra systems such as Nemo.jl 

[32]. 

3. Complex analytic evaluation. For generic q ∈ C,redundant recomputation of cyclotomic factors is avoided by precomputing the values {Φd(q2)} up to the maximal degree required by the deferred representation. Using the identity q2n − 1 = Q 

> d|n

Φd(q2), the cyclotomic basis is generated via recursive M¨ obius inversion, Φn(q2) = q2n − 1

Q 

> d|n, d<n

Φd(q2) . (26) This produces a dense table in O(D log D) time, elimi-nating repeated factorization or symbolic expansion. Once precomputed, any deferred cyclotomic monomial 

M is evaluated through sparse multiplicative assembly according to Eq. (23). The computation reduces to fast exponentiation and a small number of complex multipli-cations, yielding an efficient and numerically stable eval-uation pipeline, particularly near the unit circle where direct methods are prone to loss of precision. 

4. Classical limit. In the limit q → 1, the cyclotomic factors satisfy [31] Φd(1) = 

(

p if d = pm for some prime p, 

1 otherwise. (27) Under this specialization, the cyclotomic exponent repre-sentation reduces to a prime factorization of classical fac-torial expressions. This establishes consistency between the deferred cyclotomic framework and standard arith-metic formulations of Racah–Wigner coefficients [33]. The universal projection procedure is summarized in Algorithm 2. These regimes differ only in the realization of the cyclotomic basis. The underlying combinatorial representation remains unchanged. 

Algorithm 2 DCR projection                                                      

> Require: SDCR , target field T
> Ensure: Evaluated amplitude S∈T
> 1: Precompute Π T(Φ d(q2)) for all required d▷
> field-dependent, one-time cost
> 2: Ssum ←ΠT(Mbase )▷ z min term
> 3: R←1
> 4: for each ratio Rzin {R z}do
> 5: v←ΠT(Rz)
> 6: if v= 0 then break ▷early termination at vanishing factor
> 7: end if
> 8: R←R·v
> 9: Ssum ←Ssum + Π T(Mbase )·R
> 10: end for
> 11: return pΠT(Mrad )·ΠT(Mroot )·Ssum

These projection regimes illustrate that numerical evaluation, exact arithmetic, and classical limits are not distinct computational problems, but instances of a single universal projection mechanism acting on a fixed combi-natorial object.  

> V. STRUCTURAL AND ALGEBRAIC CONSEQUENCES OF THE DCR

The deferred cyclotomic representation (DCR) has been introduced as a computational framework for sta-bilizing and scaling the evaluation of q-hypergeometric series. However, by isolating algebraic structure from evaluation, it also provides a new perspective on the in-ternal organization of quantum amplitudes. In particu-lar, deformation, admissibility, and asymptotic behavior can be reformulated as properties of a fixed combinatorial object prior to evaluation. We emphasize here that several of the structural in-terpretations developed in this section are preliminary. While the algebraic statements regarding the DCR are exact, their implications for quantum topology and dis-crete quantum geometry require further investigation. The goal here is therefore to identify precise reformula-tions and to delineate directions where the representation may offer new conceptual leverage.  

> A. Deformation as Evaluation of a Fixed Combinatorial Object

A defining feature of the DCR is that all dependence on the deformation parameter q is mediated exclusively through the projection map. The underlying exponent data is independent of q.

Proposition 6 (Deformation as evaluation) . Let S(q) be a finite q-hypergeometric series admitting a deferred cy-clotomic representation SDCR . Then for any admissible value of q,

S(q) = Π q (SDCR ), (28) 9

where Πq denotes the evaluation map defined in Eq. (23) .Proof. By construction, each summand of S(q) is repre-sented as a cyclotomic monomial Mz whose evaluation under Π q reproduces the original expression. The full sum is obtained by iterating the update relations encoded in SDCR and applying Π q termwise. Since Π q is multi-plicative, the result follows. This formulation implies that quantum amplitudes at different values of q are not distinct algebraic objects, but rather evaluations of a single underlying combinatorial structure. In particular, all topological levels k and the classical limit q → 1 arise from the same data SDCR via different projection maps. In quantum topology and discrete quantum gravity models, the deformation parameter q is related to physi-cal parameters such as the cosmological constant Λ. For example, in Turaev–Viro type models, choosing q to be a root of unity corresponds to a theory with positive cos-mological constant (Λ > 0), while other regimes are as-sociated with different geometric behaviors. From the perspective of the DCR, these different phys-ical regimes arise from different evaluations of the same combinatorial data. The representation itself does not encode the value or sign of Λ. Instead, this information enters only through the projection map. It is impor-tant to emphasize that this does not imply that different physical theories are equivalent. Rather, the DCR shows that they share a common algebraic backbone, while their physical interpretation is determined by how this struc-ture is evaluated.  

> B. Admissibility as Cyclotomic Vanishing

At roots of unity, admissibility conditions restrict the allowed spins and summation ranges. In the DCR, these constraints acquire an intrinsic algebraic characteriza-tion. 

Proposition 7 (Admissibility via cyclotomic support) .

Let q = eiπ/h , so that q2 is a primitive h-th root of unity. For a cyclotomic monomial M with exponent vector e,the evaluation satisfies 

Πq (M) = 0 ⇐⇒ eh > 0. (29) 

Proof. At q2 = e2πi/h , one has Φ d(q2) = 0 if and only if 

d = h. Thus M(q) vanishes precisely when the exponent of Φ h(q2) is positive. This identifies admissibility as a vanishing condition internal to the representation, rather than an externally imposed constraint. Terms violating admissibility are an-nihilated under projection, and in practical implementa-tions this can lead to early termination of summations. Conceptually, this reframes admissibility as a property of cyclotomic support. The role of the root of unity is to probe this support via the projection map, rather than to impose constraints at the level of summation indices.  

> C. Algebraic Structure and Exponent Geometry

Within the DCR, each term in the hypergeometric summation is encoded by an exponent vector ez together with a phase variable Pz . The summation therefore de-fines a discrete trajectory 

z 7 −→ (ez , P z ) ∈ ZDmax × Z. (30) whose evolution is governed by the rational update oper-ator Rz .This perspective reformulates multiplicative algebra of quantum factorials as additive arithmetic on integer lat-tices. In particular, 

• cancellations correspond to linear relations in 

ZDmax ,

• factorial growth of expressions is encoded in the norm ∥ez ∥,

• phase information is tracked separately through Pz .This suggests an interpretation of q-hypergeometric summation as a discrete flow in exponent space. The structure of this flow is independent of the choice of tar-get field and may provide a useful organizing principle for combinatorial identities and analyzing asymptotic be-haviour, particularly in regimes where traditional ana-lytic methods become unwieldy.  

> D. Coherence Identities at the Representation Level

Quantum recoupling coefficients satisfy several coher-ence relations. For instance orthogonality conditions (bubble move) and the Biedenharn-Elliott pentagon iden-tity, which ensures the triangulation independence of topological invariants [23, 34, 35]. Conventionally, these identities are established as analytical equalities between evaluated physical amplitudes. Because the DCR isolates amplitudes into canonical combinatorial objects SDCR , it raises the possibility that such identities may admit a formulation directly at the representation level. In particular, one may ask whether the pentagon identity can be realized as an equality be-tween unprojected cyclotomic exponent data. At present, this remains an open question. A positive answer would imply that topological invariance is rooted in purely com-binatorial properties of the exponent structure, indepen-dent of analytic features of the deformation parameter. The DCR provides a concrete setting in which this ques-tion can be formulated precisely.  

> E. Semiclassical Limit and Exponent Asymptotics

The semiclassical behaviour of q-deformed amplitudes is typically analyzed via saddle-point analysis of factorial 10 or polynomial expressions [8, 24, 25]. In the DCR, facto-rials are replaced by cyclotomic exponent data, providing an alternative description of this limit. For a cyclotomic monomial M, its logarithm under projection can be written as log Π q (M) = P log q + X

> d≥2

ed log Φ d(q2). (31) Thus, the asymptotic behaviour is governed by the growth of the exponent vector e coupled with the an-alytic properties of log Φ d(q2). In the classical limit q → 1, the cyclotomic factors re-duce to prime contributions according to Eq. (27), and the exponent data recovers the prime factorization of classical factorials via Legendre’s formula 

νp(n!) = 

> ∞

X

> m=1

 npm



, for p prime . (32) This establishes a direct interpolation between quantum and classical regimes at the level of exponent structure. Understanding how the exponent trajectory ( ez , P z ) en-codes geometric quantities such as Regge action or tetrahedral volume remains an open problem, but the DCR isolates the relevant combinatorial data in a form amenable to further analysis. We consider this an impor-tant direction for future work.  

> F. Connections to Cyclotomic Structures and Quantum Topology

Cyclotomic structures play a central role in analytic number theory and the arithmetic of quantum invari-ants. In particular, invariants of 3-manifolds evaluated at roots of unity exhibit strong integrality properties and admit formulations within cyclotomic completions such as Habiro’s ring [3, 27]. These considerations reveal an interesting interplay between topology, number theory, and representation theory. The DCR provides a complementary, local perspective on this structure at the level of individual amplitudes. By expressing q-hypergeometric terms in a cyclotomic basis prior to evaluation, it isolates the arithmetic data gov-erning specialization at roots of unity. In this sense, the DCR may be viewed as a factorized representation of the cyclotomic content that underlies integrality phenomena in quantum topology. This viewpoint also highlights the role of cyclotomic fields and their Galois structure. Evaluation at roots of unity takes place in cyclotomic fields Q(ζn), whose sym-metries are controlled by the Galois group Gal( Q(ζn)/Q)[31]. While the DCR itself is defined independently of any particular field, the projection maps inherit this struc-ture. This raises the possibility that Galois actions on cyclotomic fields may correspond to transformations of exponent data, providing a new perspective on symme-try properties of quantum invariants. More broadly, the DCR suggests a bridge between computational representations and arithmetic structures of cyclotomic fields. Clarifying the precise relationship between local cyclotomic factorization (as realized in the DCR) and global cyclotomic completions (as in Habiro-type constructions) remains an interesting direction for future work.  

> VI. COMPLEXITY AND STABILITY ANALYSIS

In this section, we analyze the computational complex-ity and numerical stability of the deferred cyclotomic rep-resentation (DCR). We shall make use of main structural feature, that is the separation between (i) the combina-torial construction of a sparse cyclotomic exponent rep-resentation and (ii) its evaluation via projection into a target field T. This separation allows us to isolate intrin-sic algebraic complexity from representation-dependent numerical effects. The central claim of this section is that the DCR shifts computational complexity away from algebraic manipu-lation and into a controlled projection stage. In particu-lar, it significantly reduces representation-induced com-plexity, both intermediate expression swell in symbolic computation and dynamic range inflation in numerical evaluation, leaving only the intrinsic complexity of the summation itself.  

> A. Construction and Evaluation Complexity

Let Z = zmax − zmin denote the summation length and Dmax the maximal cyclotomic order appearing in the factorization. Each intermediate object is represented by a sparse exponent vector e ∈ ZDmax −1. We assume a bit-complexity model in which multiplication of L-bit integers has cost M (L), and floating-point arithmetic has constant cost. Each update ratio involves at most K

cyclotomic factors, each affecting a sparse subset of size 

Smax of the exponent vector which depends on the divisor function τ (n). 

Theorem 8 (Construction complexity) . The compila-tion of the DCR combinatorial object requires 

O(Dmax + Z · K · Smax ) (33) 

integer operations and stores a representation of the same asymptotic size. Sketch. Precomputation of cyclotomic data up to Dmax 

contributes O(Dmax ). Each of the Z update ratios mod-ifies at most K factors, and each factor updates at most 

Smax sparse entries, yielding the stated bound. For the quantum 6 j-symbols (or generic quantum re-coupling coefficients), K is constant and Smax grows slowly with Dmax , yielding near-linear scaling in Z.11 Evaluation consists of projecting the exponent repre-sentation into a target field T.

Proposition 9 (Evaluation complexity) . Let T be the target field and CT the cost of one arithmetic operation in T. Then evaluation cost of the DCR requires 

O(Dmax · CT + Z · K · Smax · CT) , (34) 

operations for the full summation. 

For floating-point arithmetic, CT = O(1), thus eval-uation is effectively O(Z) up to divisor-function correc-tions. For evaluation in exact cyclotomic number fields, elements of Q(ζn) have dimension φ(n), i.e., Euler’s to-tient function, so CT = O(φ(n) · M (L)). This yields an evaluation cost ∼ O (Z · K · Smax · φ(Dmax ) · M (L)) . 

> B. Numerical Stability and Conditioning

Conventional approaches rely on eager evaluation ,which refer to a paradigm where quantum factorials are immediately expanded into dense polynomial representa-tions or directly accumulated in floating-point arithmetic prior to any structural simplification. In exact symbolic computation, this eager expansion generates intermedi-ate objects whose polynomial degree scales directly with 

Dmax . This necessitates repeated polynomial multiplica-tion and costly GCD reductions, producing superlinear memory and runtime growth. In contrast, the DCR re-places these dense algebraic objects with sparse integer exponent vectors. By deferring evaluation, intermediate expression swell is eliminated, and all asymptotic com-putational cost is shifted to the final projection stage. Let S = P 

> z

(−1) z Tz denote the target alternating sum. The intrinsic sensitivity of the problem is governed by the condition number (Eq. (7)), which is independent of representation. In floating-point arithmetic with unit roundoff ϵ, the forward error satisfies 

| bS − S||S| = O(κ Z ϵ ) + O(κ γ rep ϵ) . (35) The first term reflects the intrinsic summation error gov-erned strictly by the condition number of the amplitude [19]. The second term captures representation-induced amplification. Here, γrep is defined as 

γrep = max  

> z

(log 10 |N rep  

> z

| + log 10 |Drep  

> z

|), (36) which measures the maximum dynamic range of the intermediate numerator Nz and denominator Dz con-structed when evaluating the summand Tz = Nz /D z .The quantity γrep precisely isolates the contribution of the representation choice to the total numerical error. In eager logarithmic evaluation (LSE) based on the stan-dard polynomial representation, each summand is com-puted via the floating-point subtraction log Tz = log Nz − log Dz . (37) Because the eager polynomial representation forces al-gebraic cancellations to occur only after expansion, the unreduced components Nz and Dz grow into exponen-tially large, closely matched quantities. The subtraction of these artificially inflated magnitudes in Eq. (37) intro-duces severe rounding error, yielding large amplification factor γeager ≫ 1. In contrast, the DCR performs all cancellations sym-bolically at the level of exponent vectors before numer-ical evaluation. The quantities entering the projection step are therefore already reduced to their minimal form, avoiding subtraction of large nearly equal numbers. As a result, 

γDCR ≪ γeager ,

and the numerical error is driven primarily by the intrin-sic condition number κ.In summary, eager polynomial representations entan-gle combinatorial growth with evaluation, leading to both expression swell and amplified rounding error. The DCR on the other hand isolates intrinsic computational diffi-culty from representation-induced artifacts. It removes intermediate algebraic growth through exact symbolic cancellation and reduces numerical instability by com-pressing the dynamic range prior to evaluation. Con-sequently, the DCR achieves near-optimal scaling with respect to summation length and approaches the min-imal error dictated by the intrinsic conditioning of the problem. These improvements are not algorithmic refinements, but consequences of aligning the representation with the underlying algebraic structure. See Section II C for em-pirical results.  

> C. Macroscopic Complexity and State-Sum Amplitudes

The preceding analysis characterizes the complexity and numerical stability of individual q-hypergeometric series. However, physical observables in topological quantum field theory and spin foam models arise from large-scale contractions of such amplitudes [36–38]. The principal advantage of the deferred cyclotomic represen-tation emerges in this macroscopic regime, where it en-ables a separation between local combinatorial structure and global summation. For composite amplitudes defined by tensor products, the ring homomorphism property of the projection map ΠT ensures that ΠT(S1 · S2) = Π T(S1) · ΠT(S2). (38) As a consequence, composite amplitudes factorize at the representation level. Each elementary building block (e.g. a quantum 6 j-symbol) can be compiled indepen-dently into its DCR form, and evaluation of composite expressions reduces to multiplication in the target field. 12 This induces a compilation paradigm , where local geomet-ric contributions are precomputed once as reusable com-binatorial objects, while global observables are obtained through field-dependent projection and aggregation. 

Application to state-sum models. Interestingly, the DCR architecture removes repeated algebraic recompu-tation, isolating the exponential cost inherent in topologi-cal state sums. Consider the Turaev-Viro partition func-tion over a triangulated 3-manifold M, which requires a coherent summation over all admissible spin colorings 

{j}:TV k(M) = A−| V | X

> {j}

Y 

> τ∈∆3(M)

6j τq , (39) where |V | is the number of vertices, A is a global nor-malization constant, and τ indexes the constituent tetra-hedra. In conventional approaches, evaluating Eq. (39) re-quires repeatedly computing dense polynomial expan-sions or unstable floating-point sums for every tetrahe-dron and for every admissible coloring. Because the com-binatorial construction and the numerical evaluation are fused, exact computations are hard [39]. This multiplica-tive complexity also dominate current difficulties within modern spin foam numerics [40–43]. In the DCR frame-work, the compilation cost is highly amortized. A sin-gle DCR object is compiled exactly once for each geo-metrically distinct spin configuration (tetrahedron type) appearing in the triangulation. This universal DCR li-brary is then shared across all equivalent geometric oc-currences. For a triangulation encompassing N tetrahedra, the combinatorial compilation cost is bounded by the num-ber of unique spin configurations. Due to the inherent symmetries of the lattice and the constraints of admis-sibility, this number is typically smaller than the total combinatorial volume. The partition function is subse-quently evaluated by projecting this pre-compiled library at the target level k and tracing the numerical result. By severing the compilation of the local geometric weights from the global topological summation, the DCR renders such large-scale computations tractable.  

> VII. PERFORMANCE AND NUMERICAL VALIDATION

We now empirically validate the DRC architecture by benchmarking memory usage, numerical stability, and execution latency. These results confirm the practical feasibility of the framework and validate the theoretical complexity bounds established in Section VI. Throughout this section, we contrast the DCR against conventional eager evaluation baselines. We use the term “eager” to denote any strategy that forces the algebraic or numerical resolution of the amplitude prior to struc-tural simplification. Specifically: 

• In exact symbolic arithmetic (Eager CAS), eager evaluation refers to the standard approach of ex-panding the hypergeometric series into dense poly-nomial or rational representations and relying on algorithmic greatest common divisor (GCD) reduc-tions. 

• In floating-point arithmetic (Eager LSE), it refers to the direct logarithmic summation of expanded 

q-factorial expressions, where cancellations are at-tempted numerically rather than resolved alge-braically. All experiments use the symmetric quantum 6 j-symbol (ji = j) as a representative test case (see Eq. (3)). Com-putations are implemented in the open-source Julia pack-age QRecoupling.jl [44] 2, leveraging multiple dispatch and type stability to ensure no runtime overhead from the abstract algebraic structures. Floating-point compu-tations use IEEE 754 double precision ( Float64 ), while arbitrary precision uses BigFloat (MPFR). Exact alge-braic evaluation uses Nemo.jl , interfacing with FLINT and Antic [32]. Benchmarks were run on an Apple Sili-con M2 system with 16 GB memory.  

> A. Memory Usage and Complexity

A key limitation of exact q-hypergeometric evaluation is the rapid growth of intermediate symbolic expressions. To quantify this, we measure peak memory allocation for the symmetric 6 j-symbol at topological level k = 4 j

across three regimes: 1. DCR Construction: Sparse integer exponent data 

{M rad , Mroot , Mbase , {R z }} .2. Exact Projection: Projection into a cyclotomic field, including the cost of DCR construction. 3. Eager CAS Evaluation: Direct rational hypergeo-metric summation with iterative GCD reductions. To ensure a rigorous comparison, the eager CAS base-line is highly optimized by evaluating the series itera-tively using the exact rational hypergeometric update ratios ( Rz ). At each step of the sum, the CAS multi-plies the current rational term by Rz and immediately performs a polynomial greatest common divisor (GCD) reduction to maintain the expression in canonical lowest terms. The peak allocations were measured using a double-pass execution strategy with forced garbage collection to eliminate JIT-compilation and LRU-caching artifacts.  

> 2This library was developed in conjunction with this manuscript to natively implement the DCR framework and ensure exact re-producibility of all presented benchmarks.

13 Spin ( j)           

> 1510 20 50 100 Peak Heap Allocation (MB)
> 10 −210 010 210 4
> Memory Complexity of Exact 6j-Symbol Evaluation
> Eager CAS (Nemo) DCR Exact Projection Pure DCR Construction
> 𝓞 (j4) Reference
> 𝓞 (j3) Reference
> 𝓞 (j) Reference

FIG. 2. Peak heap memory allocation for the exact algebraic evaluation of the symmetric 6 j-symbol. The DCR construction scales linearly with spin ( O(j)). Projecting the DCR into the exact field scales as O(j3). In contrast, the eager CAS baseline triggers intermediate expression swell that scales worse than O(j4), exceeding 50 GB by j = 120. TABLE II. Peak memory allocations for exact evaluation of the symmetric 6 j-symbol. The DCR remains compact (KB scale), exact projection grows predictably (remaining under 380 MB at j = 120), while the eager CAS approach suffers intermediate expression swell (exceeds 50 GB at j = 120). 

Spin j DCR Build Exact Projection Eager CAS 

20 7.2 KB 2.89 MB 9.07 MB 40 14 .8 KB 9.60 MB 36 .32 MB 60 23 .6 KB 39 .74 MB 4.52 GB 75 29 .5 KB 93 .30 MB 20 .20 GB 

120 50 .6 KB 377 .5 MB 52 .47 GB 

The memory snapshots are detailed in Table II, and the continuous scaling is plotted in Figure 2. The key observations are 

• DCR Construction: Memory scales linearly with spin ( O(j)), costing under 51 kilobytes at j = 120. 

• Exact Projection: Memory scales roughly cubically due to summation length, cyclotomic field dimen-sion, and coefficient growth, consistent with Sec-tion VI. The observed oscillations are driven by the Euler totient function φ(d), which dictates the ex-act degree of the underlying cyclotomic field. 

• Eager CAS: Polynomial GCD reductions cannot prevent expression swell, exceeding 50GB by j =120. Overall, these results confirm the theoretical picture developed in Section VI. The DCR isolates combinatorial complexity from arithmetic growth, ensuring memory re-mains predictable and bounded prior to projection. 

B. Numerical Stability and Algebraic Preconditioning 

We now empirically validate the stability properties established in Section VI. Specifically, we quantify the reduction of the representation-dependent amplification factor γrep Eq. (36) and its direct impact on finite-precision evaluation. 

Dynamic Range Compression. A key mechanism un-derlying the improved stability of the DCR is the exact algebraic cancellation of intermediate magnitudes prior to numerical evaluation. To quantify this precondition-ing, Table IV compares the peak dynamic range gener-ated by eager polynomial evaluation ( γeager ) against the symbolically reduced cyclotomic representation ( γDCR ). We also track the intrinsic condition number (log 10 κ), which dictates the absolute theoretical minimum for pre-cision loss. As illustrated in Table IV, eager evaluation inflates intermediate expressions by thousands of decades. At 

j = 500, the subtraction of unreduced polynomial com-ponents introduces an amplification factor of γeager =9518 .5. The DCR algebraically eliminates this bloat at the exponent level, compressing the dynamic range by over 8400 orders of magnitude (∆ γ). This ensures the numerical processor only evaluates the irreducible core of the amplitude. 14 

TABLE III. Evaluation of the symmetric 6 j-symbol at k = 500. The eager LSE loses reliability beyond j ≳ 90 due to catastrophic cancellation. DCR projection preserves correct signs and significantly reduces error in double precision. 

Spin j Eager LSE (Float64) DCR-Projection (Float64) Truth (2048-bit) 

30 −1.0930 × 10 −3 −1.0930 × 10 −3 −1.0930 × 10 −3

50 9.1082 × 10 −4 9.1082 × 10 −4 9.1082 × 10 −4

70 −7.6406 × 10 −4 −7.6286 × 10 −4 −7.6283 × 10 −4

90 3.5642 × 10 −4 −6.6327 × 10 −4 −6.4428 × 10 −4

110 −9.6881 × 10 −1 1.5083 × 10 −3 2.8290 × 10 −4Spin ( j)            

> 0100 200 300 400 500 600 Relative Error (vs. 2048-bit Truth)
> 10 −150 10 −100 10 −50 10 010 50
> Stability: Eager LSE vs. Deferred Cyclotomic Representation (DCR)

100% Error          

> 60 80 100
> 10 −610 −210 210 6Zoomed in Float64( j≈90)

Spin ( j)             

> 450 475 500
> 10 −610 −210 4Zoomed in 256 −bit ( j≈475)
> Eager LSE (Float64) DCR-Projection (Float64) Eager LSE (256-bit) DCR-Projection (256-bit) Eager LSE (512-bit) DCR-Projection (512-bit)

FIG. 3. Relative error of the symmetric 6 j-symbol at k = 10 j for multiple precisions. Dashed lines denote the eager LSE baseline and solid lines the DCR projection. The red dashed line marks the 100% relative error threshold. Right panel: Insets zoom into the onset of catastrophic cancellation. DCR systematically delays large errors and reduces their magnitude. TABLE IV. Amplification factors for symmetric 6 j-symbols. Both γeager and γDCR are dimensionless log-scale measures of intermediate dynamic range. ∆γ represents the orders of magnitude compressed by symbolic preconditioning. The log 10 κ column establishes the intrinsic precision loss. 

Spin j k log 10 κ γeager γDCR ∆γ

10 40 1.27 61.1 19.0 42.1 50 200 7.10 560.1 104.5 455.6 100 400 14.39 1352.7 212.5 1140.2 200 800 28.97 3177.3 429.1 2748.2 400 1600 58.12 7307.1 862.8 6444.3 500 2000 72.70 9518.5 1079.8 8438.8 

Although these quantities are not explicitly formed in floating-point arithmetic, they determine the scale of in-termediate cancellations and therefore directly influence numerical error. As shown in Table IV, the DCR consi-tently reduces intermediate magnitudes by several orders, leading to a substantial improvement in stability. This behavior is consistent with the reduction in γrep predicted in Section VI. 

Finite-Precision Accuracy. To assess the practical impact of this preconditioning, we evaluate the symmet-ric 6 j-symbol at fixed level ( k = 500) in double precision and compare against a 2048-bit reference (Table III). The standard LSE implementation begins to exhibit signifi-cant deviation at moderate spins and produces sign errors by j ≈ 90, indicating loss of numerical reliability. In con-trast, the DCR-based evaluation maintains the correct sign and substantially improved accuracy over a wider range. This behavior is further illustrated in Figure 3, where the relative error of the eager LSE implementation rapidly approaches unity, while the DCR maintains con-trolled error growth. The residual error at large j is gov-erned by the intrinsic condition number κ, confirming that the DCR has exhausted the representation-level im-provement. Further gains require either higher precision arithmetic or a fundamentally different summation order. 15                                               

> TABLE V. Median steady-state execution latencies (milliseconds) for symmetric 6 j-symbols at k= 4 j. The DCR architecture isolates combinatorial complexity into a one-time algebraic construction (Build), allowing subsequent numerical evaluations (Projection) to rival the speed of optimized eager LSE baselines.
> Float64 (ms) 256-bit BigFloat (ms) Spin jLevel kDCR Build Eager LSE DCR Projection Eager LSE DCR Projection
> 50 200 0.0209 0.0006 0.0007 0.1622 0.2195 100 400 0.0824 0.0009 0.0014 0.3163 0.4607 200 800 0.3188 0.0015 0.0031 0.6373 0.9861 300 1200 0.6732 0.0021 0.0053 0.9530 1.5305 400 1600 1.1638 0.0027 0.0075 1.2716 2.0571 500 2000 1.7698 0.0031 0.0094 1.6052 2.6260
> C. Execution Latency and Amortized Parameter Sweeps

We conclude our empirical analysis by examining ex-ecution time. Runtimes were measured using Julia’s 

BenchmarkTools , reporting the median steady-state la-tencies over warmed-up repeated executions to bypass JIT-compilation overhead. We compare the DCR projection against an eager nu-merical baseline that applies the Log-Sum-Exp (LSE) al-gorithm directly to precomputed logarithmic q-factorial tables, reducing the summation to rapid sequential ar-ray access. While both engines ultimately utilize LSE to safely accumulate the final alternating sum, the DCR en-gine pre-conditions the calculation. By algebraically can-celing the massive factorials into sparse cyclotomic ratios prior to numerical evaluation, the DCR compresses the dynamic range of the intermediate terms. The result-ing stability thresholds across hardware and arbitrary-precision regimes are summarized in Table V. At standard 64-bit precision, the direct eager LSE eval-uation achieves very low latency. However, as demon-strated in Section VII B, its numerical reliability deteri-orates rapidly with increasing spin due to catastrophic cancellation, leading to 100% loss of accuracy beyond 

j ≈ 90 (see Figure 3). The algebraic preconditioning in-herent in the DCR delays this instability, extending the range of reliable double-precision evaluation to moder-ately larger spins. Nevertheless, for sufficiently large j,both approaches require promotion to software-emulated arbitrary precision to maintain accuracy. In this regime, the amortized advantages of the deferred representation become increasingly significant, as the cost of projection grows more slowly than direct high-precision summation. In the 256-bit regime, both methods exhibit compara-ble scaling. The optimized LSE baseline benefits from direct accumulation over precomputed high-precision ta-bles, yielding 1 .61 ms at j = 500. The DCR projection achieves similar performance (2 .63 ms at j = 500), in-dicating that traversal and evaluation of the sparse cy-clotomic representation introduces only modest overhead relative to direct (raw tables) summation. This is consis-tent with the complexity analysis, where both approaches ultimately reduce to arithmetic operations in the target field. The primary computational advantage of the deferred representation emerges in repeated evaluations across pa-rameter space. In direct methods, each new value of the deformation parameter q requires recomputation of the full summation, including reconstruction of auxil-iary tables. In contrast, the DCR decouples combina-torial structure from numerical evaluation. The struc-ture is constructed once, and subsequent evaluations re-quire only the projection step. For moderate spins within the hardware precision limit (e.g., j ≤ 100), this re-duces marginal evaluation cost to the microsecond regime (0 .7 μs at j = 50, 1 .4 μs at j = 100). This enables effi-cient exploration of continuous parameter regimes that would otherwise require repeated full recomputation. In summary, the latency results align with the theoret-ical framework developed in Section VI. The deferred cy-clotomic representation isolates combinatorial complex-ity into a compact, reusable structure, while the remain-ing computational cost is governed by arithmetic in the target field. This separation does not eliminate the in-trinsic cost of high-precision evaluation, but it avoids re-dundant recomputation and enables efficient amortiza-tion across repeated evaluations.  

> VIII. CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK

We have introduced the deferred cyclotomic represen-tation (DCR), a structural reformulation for the eval-uation of finite q-hypergeometric series and q-deformed amplitudes. Instead of treating quantum amplitudes as a dense polynomial representation, the DCR encodes their multiplicative structure in a sparse integer exponent rep-resentation over cyclotomic factors. Evaluation in any target field is then realized via projection as a ring homo-morphism applied to this canonical combinatorial object. The computational advantages of this framework are structural rather than merely algorithmic. By executing exact factorial cancellations at the exponent level prior to projection, the DCR functions as a universal algebraic preconditioner. For exact symbolic computation, it elim-inates the expression swell inherent in rational polyno-16 mial representations. For numerical evaluation, it sub-stantially compresses the intermediate dynamic range, systematically delaying the onset of catastrophic cancel-lation. Furthermore, as established in our macroscopic analysis (see Section VI C), compiling the DCR isolates and amortizes the combinatorial complexity across entire triangulations. This separation of structure and evalua-tion renders large-scale topological state sums computa-tionally tractable. Beyond its computational advantages, the DCR pro-vides a new structural perspective on q-deformed ampli-tudes. The deformation parameter q does not enter the internal representation, but appears only through evalu-ation. As a consequence, amplitudes at different defor-mation parameters arise as evaluations of a single under-lying combinatorial object. Within this framework, ad-missibility at roots of unity and the classical limit q → 1are naturally expressed in terms of cyclotomic exponent support, rather than as external analytical constraints. This provides a direct link between quantum and classi-cal regimes at the level of factorization structure. Several directions for further investigation emerge from this work. On the structural side, it is natural to ask whether coherence relations in quantum recoupling the-ory, such as orthogonality and the Biedenharn–Elliott identity, admit a formulation directly at the level of ex-ponent data prior to evaluation. On the algorithmic side, extending the DCR to higher-rank quantum groups and more general tensor network contractions [43, 45] will require maintaining sparsity under increasingly complex combinatorial operations. More broadly, this work highlights the role of represen-tation design in computational mathematics and physics. By aligning the representation with the intrinsic multi-plicative structure of the problem, it is possible to simul-taneously improve exact computability, numerical stabil-ity, and algorithmic efficiency. The deferred cyclotomic representation provides one concrete realization of this principle in the context of q-hypergeometric series, and suggests that similar approaches may be applicable to broader classes of special functions and quantum ampli-tudes. Ultimately, the deferred cyclotomic framework estab-lishes that representation design prior to evaluation can fundamentally alter the computational profile of topolog-ical quantum field theories. By aligning the data struc-ture with the true multiplicative algebra of the deforma-tion, we obtain a representation that is simultaneously more computable, numerically stable, and theoretically transparent. 

> CODE AVAILABILITY

The methods developed in this work are imple-mented natively in the open-source Julia package 

QRecoupling.jl [44]. The package extends the deferred cyclotomic architecture beyond the 6 j-symbol to encom-pass quantum 3 j-symbols, general fusion tensors, and braiding R-matrices, and general q-hypergeometric se-ries. It provides a unified, high-performance interface for exact algebraic evaluation, root-of-unity projection, and arbitrary-precision floating-point computation. 

> ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The author is grateful for the funding and sup-port of the Atlantic Association for Research in the Mathematical Sciences (AARMS). I would also like to thank Bianca Dittrich, Sebastian Steinhaus, and Ed-ward Wilson-Ewing for their support and encouragement throughout this work.                   

> [1] V. G. Drinfeld, Hopf algebras and the quantum yang-baxter equation, Dokl. Akad. Nauk SSSR 283 ,1060 (1985), english translation: Soviet Math. Dokl. 32 (1985), 254–258. [2] C. Kassel, Quantum Groups , Graduate Texts in Mathe-matics, Vol. 155 (Springer-Verlag New York, 1995). [3] E. Witten, Quantum field theory and the jones polyno-mial, Communications in Mathematical Physics 121 , 351 (1989). [4] V. G. Turaev and O. Y. Viro, State sum invariants of 3-manifolds and quantum 6j-symbols, Topology 31 , 865 (1992). [5] L. H. Kauffman and S. Lins, Temperley-Lieb recoupling theory and invariants of 3-manifolds , 134 (Princeton Uni-versity Press, 1994). [6] A. Kirillov and N. Y. Reshetikhin, Representations of the algebra uq (sl (2)), q-orthogonal polynomials and invari-ants of links, Infinite dimensional Lie algebras and groups
> 7, 285 (1989). [7] V. Chari and A. N. Pressley, A guide to quantum groups
> (Cambridge university press, 1995). [8] G. Ponzano and T. Regge, Semiclassical limit of racah co-efficients, in Spectroscopic and group theoretical methods in physics (North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1968) pp. 1–58. [9] C. Rovelli, Quantum Gravity , Cambridge Monographs on Mathematical Physics (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2004). [10] D. Oriti, The microscopic dynamics of quantum space as a group field theory, in Foundations of Space and Time ,edited by G. F. R. Ellis, J. Murugan, and A. Weltman (Cambridge University Press, 2011) pp. 257–320. [11] J. W. Barrett and B. W. Westbury, Invariants of piece-wise linear three manifolds, Trans. Am. Math. Soc. 348 ,3997 (1996), arXiv:hep-th/9311155. [12] S. Major and L. Smolin, Quantum deformation of quan-tum gravity, Nucl. Phys. B 473 , 267 (1996), arXiv:gr-qc/9512020.

17 

[13] M. Dupuis, L. Freidel, F. Girelli, A. Osumanu, and J. Rennert, Origin of the quantum group symmetry in 3D quantum gravity, Phys. Rev. D 112 , 084071 (2025), arXiv:2006.10105 [gr-qc]. [14] A. Y. Kitaev, Fault-tolerant quantum computation by anyons, Annals of Physics 303 , 2 (2003). [15] P. Etingof, S. Gelaki, D. Nikshych, and V. Ostrik, Ten-sor Categories , Mathematical Surveys and Monographs, Vol. 205 (American Mathematical Society, Providence, RI, 2015). [16] X.-G. Wen, Quantum Field Theory of Many-Body Sys-tems: From the Origin of Sound to an Origin of Light and Electrons (Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2004). [17] K. O. Geddes, S. R. Czapor, and G. Labahn, Algorithms for computer algebra (Springer Science & Business Me-dia, 1992). [18] J. Von Zur Gathen and J. Gerhard, Modern computer algebra (Cambridge university press, 2013). [19] N. J. Higham, Accuracy and stability of numerical algo-rithms (SIAM, 2002). [20] D. Goldberg, What every computer scientist should know about floating-point arithmetic, ACM Computing Sur-veys (CSUR) 23 , 5 (1991). [21] U. M. Ascher and C. Greif, A first course in numerical methods (SIAM, 2011). [22] N. Reshetikhin and V. G. Turaev, Invariants of 3-manifolds via link polynomials and quantum groups, In-ventiones mathematicae 103 , 547 (1991). [23] D. A. Varshalovich, A. N. Moskalev, and V. K. Kher-sonski˘ ı, Quantum Theory of Angular Momentum: Irre-ducible Tensors, Spherical Harmonics, Vector Coupling Coefficients, 3nj Symbols (World Scientific, Singapore, 1988). [24] J. Roberts, Classical 6j-symbols and the tetrahedron, Ge-ometry & Topology 3, 21 (1999). [25] Y. Taylor and C. T. Woodward, 6j symbols for uq (sl 2)and non-euclidean tetrahedra, Selecta Mathematica 11 ,539 (2005). [26] P. Blanchard, D. J. Higham, and N. J. Higham, Accurate computation of the log-sum-exp and softmax functions, IMA Journal of Numerical Analysis 41 , 2311 (2021). [27] K. Habiro, Cyclotomic completions of polynomial rings, Publications of the Research Institute for Mathematical Sciences 40 , 1127 (2004). [28] S. A. Abramov, P. Paule, and M. Petkov˚ A¡ek, q-hypergeometric solutions of q-difference equations, Dis-crete Mathematics 194 , 3 (1999). [29] B. A. Burton, C. Maria, and J. Spreer, Algorithms and complexity for turaev–viro invariants, Journal of Applied and Computational Topology 2, 33 (2018). [30] D. Zeilberger, A holonomic systems approach to special functions identities, Journal of Computational and Ap-plied Mathematics 32 , 321 (1990). [31] L. C. Washington, Introduction to cyclotomic fields 

(Springer New York, NY, 1997). [32] C. Fieker, W. Hart, T. Hofmann, and F. Johansson, Nemo/hecke: computer algebra and number theory pack-ages for the julia programming language, in Proceedings of the 2017 ACM International Symposium on Symbolic and Algebraic Computation (2017) pp. 157–164. [33] H. T. Johansson and C. Forss´ en, Fast and accurate evalu-ation of wigner 3j, 6j, and 9j symbols using prime factor-ization and multi-word integer arithmetic, SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing 38 , A376 (2016). [34] L. C. Biedenharn and J. P. Elliott, An identity satisfied by the racah coefficients, Journal of Mathematics and Physics 31 , 287 (1953). [35] U. Pachner, P.l. homeomorphic manifolds are equivalent by elementary shellings, European Journal of Combina-torics 12 , 129 (1991). [36] J. W. Barrett, J. Faria Martins, and J. M. Garc´ ıa-Islas, Observables in the turaev-viro and crane-yetter models, Journal of Mathematical Physics 48 (2007). [37] B. Dittrich, Cosmological constant from condensa-tion of defect excitations, Universe 4, 81 (2018), arXiv:1802.09439 [gr-qc]. [38] V. Bonzom, M. Dupuis, F. Girelli, and Q. Pan, Local observables in SUq(2) lattice gauge theory, Phys. Rev. D 

107 , 026014 (2023), arXiv:2205.13352 [hep-lat]. [39] F. Jaeger, D. L. Vertigan, and D. J. Welsh, The compu-tational complexity of the Jones and Tutte polynomials, Mathematical Proceedings of the Cambridge Philosoph-ical Society 108 , 35 (1990). [40] J. Engle, E. Livine, R. Pereira, and C. Rovelli, LQG ver-tex with finite Immirzi parameter, Nucl. Phys. B 799 ,136 (2008), arXiv:0711.0146 [gr-qc]. [41] P. Don` a, G. Fanizza, G. Sarno, and S. Speziale, Numer-ical study of the Lorentzian Engle-Pereira-Rovelli-Livine spin foam amplitude, Physical Review D 98 , 084050 (2018). [42] P. Dona, M. Han, and H. Liu, Spinfoams and High-Performance Computing, in Handbook of Quantum Grav-ity , edited by C. Bambi, L. Modesto, and I. Shapiro (2023) pp. 1–38, arXiv:2212.14396 [gr-qc]. [43] S. K. Asante and S. Steinhaus, Efficient tensor network algorithms for spin foam models, Phys. Rev. D 110 ,106018 (2024), arXiv:2406.19676 [gr-qc]. [44] S. K. Asante, QRecoupling.jl: Stable and exact evaluation of quantum recoupling symbols and q-hypergoemetric series via deferred cyclotomic represen-tation (2026). [45] B. Dittrich, S. Mizera, and S. Steinhaus, Decorated ten-sor network renormalization for lattice gauge theories and spin foam models, New Journal of Physics 18 , 053009 (2016).