Efficient and Accurate Surrogate-Assisted
Electromagnetic Parameter Calibration for 6G
Digital Twin Channels
Xiaofan Zou, Pan Tang, Peijie Liu, Changyou Tai
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China
E-mail: {zouxf, tangpan27}@bupt.edu.cn
Abstract—High-fidelity ray-tracing (RT) channel reconstruc-
tion is a fundamental step toward building digital twins for the
era of 6G wireless communications. However, precise calibra-
tion of complex electromagnetic material parameters remains a
dual challenge characterized by massive computational overhead
and strict accuracy requirements. To overcome this bottleneck,
we propose a Surrogate-assisted Grey Wolf Optimizer with
Individual Memory (SGWO-IM) algorithm that simultaneously
improves computational efficiency and calibration accuracy. In
terms of computational efficiency, an online surrogate model is
seamlessly embedded into the evaluation workflow for candidate
pre-screening, substantially reducing the reliance on highly time-
consuming real RT simulations. Regarding calibration accuracy,
adaptive convergence and individual memory strategies are incor-
porated to optimize the global parameter search path, effectively
enhancing the consistency between the reconstructed channel and
measured data. Validated against measured channel data from
a high-density urban scenario, the proposed algorithm requires
only 225 real RT simulation calls compared to the 600 calls
needed by the standard Grey Wolf Optimizer (GWO), cutting
computational overhead by 62.5%. Concurrently, the final Root
Mean Square Error (RMSE) is substantially reduced from the
3.65 dB of GWO to 2.97 dB. The results demonstrate that the
SGWO-IM algorithm achieves significant advancements in both
efficiency and precision, providing a solution that effectively
balances efficiency and accuracy for electromagnetic environment
reconstruction.
Index Terms—Digital Twin Channel, Ray Tracing, Electro-
magnetic Parameter Calibration, Surrogate Model, Grey Wolf
Optimizer, V2V Communications
I. INTRODUCTION
With the evolution of the sixth-generation (6G) mobile
communication technology, the paradigm of wireless com-
munication is shifting towards proactive environment intel-
ligence communication [1]. In this context, building large-
scale channel foundation models, such as ChannelGPT [2],
requires massive and highly accurate digital twin channel data.
Therefore, ray tracing (RT) has become a core method for
the high-fidelity reconstruction of complex electromagnetic
(EM) environments due to its capability to precisely depict
EM wave propagation paths [3]–[8]. However, the accuracy
of RT models largely depends on the accurate input of EM
parameters (such as permittivity and conductivity) of vari-
ous building materials within the real scenario. Since these
parameters vary significantly with frequency bands and are
difficult to measure directly, utilizing measured channel data
for reverse calibration has become crucial [9], [10]. Essentially,
this is a highly challenging multi-variable, non-convex, and
computationally expensive non-linear optimization task.
To address these multi-variable calibration challenges, var-
ious optimization algorithms have been explored [11]. Tra-
ditional heuristic and swarm intelligence algorithms possess
global search capabilities [12], but they encounter a se-
vere computational bottleneck in practical deployments [13].
These methods require executing time-consuming forward RT
simulations for the entire population during every iteration,
resulting in massive computational overhead. Moreover, due
to the highly coupled nature of channel parameters, standard
algorithms often suffer from a loss of population diversity,
causing the optimization to prematurely stop at suboptimal
points [14]. Recently, machine learning methods have been
introduced to accelerate the process by replacing simulation
engines with neural networks. However, constructing a reliable
static surrogate model offline still requires enormous initial
computational resources to generate massive training datasets
[15]–[17]. Consequently, a calibration framework that can
simultaneously achieve high efficiency and high precision
without extensive offline data preparation remains highly de-
sired.
To overcome these limitations, this paper proposes a
Surrogate-assisted Grey Wolf Optimizer with Individual Mem-
ory (SGWO-IM) for highly efficient and accurate digital twin
channel reconstruction. The main contributions of this paper
are summarized as follows:
• A surrogate-assisted calibration framework is proposed
to eliminate computational bottlenecks: To avoid the
massive overhead of standard swarm intelligence algo-
rithms, an online Radial Basis Function (RBF) neural
network is introduced as a dynamic surrogate model.
By utilizing initial samples for low-cost pre-screening,
expensive forward RT simulations are strictly restricted
to the predicted elite individuals. Validated in a real-
world scenario, this approach significantly accelerates the
optimization process, reducing real RT simulation calls
by 62.5%.
• A dynamic search mechanism is designed to enhance pa-
rameter estimation precision: The proposed algorithm in-
corporates a non-linear cosine convergence factor along-
side an individual cognitive component. This structural
arXiv:2608.12872v1  [eess.SP]  13 Aug 2026


refinement overcomes the standard Grey Wolf Optimizer
(GWO)’s limitation of blindly following the current best
solution, ensuring a thorough exploration of the parameter
space. Validated by empirical Vehicle-to-Vehicle (V2V)
measurement data from a typical urban street scenario,
this mechanism substantially improves the parameter es-
timation accuracy, reducing the final Root Mean Square
Error (RMSE) from 3.65 dB of the standard GWO to
2.97 dB, thereby enabling the RT model to accurately fit
the actual path loss.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section
II details the proposed SGWO-IM algorithm. Section III
introduces the measurement and simulation settings. Section
IV presents the performance evaluation and results analysis.
Finally, Section V concludes this paper.
II. PROPOSED METHOD
A. Overall Process
As shown in Fig. 1, the overall execution process of the
proposed parameter calibration approach is structured as a
continuous feedback loop. Initially (Step 1), the compre-
hensive scenario information, including the XML-based 3D
environment, material categories, Tx/Rx locations, and specific
simulation settings, is fed into the RT engine. Subsequently
(Steps 2 and 3), the RT engine executes the EM wave
propagation simulation to output the simulated path loss (PL),
while the empirical V2V data is concurrently imported to serve
as the real-world measured PL baseline (Step 3a).
To quantify the discrepancy between the simulated results
and the measured data, the Root Mean Square Error (RMSE)
evaluation (Step 4) is conducted using the following objective
function:
RMSE =
v
u
u
t 1
M
M
X
m=1
(LRT
m −LMeas
m
)2,
(1)
where M is the total number of measurement points, and
LRT
m and LMeas
m
represent the simulated PL by the RT engine
and the actual measured PL at the m-th receiver location,
respectively.
Driven by this error feedback, the SGWO-IM optimizer
iteratively updates the candidate parameters (Step 6). Inter-
nally, it utilizes an RBF surrogate model for pre-screening to
enhance efficiency, and applies a dynamic search mechanism
to improve parameter estimation accuracy. The optimizer then
generates an updated set of candidate EM parameters, which
are fed back into the RT engine for the next evaluation.
This closed-loop process repeats until the convergence criteria
are satisfied, ultimately outputting the calibrated EM pa-
rameters—specifically, the optimal relative permittivities—that
yield the minimum RMSE (Step 5).
B. Proposed SGWO-IM Algorithm for Parameter Calibration
When calibrating EM parameters, traditional swarm intelli-
gence algorithms face two major challenges: the severe com-
putational bottleneck caused by massive forward RT simula-
tions, and the risk of premature convergence due to the highly
coupled nature of channel parameters. To address these issues,
the proposed SGWO-IM algorithm optimizes the standard
framework across two primary dimensions: computational
efficiency and calibration accuracy. The detailed procedure is
summarized in Algorithm 1.
1) Computational Efficiency Enhancement via Online Sur-
rogate: In traditional optimization, every candidate parameter
combination in the population (size N) must be evaluated by
the RT engine during each iteration. To eliminate this massive
computational overhead, an RBF neural network is integrated
into the framework as an online surrogate model to predict the
evaluation errors.
In the early iterations, all candidate parameters are evaluated
using the real RT simulator to accumulate reliable initial
data samples. Once the iteration threshold is reached, these
historical samples are utilized to train the RBF network online.
In the subsequent iterations, the RBF model first predicts
the RMSE for all N candidate combinations at a negligible
computational cost. Based on these predictions, the candidates
are sorted, and only the top-K elite individuals (set to K = 5
in this paper) with the lowest predicted errors are selected
for the actual RT simulation. This pre-screening mechanism
significantly reduces the real RT simulation calls per iteration
from N to K, fundamentally alleviating the computational
burden without compromising the final calibration accuracy.
2) Calibration
Accuracy
Enhancement
via
Dynamic
Search:
To
prevent
the
algorithm
from
stagnating
at
suboptimal
parameter
combinations,
a
dynamic
search
mechanism is designed to enhance the accuracy of the
parameter calibration. This mechanism consists of a non-
linear cosine convergence factor and an individual historical
memory component.
First, standard algorithms use a linearly decreasing conver-
gence factor, which struggles to adapt to the complex bounds
of the EM parameter space. Therefore, a non-linear factor a(t)
is introduced:
a(t) = 2 · cos
π
2 ·
t
Tmax

,
(2)
where t is the current iteration and Tmax is the maximum
number of iterations. This strategy maintains a large search
step size in the early stage, ensuring a thorough exploration
across the entire parameter space (e.g., the wide permittivity
bounds of concrete and glass). In the later stage, it decays
rapidly to facilitate fine-tuning around the optimal values.
Second, to address the standard algorithm’s limitation of
merely following the current best solution, an individual
historical best (Pbest) memory mechanism is incorporated
[18]. During the parameter update process, each candidate
solution retains the memory of the best parameter combination
it has historically discovered. The position update formula is
thereby modified as:⃗
Xnew(t+1) = (1−w(t))·⃗XGWO(t+1)+w(t)·⃗XPbest(t), (3)


Fig. 1. Flowchart of the proposed SGWO-IM parameter calibration framework.
where⃗XGWO(t+1) is the standard guidance position, and the
dynamic memory weight w(t) is defined as:
w(t) = wmin + (wmax −wmin) ·

t
Tmax
2
.
(4)
In this study, wmin and wmax are set to 0.1 and 0.3, respec-
tively. Through this dynamic fusion, the candidate parameters
not only move towards the global optimal region but also
refer to their independent historical optimums. This contin-
uous adjustment ensures the spatial diversity of the candidate
solutions, directly improving the algorithm’s capability to find
the precise EM parameters.
III. MEASUREMENT AND SIMULATION SETTINGS
The channel measurement experiment in this study was
conducted in a high-density urban street scenario near Golden
Beach, Huangdao District, Qingdao, covering a geographical
area of approximately 2.1 km × 1.7 km. This measurement
campaign follows the established methodology for urban V2V
channel characterization [19], ensuring reliability in capturing
complex multipath propagation features. The buildings in this
area generally have heights ranging from 60 to 70 m, featuring
concrete main structures with numerous glass windows on
the facades. The underlying surfaces are primarily composed
of soil and asphalt, while discrete scatterers such as street
lamp poles and green belts are randomly distributed along
the streets. During the measurement, the Tx was mounted
in the rear bed of a pickup truck and served as a fixed
static node, while the Rx vehicle moved along the streets and
stopped at specific locations for fixed-point data collection.
The experiment involved two fixed Tx locations, Tx 1 and
Tx 2. The Tx was initially fixed at the Tx 1 position while
the Rx vehicle conducted fixed-point measurements at 27
distinct receiver locations labeled as Rx 1 to 27 distributed
in the surrounding area. After completing these designated
point measurements, the Tx was relocated and fixed at the
Algorithm 1 SGWO-IM Algorithm
1: Step 1: Initialization
2: Initialize the population, maximum iterations, and bounds.
3: Initialize individual memory⃗XPbest and w.
4: Initialize positions and scores of α, β, and δ wolves.
5: Initialize an empty training set for the RBF surrogate
model.
6: Step 2: Iterative Optimization
7: for t = 1 to Tmax do
8:
if RBF model is available then
9:
Predict RMSE for all N candidates using the RBF
model.
10:
Sort and select top-K elites to form evaluation subset.
11:
else
12:
Select all N candidates (Evaluate entire population).
13:
end if
14:
for each candidate in subset do
15:
Call RT engine to calculate actual RMSE.
16:
Add (X, RMSE) to the RBF training set.
17:
if RMSE < Pbest score then
18:
Update personal best:⃗XPbest = X.
19:
end if
20:
Update the positions of α, β, and δ wolves.
21:
end for
22:
Online retrain and update the RBF surrogate model.
23:
Calculate non-linear convergence factor a(t).
24:
Calculate dynamic memory weight w(t).
25:
for i = 1 to N do
26:
Calculate standard GWO position⃗XGWO guided by
α, β, δ and factor a.
27:
Update position via memory fusion using⃗XGWO and⃗
XPbest.
28:
end for
29: end for
30: Step 3: Output
31: Return the optimal EM parameters and minimum RMSE.


Tx 2 position, and the Rx vehicle proceeded to measure the
remaining 13 locations labeled as Rx 28 to 40 to continue
data acquisition, as shown in Fig. 2. Throughout the process,
a Global Positioning System (GPS) module was utilized
to synchronously record the instantaneous coordinates and
timestamps of both transceivers, ensuring precise alignment
between spatial distances and channel data. To ensure mea-
surement consistency and acquire sufficient samples, the Rx
continuously recorded 100 sets of channel impulse response
data at each fixed measurement point. The heights of both
omnidirectional antennas were strictly maintained at 4 m above
the ground. The specific measurement scenario and hardware
deployment are illustrated in Fig. 3.
The transmission system consists of a vector signal gener-
ator (R&S SMW 200A), a power amplifier, and an omnidi-
rectional antenna. The signal generator transmits a periodic
511-sample pseudo-noise sequence 9 (PN9) with a transmit
power of -10 dBm. The receiving end is equipped with an
omnidirectional antenna, a low-noise amplifier, a spectrum
analyzer (R&S FSW 43), and a laptop for data processing.
Relevant measurement parameters are listed in Table I.
Fig. 2. Schematic diagram of measurement point locations.
Fig. 3. V2V channel measurement setup and hardware deployment.
To achieve high-fidelity simulation of realistic radio wave
propagation, a forward RT simulation platform was developed
based on the MATLAB programming environment. The plat-
form first imports the geometric data file in .xml format of
TABLE I
MEASUREMENT PARAMETERS
Parameters
Value/Type
Carrier frequency
4 GHz
RF bandwidth
200 MHz
Tx/Rx Antenna Type
Omnidirectional / Omnidirectional
Tx Antenna Height
4 m
Rx Antenna Height
4 m
Tx Signal
PN9
the study area, along with the coordinates of the 40 valid
spatial sample points obtained from the actual fixed-point
measurements, comprising 27 receiver points corresponding
to Tx 1 and 13 receiver points corresponding to Tx 2.
Subsequently, the RT platform systematically searches for all
EM wave propagation paths between the Tx and Rx based
on geometric optics. After identifying these paths, the system
utilizes their geometric features to perform EM calculations,
determining the field strength distribution along each path.
Finally, it extracts the channel characteristics to complete the
entire simulation process [20]. Following this, by calculating
the RMSE between the simulated PL and the measured PL for
each point, the proposed SGWO-IM algorithm is employed
to optimize and calibrate the EM parameters of key materi-
als. To validate the performance of the proposed SGWO-IM
algorithm, the standard GWO was selected as the baseline
algorithm. Detailed settings are shown in Table II.
TABLE II
ALGORITHM PARAMETER SETTINGS
Parameters
SGWO-IM
Standard GWO
Max iterations
20
20
Population size (N)
30
30
Convergence strategy
Non-linear cosine
Linear decay
Memory weight
Quadratic (0.1–0.3)
N/A
Eval. iterations
5
N/A
RT evaluations/iter
5 (Top K)
30 (Full population)
IV. RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
A. Computational Efficiency Analysis
Computational overhead represents a major bottleneck in
RT-based channel calibration. To evaluate the acceleration
capability of the proposed algorithm, Fig. 4 illustrates the
cumulative execution time over 20 iterations, and Table III
provides a quantitative comparison of the computational costs.
TABLE III
COMPARISON OF COMPUTATIONAL EFFICIENCY
Algorithm
RT Simulation Calls
Final Cumulative Time (s)
GWO
600
831.68
SGWO-IM
225
336.51


Fig. 4. Comparison of cumulative execution time between GWO and SGWO-
IM.
As shown in Fig. 4 and Table III, the GWO exhibits a
steep linear growth in computational cost, requiring 600 time-
consuming RT simulations to complete the process, which
results in a total execution time of 831.68 s. In contrast, the
cumulative cost curve of SGWO-IM flattens significantly after
the 5th iteration. The vertical dashed line in Fig. 4, explicitly
labeled as “Surrogate Intervention”, marks the critical tran-
sition point where the RBF surrogate model is sufficiently
trained and takes over the evaluation process. By restricting
the computationally expensive RT evaluations only to the
top 5 elites during the remaining 15 iterations, SGWO-IM
reduces the total RT simulations to 225. Consequently, the
final cumulative time drops to 336.51 s. This demonstrates
that SGWO-IM cuts the overall computational overhead by
62.5% in terms of RT calls and saves approximately 59.5%
in absolute execution time, all without compromising the
optimization integrity.
B. Calibration Accuracy Analysis
In typical urban and indoor RT scenarios, not all materials
uniformly affect signal propagation. To ensure calibration
efficiency and avoid high-dimensional overfitting, only the
relative permittivities of three dominant materials, namely
concrete, glass, and soil, were selected for optimization. These
materials constitute the primary interacting surfaces, such as
building walls, windows, and the ground, in the measurement
environment, dominating the macroscopic reflection and scat-
tering rays. The initial relative permittivities before calibration
are strictly assigned based on the empirical material models
recommended by the latest International Telecommunication
Union (ITU) standard [21], which serves as a widely adopted
baseline in RT simulations. Table IV summarizes the rela-
tive permittivities optimized by the different algorithms. To
demonstrate the algorithmic superiority in finding the global
optimum, Fig. 5 visualizes the RMSE convergence behaviors
of the two algorithms.
As visually emphasized by the horizontal projection lines
in Fig. 5, the GWO suffers from premature convergence,
completely stagnating at a local optimum of 3.65 dB after the
TABLE IV
RELATIVE PERMITTIVITIES BEFORE AND AFTER CALIBRATION
Material
Before Calibration
GWO
SGWO-IM
Concrete
5.31
6.45
5.82
Glass
6.27
4.12
4.65
Soil
2.25
3.88
4.21
Fig. 5.
Comparison of convergence curves among different calibration
algorithms.
15th iteration, which is indicated by the green dashed line.
Conversely, benefiting from the non-linear convergence factor
and the individual history mechanism, SGWO-IM successfully
escapes local traps. At the 15th iteration, SGWO-IM has al-
ready achieved a superior accuracy of 3.02 dB, represented by
the gray dashed line, and continues to dig deeper into the EM
parameter space, ultimately converging to 2.97 dB, marked
by the blue dashed line. The explicit quantitative annotation
highlights a significant final performance gap of 0.68 dB,
proving the enhanced global search capability of SGWO-IM.
Finally, the calibrated parameters detailed in Table IV were
fed back into the RT engine to generate the simulated PL,
which was then compared against the empirical measurement
data.
As depicted in Fig. 6, the SGWO-IM calibrated model
exhibits exceptional consistency with the measured curve
across all 40 Rx indices. This superiority is particularly evident
in the High-Loss Regions, spanning from Rx 10 to 16 and Rx
25 to 27. As clearly highlighted by the zoom-in inset, in the
High-Loss Region at Rx 15, GWO fails to capture the signal
fluctuation, resulting in a significant local deviation of 4.5
dB. In contrast, SGWO-IM demonstrates superior robustness,
firmly adhering to the measurement trend and suppressing this
local deviation to 1.6 dB.
It is worth noting that at the specific minor point of Rx 9, the
GWO appears to align slightly better with the measurement
than SGWO-IM. This negligible anomaly occurs because the
premature convergence of GWO coincidentally traps it in a


Fig. 6. Comparison between the simulated PL of different models and actual
measurement data.
localized parameter subset that matches the specific multipath
superposition at this single location. However, SGWO-IM
prioritizes the global spatial fidelity of the entire propagation
environment, successfully preventing the model from overfit-
ting to isolated noise points.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed the SGWO-IM algorithm for
EM parameter calibration to support 6G digital twin channel
reconstruction in complex urban environments. By integrating
an online surrogate pre-screening mechanism with an indi-
vidual memory strategy, this approach effectively overcomes
the traditional bottleneck between computational efficiency
and global calibration accuracy. Results indicate that the
proposed method significantly accelerates the optimization
process; by restricting the expensive RT evaluations to elite
candidates, it reduces the required forward simulations by
over 60% compared to the standard GWO. Furthermore, the
dynamic search mechanism successfully prevents premature
convergence, allowing the algorithm to escape local optima
traps. Consequently, the calibration framework achieves sub-
3 dB precision, demonstrating a substantial improvement in
global search capability. The calibrated EM parameters for
dominant materials (concrete, glass, and soil) yield a simulated
path loss that highly aligns with empirical measurements,
exhibiting exceptional robustness particularly in deep-fading
and High-Loss Regions. Ultimately, this research provides a
highly efficient, practical, and accurate parameter calibration
solution for 6G digital twin channel modeling and complex
urban EM environment reconstruction.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported in part by National Natu-
ral Science Foundation of China (62571053, 62525101,
62341128), National Key Research and Development Program
of China (2023YFB2904805), Beijing Municipal Natural Fund
(L243002), and BUPT-CMCC Joint Institute.
REFERENCES
[1] J. Zhang et al., “Wireless environmental information theory: A new
paradigm toward 6G online and proactive environment intelligence
communication,” Engineering, Aug. 2025.
[2] L. Yu et al., “ChannelGPT: A large model toward real-world channel
foundation model for 6G environment intelligence communication,”
IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 63, no. 10, pp. 68–74, Oct. 2025.
[3] J. Zhang et al., “Deterministic Ray Tracing: A Promising Approach to
THz Channel Modeling in 6G Deployment Scenarios,” IEEE Commun.
Mag., vol. 62, no. 2, pp. 48–54, Feb. 2024.
[4] P. Tang et al., “XL-MIMO channel measurement, characterization, and
modeling for 6G: a survey,” Front. Inf. Technol. Electron. Eng., vol. 25,
no. 12, pp. 1627–1650, Dec. 2024.
[5] J. Zhang et al., “Integrated Sensing and Communication Channel:
Measurements, Characteristics, and Modeling,” IEEE Commun. Mag.,
vol. 62, no. 6, pp. 98–104, Jun. 2024.
[6] H. Wang et al., “Digital Twin Channel for 6G: Concepts, Architectures
and Potential Applications,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 63, no. 3, pp.
24–30, Mar. 2024.
[7] J. Wang et al., “Radio Environment Knowledge Pool for 6G Digital
Twin Channel,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 63, no. 5, pp. 158–164, May
2025.
[8] M. Li et al., “DeepRT: A Hybrid Framework Combining Large Model
Architectures and Ray Tracing Principles for 6G Digital Twin Channels,”
Electronics, vol. 14, no. 9, p. 1849, May 2025.
[9] Z. Li et al., “Ray-Tracing Calibration Based on Improved Particle Swarm
Optimization in 5.9 GHz Outdoor Scenario,” IEEE Antennas Wireless
Propag. Lett., vol. 24, no. 11, pp. 3871–3875, Nov. 2025.
[10] B. Peng et al., “Electromagnetic Parameter Calibration for a Broadband
Ray-Launching Simulator With SAGE Algorithm for Millimeter-Wave
Communications,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 138331–138339, Aug. 2020.
[11] Z. Xu et al., “An Enhanced Electromagnetic Properties Calibration
Algorithm for RT-Based Electromagnetic Environment Reconstruction,”
in Proc. IEEE 101st Veh. Technol. Conf. (VTC2025-Spring), Oslo,
Norway, 2025, pp. 1–5.
[12] S. Mirjalili et al., “Grey Wolf Optimizer,” Adv. Eng. Softw., vol. 69, pp.
46–61, Mar. 2014.
[13] X. Yang and Y. Qiu, “Research on Improving Gray Wolf Algorithm
Based on Multi-Strategy Fusion,” IEEE Access, vol. 11, pp. 66135–
66149, Jun. 2023.
[14] L. Zhang and X. Chen, “A Velocity-Guided Grey Wolf Optimization
Algorithm With Adaptive Weights and Laplace Operators for Feature
Selection in Data Classification,” IEEE Access, vol. 12, pp. 39887–
39901, Mar. 2024.
[15] X. Huang et al., “A Surrogate-Assisted Gray Prediction Evolution
Algorithm for High-Dimensional Expensive Optimization Problems,”
Mathematics, vol. 13, no. 6, p. 1007, Mar. 2025.
[16] H. Dong and Z. Dong, “Surrogate-assisted grey wolf optimization
for high-dimensional, computationally expensive black-box problems,”
Swarm Evol. Comput., vol. 57, p. 100713, Aug. 2020.
[17] G. Chen et al., “A Radial Basis Function Surrogate Model Assisted
Evolutionary Algorithm for High-Dimensional Expensive Optimization
Problems,” Appl. Soft Comput., vol. 116, p. 108353, Feb. 2022.
[18] S. Yu et al., “Memory Self-Learning Grey Wolf Optimization for PMSM
Parameter Identification with Inverter Voltage-Error Compensation,”
Electronics, vol. 14, no. 24, p. 4913, Dec. 2025.
[19] Y. Qin et al., “Doppler analysis and modeling of V2V channel at 6 GHz
in typical urban scenarios,” in Proc. 19th Eur. Conf. Antennas Propag.
(EuCAP), Stockholm, Sweden, 2025, pp. 1–5.
[20] Z. Yun and M. F. Iskander, “Ray Tracing for Radio Propagation
Modeling: Principles and Applications,” IEEE Access, vol. 3, pp. 1089–
1100, 2015.
[21] ITU-R, “Effects of building materials and structures on radiowave
propagation above about 100 MHz,” Recommendation ITU-R P.2040-
4, Geneva, Switzerland, 2024.
