Title: Beyond Code Reasoning: Specification-Anchored Auditing of Multi-Implementation Distributed Protocols

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.26495v2

Published Time: Wed, 06 May 2026 01:11:26 GMT

Number of Pages: 16

Markdown Content:
# Beyond Code Reasoning: Specification-Anchored Auditing of Multi-Implementation Distributed Protocols 

Masato Kamba 

Nyx Foundation masato.kamba@nyx.foundation 

Hirotake Murakami 

Aichi Prefectural Aichi High School of Technology and Engineering 2009hirotake@gmail.com 

Akiyoshi Sannai 

Department of Physics, Kyoto University sannai.akiyoshi.7z@kyoto-u.ac.jp 

Abstract —Code-driven auditing succeeds where vulnerabilities surface as code-level anomalies, but fails when correctness depends on what the specification requires rather than how the code is written. Production blockchain networks expose this gap directly: byzantine consensus is reached by running many independent clients of a shared specification, so a specification-divergence defect in any one client can fork the network, halt finality, or silently corrupt cross-client state. Existing auditing tools reason one repository at a time and have no shared baseline that can be held constant while the implementation varies. We present SPECA, an LLM-driven audit framework that de-rives explicit, categorized security properties (invariants, precon-ditions, postconditions, trust assumptions) from natural-language specifications and reuses them across implementations. SPECA yields three capabilities absent from code-driven auditing: con-trolled cross-implementation comparison under a constant prop-erty set, detections grounded in specification invariants no code-level pattern encodes, and false positives traceable to a specific pipeline phase rather than opaque model errors. We evaluate on two benchmarks. On the Sherlock Ethereum Fusaka Audit Contest (10 targets, 366 auditor submissions), a post-contest re-experiment recovers all 15 in-scope H/M/L vulner-abilities expert-augmented (8/15 automated-only) and indepen-dently surfaces 4 fix-confirmed bugs, including a cryptographic-invariant violation missed by every adjudicated contest find-ing; all 15 detecting properties encode specification-derived information unavailable from code alone. On the RepoAudit C/C++ benchmark, SPECA reaches 88.9% precision at 100% recall ( F1=0 .94 , on par with RepoAudit’s best configuration) and surfaces 12 author-validated bugs beyond ground truth, with two externally validated (Level A fix; Level B maintainer approval). Symmetrically, SPECA flags 5 of RepoAudit’s 40 published bugs as defensive-coding fixes with no reachable exploit path (DeepSeek R1 rejects all 5; Sonnet 4.5 rejects 4 of 5)— a verdict the explicit property representation makes auditable. All false positives trace to three pipeline-pinned root causes (trust boundary, code-reading, specification misinterpretation), and a multi-model study identifies property-generation quality, not model reasoning, as the binding constraint on coverage. End-to-end cost is ∼$30 per H/M/L bug ( ∼42 min wall-clock under parallel execution). 

Index Terms —distributed systems security, multi-implementation protocols, blockchain client security, security auditing, property-based verification, specification mining, false positive analysis 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Production blockchain networks reach byzantine consensus by running multiple independent client implementations of a shared protocol specification. Ethereum’s mainnet alone is sustained by clients in Go, Rust, Nim, TypeScript, Java, and C#, each independently engineering the same consensus and execution rules. This client diversity bounds the blast radius of any single bug, and it is the operational reason a specification-divergence defect in any one client is not a local code error but a distributed-systems failure that can fork the network, halt finality, or silently corrupt cross-client state. In a recent security contest exercising exactly this setting, 366 auditors examined ten implementations of the same cryp-tographic protocol specification and collectively identified fif-teen vulnerabilities—all recognizable as local code defects. Yet a subtle defect remained absent from every adjudicated find-ing: in a core cryptographic library, the KZG proof verification routine passed the original commitment array rather than its deduplicated variant, silently undermining the mathematical guarantee that the verification scheme depends on. The bug was a violation of an invariant that the specification defines but no code-level auditing tool was designed to check. This is the structural blind spot we target: when a vulnerability arises not from how code is written but from what the specification 

requires , repository-local auditing has neither the vocabulary to detect it nor the structure to explain the miss. Recent code-driven analyses—repository-level auditing agents [1], LLM-enhanced static analyzers [2], [3], and code-derived property generators [4]—all start from the code and work outward. They succeed when vulnerabilities surface as recognizable code-level anomalies, but they cannot express security expectations that the specification defines and the code never explicitly encodes, and their false positives are opaque: when a finding is wrong, there is no principled account of why 

the tool diverged from reality. Our key insight is that auditing becomes both more effective and more analyzable when vulnerabilities are represented as violations of explicit security properties derived from the specification, rather than as repository-local code patterns. We 

> arXiv:2604.26495v2 [cs.CR] 5 May 2026

derive typed properties from natural-language specifications and check each via Hoare-style proof-attempt reasoning: the LLM treats the property as a per-program-point obligation and emits a finding only when no discharging argument is reachable. This grounds every finding in a traceable secu-rity expectation and makes false positives interpretable—each maps to one of three pipeline-phase-specific root causes (trust-boundary misunderstanding, code-reading errors, specification misinterpretation), turning opaque model errors into ranked engineering targets. Because a missed specification invariant in a production client can fork the network, we deliberately optimize SPECA for recall-first auditing: a costly false posi-tive (manual triage time) is acceptable when the alternative is a silent consensus split, and the explicit property representation is what keeps triage tractable. 

a) Scope and threat model.: We focus on multi-implementation distributed protocols whose specifications are publicly maintained natural-language artifacts. Ethereum’s consensus and execution specifications are our primary case study; the framework targets any protocol that prescribes byzantine-fault-tolerant behavior across heterogeneous clients (e.g., Cosmos, Solana, QUIC). The audit consumes the specifi-cation and source code, trusts the build toolchain and specifica-tion text, and models an adversarial peer that can craft protocol messages or local inputs but cannot modify the binaries under audit. Side-channel and supply-chain attacks are out of scope. We implement SPECA on a current-generation LLM (Claude Sonnet 4.5) and report weaker models as ablations. We eval-uate on two established benchmarks: the Sherlock Ethereum Fusaka contest (10 audit targets, 366 professional auditors) and RepoAudit (15 C/C++ projects, where API documentation and module-level invariants serve as the specification surface). The evaluation reported here is a controlled post-contest re-experiment of SPECA against the adjudicated ground truth, isolating methodology from operator effects; the KZG defect is among the bugs recovered. SPECA delivers two coupled outcomes: vulnerabilities that a code-driven pipeline cannot articulate, and a structured account of why each issue was found or missed. This paper makes the following contributions:  

> •

Cross-implementation comparison under a shared property vocabulary. Properties derived once from the specification are reused across 10 Ethereum au-dit targets—7 consensus/execution clients, 1 EVM li-brary, and 2 KZG cryptographic libraries spanning 6 languages—holding the security baseline constant while the implementation varies (§III, §IV).  

> •

Specification-anchored audit framework. SPECA re-covers all 15 in-scope H/M/L Sherlock vulnerabili-ties expert-augmented (8/15 automated-only) and in-dependently discovers 4 fix-confirmed bugs, including a cryptographic-invariant violation missed by all 366 contest submissions; on RepoAudit it matches the best published precision (88.9%) and surfaces 7–18 author-validated beyond-GT candidates across three models, with 2 cross-model candidates externally validated to Level A/B (§IV).  

> •

Pipeline-phase-traceable failure analysis. False posi-tives map to three interpretable root causes pinned to specific phases; a multi-model study identifies property-generation quality as the binding constraint on coverage, turning model errors into ranked engineering targets (§IV, §V).  

> •

Engineering principles for recall-first auditing. We isolate the productive property types (invariants 75% pre-cision, preconditions 100%) and characterize a severity-preserving review filter that removes 30 of 102 raw findings while losing zero H/M/L true positives. The full pipeline costs roughly $30 per H/M/L bug ( ∼42-minute wall-clock under parallel execution), giving design princi-ples for high-assurance distributed-systems tooling (§IV, §V). II. R ELATED WORK 

We organize related work along three axes and summarize the closest systems in Table I. Appendix A provides a full discussion; here we highlight what distinguishes SPECA. 

LLM-augmented code-level detection. LLift [2] and Bu-gLens [3] guide LLMs through structured reasoning for kernel use-before-initialization and taint-style bugs; IRIS [5] and LLMxCPG [6] combine LLMs with CodeQL or code property graphs; RepoAudit [1] deploys an autonomous repository-level agent. All start from repository-local information (dataflow, code property graphs, path constraints). When correctness depends on normative requirements the code never explicitly encodes, code-level starting points cannot express whether an implementation satisfies its intended security expectation [7], [8]. 

LLM-driven property generation. PropertyGPT [4] (NDSS’25 Distinguished Paper), GPTScan [9], and iAudit [10] target smart contracts; FormalBench [11] finds that multi-phase pipelines with structured review are necessary for reliable inference. These share SPECA’s emphasis on explicit properties as the unit of analysis, but derive them primarily from code or existing properties rather than authoritative natural-language specifications, and focus predominantly on smart contracts. 

Specification-driven analysis. RFCAudit [12] audits proto-col implementations against RFCs with a hierarchical code-indexing agent; EDEFuzz [13] fuzzes web APIs using API specs; Jin et al. [14] show that complex prompting para-doxically raises false-negative rates due to overcorrection bias—a result motivating SPECA’s recall-first filtering. Even ideal specifications [15] can miss intuitively expected se-curity properties. RFCAudit is closest in spirit but uses implicit RFC compliance as its unit of reasoning, whereas SPECA derives explicit, typed security properties and sup-ports cross-implementation comparison under a shared prop-erty vocabulary plus a structured false-positive taxonomy traced to pipeline-phase origins. Related property-enforcement work [16], [17] and studies of specification–implementation gaps in blockchain systems [18] situate specification-based 2analysis as an active area SPECA extends from enforcement to auditing. III. SPECA F RAMEWORK DESIGN 

A. Overview 

SPECA automates the workflow of a specification-aware se-curity auditor through a six-phase pipeline organized into two stages: knowledge structuring (Phases 1–3), which transforms natural-language specifications into explicit security proper-ties, and systematic auditing (Phases 4–6), which applies structured proof-attempt reasoning to check whether imple-mentations satisfy those properties. Figure 1 illustrates the end-to-end pipeline: SPECA first builds a structured representation of what the code should do (from specifications and threat models), then checks whether the code actually does it through proof construction, grounding every finding in a traceable security property. The workflow proceeds in six phases: 1) Specification Discovery (Phase 1): Crawl specification documents and produce a structured index. 2) Subgraph Extraction (Phase 2): Decompose each spec-ification into program graphs with invariant annotations derived from RFC 2119 modal verbs, following Nielson and Nielson [19]. 3) Property Generation (Phase 3): Apply STRIDE threat modeling with CWE Top 25 augmentation to derive typed security properties (Table III) from subgraphs and the bug bounty scope. 4) Code Pre-resolution (Phase 4): Link each property to concrete source locations using Tree-sitter symbol analysis, reducing downstream audit tokens by 40–60%. 5) Property-Grounded Audit (Phase 5): For each prop-erty, attempt to construct a structured proof that it holds; gaps constitute findings. 6) Severity-Preserving Review (Phase 6): Filter false positives through three narrow mechanical gates (dead code, trust boundary, scope) designed to preserve H/M/L recall. In multi-implementation settings, Phases 1–3 execute once against the specification, producing a shared property vocab-ulary; Phases 4–6 execute independently per target. Holding security expectations constant while varying the code under audit yields a controlled comparison: the same property vo-cabulary produces systematically different distributions of true positives, false positives, and disputes across implementations, revealing where specification–implementation alignment di-verges. 

B. Threat Model 

Distributed-systems threat surface. SPECA targets multi-implementation protocols whose safety, liveness, and integrity emerge only when every client honours the specification consistently. A specification-divergence bug in any one client creates a network-scoped attack surface: an adversary de-livering crafted inputs (blocks, attestations, peer messages, RPC, engine-API responses) to a single client can fork the network, halt finality, corrupt cross-client state, or distort reward/slashing accounting. The blast radius is the network, not the host. 

Implementation-level scope. SPECA targets implementation vulnerabilities (correctness failures, denial of service, informa-tion disclosure, privilege escalation) in specification-governed software. Specifications and the bug-bounty scope document are trusted ; inter-component channels are semi-trusted ; exter-nal inputs are untrusted (Table II). SPECA does not target specification-level flaws, hardware attacks, or vulnerabilities that require dynamic execution to observe (e.g., race condi-tions). We assume specifications in machine-readable form with RFC 2119 modal verbs, accessible source code, and a bug-bounty scope document. 

C. Property Vocabulary 

Phase 3 synthesizes each property from six sources— STRIDE threats, trust-boundary obligations, specification as-sumptions, subgraph invariants ( INV-* ), state transitions, and optimization-correctness constraints—and assigns one of four types. Table III summarizes the vocabulary. 

D. Property-Grounded Audit (Phase 5) 

Phase 5 is the core reasoning phase: for each property, the auditor attempts to construct a proof that the property holds; gaps constitute findings. We characterize this as Hoare-style proof-attempt reasoning —the LLM treats every property as an assertion to be discharged at the relevant program points, and emits a finding only when no discharging argument is reachable. The pre/post/invariant/assumption typing maps directly onto this discharge style (preconditions at call entry, postconditions at return, invariants over the function body, assumptions at trust-boundary interfaces). Figure 3 shows the audit flow; Figure 2 the detailed procedure. Each property is processed in three sub-phases. Map : de-compose the assertion into verifiable sub-claims, read the enforcement code (full function bodies plus callers/callees), and link each sub-claim to its responsible code. Prove : verify input coverage, path coverage, concurrency safety, temporal validity, and implementation-pattern obligations (e.g., cache keys and deduplication keys must be computed from complete inputs); gaps are recorded as findings. Stress-test : re-examine assumptions if the proof succeeded, or construct a concrete attack path if it failed; findings without a plausible path are downgraded to potential-vulnerability . Phase 5 is LLM-driven evidence construction with structured reasoning, not formal verification. The proof-attempt framing was chosen over an adversarial “find bugs” framing after preliminary experiments showed the latter produced an 88% false-positive rate: without a structured claim to disprove, the model pro-duced numerous speculative findings with weak grounding, whereas the proof-attempt framing forces it to commit to a verifiable claim (the property’s assertion) before reporting any gap, eliminating speculative reasoning at the source. 

Worked example. For the property “The KZG batch verifica-tion challenge must be computed from the deduplicated com-3TABLE I COMPARATIVE SUMMARY OF APPROACHES CLOSEST TO SPECA. SPECA’ S PRIMARY DIFFERENTIATORS ARE THE combination OF EXPLICIT PROPERTY GROUNDING , CROSS -IMPLEMENTATION COMPARABILITY , AND STRUCTURED FALSE -POSITIVE ANALYSIS .

Axis RepoAudit PropertyGPT RFCAudit SPECA 

Source of expectations Code paths Code + properties RFC NL NL spec + threat models Unit of reasoning Bug pattern Formal property RFC clause Typed property (inv/pre/post/asm) Cross-impl. comparability No No No Yes Structured FP taxonomy No No No Yes (3 causes, phase-origin) 

Fig. 1. The SPECA pipeline. Phases 1–3 ( Knowledge Structuring ) derive security properties from specifications; Phases 4–6 ( Systematic Auditing ) verify properties against implementations. In multi-implementation settings, the left stage executes once and the right stage executes per target. TABLE II TRUST BOUNDARY MODEL USED THROUGHOUT THE AUDIT PIPELINE .EACH BOUNDARY IS MAPPED TO A TRUST LEVEL THAT PHASE 6’ STRUST -BOUNDARY GATE CHECKS AGAINST ATTACK -PATH SOURCES .

Boundary Trust Level Rationale 

Specification documents TRUSTED Correctness oracle Bug bounty scope TRUSTED Defines audit perimeter Internal component APIs SEMI TRUSTED Malformed but valid data External/user-facing inputs UNTRUSTED Attacker-controlled TABLE III THE FOUR PROPERTY TYPES IN SPECA’ S VOCABULARY .

Type Definition Example 

Invariant Holds at all times Nodes maintain ≥

CUSTODY_REQUIREMENT 

columns Precondition Holds before an operation Input length equals commitment count before verification Postcondition Holds after operation completes New custody set covers required subnets after rotation Trust assumption Assumed but not enforced by component (e.g., a downstream trust boundary) Execution layer returns valid block data via Engine API 

mitment array,” Map identifies compute_verify_cell _kzg_proof_batch_challenge at line 877; Prove dis-covers that the function receives commitments_bytes 

(with duplicates) rather than unique_commitments ,

Require: Property P with assertion A, code scope C

Ensure: Finding F or verification P ASS 

1: procedure AUDIT (P , C)

2: sub claims ← DECOMPOSE (A)

3: code map ← MAP (sub claims , C ) ▷ Sub-phase 1 

4: for each claim s in sub claims do 

5: proof ← PROVE (s, code map [s]) ▷ Sub-phase 2 

6: if proof .fails then 

7: gap ← proof .failure point 

8: attack ← STRESS TEST (gap , C ) ▷ Sub-phase 3 

9: if attack .plausible then 

10: return FINDING (P .id, V ULN , gap , attack )

11: else 

12: return FINDING (P .id, P OTENTIAL , gap , ∅)

13: end if 

14: end if 

15: end for 

16: return PASS 

17: end procedure 

Fig. 2. Property-grounded audit procedure for a single property. 

breaking the verification scheme; Stress-Test confirms acrafted duplicate set causes the challenge hash to diverge from the specification, enabling proofs to pass incorrectly. The result is a High-severity cryptographic correctness bug missed by 366 human auditors in the concurrent contest (§IV-C). 

E. Severity-Preserving Review (Phase 6) 

Security auditing faces an asymmetric risk: a missed H/M/L true positive is costlier than a false positive requiring triage time. SPECA’s review phase therefore prioritizes severity preservation : it may only dispute findings through three nar-row, mechanical gates designed to be recall-safe for H/M/L findings. 4Fig. 3. Phase 5 audit flow for a single property. Each property undergoes three sub-phases: Map (decompose assertion into sub-claims), Prove (verify each sub-claim against code), and Stress-Test (validate or challenge the conclusion). 

Gate 1: Dead Code. If a flagged function has zero non-test callers (and is not part of a public API), the finding is classified 

DISPUTED_FP . Gate 2: Trust Boundary. If the attack path’s data source is TRUSTED or SEMI_TRUSTED and no alter-native untrusted input path exists, classified DISPUTED_FP .

Gate 3: Scope Check. Findings targeting scope-excluded categories, pre-existing issues, or out-of-scope components are classified DISPUTED_FP .Only these three gates may produce a DISPUTED_FP ver-dict; no design-intent or code-quality reasoning may dispute a finding. The three-gate design was simplified from a five-gate prototype after two gates (Spec Cross-Reference, Ex-ploitability) caused recall loss on informational true positives at negligible precision benefit (§IV-C). Surviving findings re-ceive severity calibration against the scope document’s impact thresholds. IV. E VALUATION 

A. Research Questions 

RQ1: How effective is SPECA at auditing specification-governed implementations, and what explains its successes and failures? We measure detection effectiveness (recall, precision) and require that both successes and failures be traceable to specific pipeline mechanisms. 

RQ2: How does SPECA compare to code-driven auditing, and does the property-centered representation produce qualitatively different outcomes? We test for (i) discovery of bugs beyond the established ground truth and (ii) qualitatively different security judgments on disputed patterns. 

B. Experimental Setup 

RQ1 benchmark (Sherlock). We evaluate on the Sherlock Ethereum Fusaka Audit Contest, targeting 10 Ethereum im-plementations of EIP-7594 (PeerDAS) and EIP-7691; Ta-ble IV summarizes the benchmark. The contest received 366 submissions from professional auditors, of which 15 were judged valid at H/M/L severity (5 H, 2 M, 8 L). The 10 targets span six languages (Go, Rust, Nim, TypeScript, C#, C) and include 5 consensus-layer clients (Lighthouse, Prysm, Grandine, Nimbus, Lodestar), 2 execution clients (Nethermind,           

> TABLE IV SHERLOCK ETHEREUM FUSAKA AUDIT CONTEST BENCHMARK CHARACTERISTICS .
> Characteristic Value
> Target implementations 10 (5 consensus + 2 execution clients + 3 libraries) Programming languages Go, Rust, Nim, TypeScript, C#, C Contest submissions 366 Valid issues (H/M/L) 15 (5 High, 2 Medium, 8 Low) Severity thresholds Network-impact-based

Reth), 1 EVM library (Alloy EVM), and 2 cryptographic libraries (c-kzg-4844, rust-eth-kzg). The ground truth is established by independent expert adjudication, not synthetic bug injection. An earlier version of SPECA was deployed live in this contest (Sep–Oct 2025) and placed 6th overall with the largest valid-issue count (17) among participating teams; the analyses below are from a controlled post-contest re-experiment, separating methodology from operator effects. Direct comparison with individual con-test participants is precluded by confidentiality; we therefore evaluate absolutely against the adjudicated ground truth and reserve head-to-head baseline comparison for RQ2. 

RQ2 benchmark (RepoAudit). We evaluate on the Re-poAudit benchmark [1]: 15 open-source C/C++ projects with 35 non-disputed ground-truth bugs (null-pointer dereferences, memory leaks, and use-after-free) confirmed by developer fixes, plus 5 disputed bugs. We compare against published baseline numbers from Guo et al. [1] (four RepoAudit model configurations) and two industrial static analyzers (Meta Infer, Amazon CodeGuru). We do not report recall comparatively because the ground truth was constructed from RepoAudit’s own discoveries, making recall comparison structurally unfair. 

Metrics. We report precision (non-FP rate), recall on H/M/L contest issues, and a strict H/M/L-match rate. Issue match-ing uses LLM-assisted semantic matching followed by two-author manual verification (initial agreement 93%, consensus on disagreements). A match is accepted only when both root cause and security impact align; partial matches (same code location but different impact) are excluded from re-call. Many-to-one matches count the issue recovered if any 5finding matches, with each finding counted independently for precision. Findings are labeled true positive ( tp , tp_info ,

fixed , partially_fixed , potential-info ) or false positive ( fp_invalid , fp_review ); Appendix C provides the full label definitions. We report precision at three granu-larities (strict H/M/L match, confirmed-useful, broad non-FP) to expose effectiveness under different TP interpretations. 

Caveats. Three methodological choices condition our numbers and warrant explicit acknowledgement: (i) issue matching uses LLM-assisted semantic matching with two-author man-ual verification (initial agreement 93%), introducing bounded but non-zero matching uncertainty; (ii) the Sherlock severity adjudication is contest-organizer-defined and conservatively requires network-wide impact for Medium/High, so opera-tionally significant local bugs surface as Informational and depress strict precision; and (iii) the RepoAudit ground truth was constructed from RepoAudit’s own discoveries, so we report beyond-GT candidates rather than recall against it. Appendix J elaborates on each. 

Implementation. SPECA is a Python systems framework (∼1,900 lines of async orchestration plus 1,373 lines of analysis prompts across 9 workers); workers run in paral-lel via asyncio with circuit-breaker abort and per-batch checkpointing. Phases 1–3 use Claude Opus; Phases 4–6 use Claude Sonnet; Phase 4 uses Tree-sitter via MCP for symbol resolution. 

Cost and wall-clock. Total API cost was $400–620 for RQ1 (∼$27–41 per recovered H/M/L bug, or $21–33 per unique bug including the 4 fix-confirmed novel bugs) and $81.05 ($1.69/bug) for the RQ2 primary configuration (Sonnet 4.5); multi-model sensitivity (Sonnet 4, DeepSeek R1) cost $93– 101 per model. Phase 5 finishes in ∼42 min wall-clock for all 10 RQ1 targets under parallel execution (4 workers/target, 64 concurrent items). Evaluation scripts and all generated artifacts are released as supplementary material (Open Science, p. 12). 

C. RQ1: Effectiveness and Structured Failure Analysis 1) Detection Effectiveness: Phase 5 produces 647 audit outputs; 545 are classified as not-a-vulnerability or out-of-scope, leaving 102 positive findings. Phase 6 filters 30 as 

DISPUTED_FP , yielding 72 post-review findings. Table V presents the headline detection results; Table XIV (Ap-pendix D) provides a full accounting reconciliation. In the expert-augmented configuration, SPECA recovers all 15 in-scope H/M/L vulnerabilities (5 High, 2 Medium, 8 Low). Phase 6 improves broad precision from 56.9% to 66.7% while preserving 100% recall on H/M/L (raising F1 from 72.5% to 80.0%); the 10 TPs filtered by Phase 6 are all informational/partial (8 tp_info , 1 partially_fixed ,1 potential-info ), confirming the severity-preserving design. 

Property neighborhoods explain the strict/broad gap. The strict H/M/L match rate (26.4%) reflects a property neighbor-hood effect : 11 issues are matched by 2+ properties (e.g., #308 and #331 each by 4; #169 by 3); Figure 4 visualizes the full per-issue distribution. Grouping findings by issue (Table VI)        

> TABLE V SPECA DETECTION EFFECTIVENESS ON THE SHERLOCK BENCHMARK .THE GAP BETWEEN STRICT PRECISION (26.4%) AND BROAD PRECISION
> (66.7%) IS EXPLAINED BY THE PROPERTY NEIGHBORHOOD EFFECT (ONE ISSUE DETECTED BY MULTIPLE COMPLEMENTARY PROPERTIES )AND BY INFORMATIONAL -SEVERITY /INDEPENDENTLY -FIXED FINDINGS OUTSIDE THE CONTEST ’S SEVERITY -GATED SCOPE .

Metric Value 

Total findings (Phase 5, pre-review) 102 Total findings (Phase 6, post-review) 72 Confirmed FPs (post-review) 24 (33.3%) H/M/L recovered (expert-augmented) 15 / 15 (100%) H/M/L recovered (automated-only) 8 / 15 (53%) Novel bugs confirmed by fix commits 4

Precision at three granularities (post-review, N=72): 

Strict (H/M/L match) 26.4% (19/72) Confirmed-useful 59.7% (43/72) Broad (non-FP rate) 66.7% (48/72)  

> Fig. 4. Findings per issue: the property neighborhood effect. Eleven of 15 matched issues are covered by two or more complementary properties, explaining both the high recall and the gap between finding-level and cluster-level precision.

yields cluster-level strict precision of 48.7% (15 issues carried by 19 clusters rather than 72 alerts), confirming genuine redundancy rather than alert duplication—and this many-to-one structure also explains the high recall: the probability that at least one neighborhood property matches the root cause is high. SPECA also independently discovered 4 bugs confirmed by developer fix commits, none of which surfaced in the 366 adjudicated contest submissions: (A) the c-kzg-4844 KZG batch-verification challenge computed from the origi-nal (not deduplicated) commitment array (fix: f18ba082 ); (B) an inverted logic error plus missing validation in Lodestar (3b98c59c ); (C) an unchecked array access in Nimbus reach-able from RPC/Engine API ( b3a3f3f9 ); (D) a wrong subnet parameter computation plus missing cell-count validation in 6TABLE VI FINDING -LEVEL VS CLUSTER -LEVEL EVALUATION . C LUSTER -LEVEL STRICT PRECISION (48.7%) NEARLY DOUBLES THE FINDING -LEVEL RATE          

> (26.4%), CONFIRMING THAT THE PROPERTY NEIGHBORHOOD PROVIDES GENUINE REDUNDANCY RATHER THAN ALERT DUPLICATION .
> Level Precision (broad / strict) Recall
> Finding-level (N=72) 66.7% / 26.4% 15/15 (100%) Cluster-level (N=39) — / 48.7% 15/15 (100%)
> Fig. 5. Sankey flow from the property families that recover the 15 ground-truth issues, across the 10 Ethereum audit targets. Phase 3 generates 7 property families in total; 5 are reused across two or more implementations, and 4 distinct families together account for all 15 ground-truth recoveries. The horizontal density around a small subset of issues visualizes the property neighborhood effect : complementary properties jointly characterize each high-impact issue, so cluster-level precision (48.7%) nearly doubles the finding-level rate—an effect that is visible only when properties are held constant across implementations.

Prysm ( b5bdd65f ). All four share a structural property: each violates a specification-derived expectation that the implemen-tation’s local code does not encode—which is why a code-driven pipeline lacks the vocabulary to surface them. Bug A is the most striking: a cryptographic correctness violation in a library shared by multiple Ethereum clients, where local code passes type and length checks but breaks the polynomial commitment scheme’s mathematical premise. Bug B is across-field constraint between two locally-correct fields whose required equality is defined only by the spec. Bug C is reachable from an external trust boundary (RPC/Engine API) that local code reads as trusted, missing a spec-defined input-validation obligation. Bug D is a protocol-parameter diver-gence at fork epochs visible only when the canonical schedule is held as oracle. The comparison is not fully controlled—the post-contest configuration had structured specification access and substantial compute budget, while contest participants operated under time pressure. 

2) Cross-Implementation Patterns: Because SPECA ap-plies a shared property vocabulary across all 10 imple-mentations, we can analyze where the same expectations  

> Fig. 6. Per-repository finding distribution (Phase 5 vs Phase 6). The same property vocabulary produces visibly different TP/FP profiles across the 10 audit targets—a direct consequence of holding security expectations constant while varying the implementation. Code-local tools cannot produce this view.

produce different outcomes. Figure 5 visualizes how the 7 property families map to ground-truth issues across all targets: 5 of the 7 families fire on 2 or more implemen-tations , which is the operational evidence for the shared-vocabulary contribution—without it, no such reuse measure-ment would be definable. Eleven issues recur across multiple repositories (e.g., #308 in Grandine, Lighthouse, Nimbus, Prysm; #169 in Grandine, Lodestar, Prysm). As a case study, 

PROP-6a4369e9-inv-014 asserts that blob parameters at fork boundaries must be computed from the canonical sched-ule rather than local config defaults: Grandine, Lighthouse, and Prysm use a divergent local default (all three TP, matched to contest issue #11), while Nimbus correctly reads the canonical schedule (PASS). A single property thus functions simultane-ously as a true-positive detector in deviating implementations and as a conformance certificate in compliant ones—a con-trolled comparison code-local tools cannot achieve. Figure 6 shows the per-repository finding distribution under the shared vocabulary; Appendix F provides further breakdowns. 

3) Automated-Only vs. Expert-Augmented Configurations: 

Of the 15 detecting properties, 8 were auto-generated by Phases 1–3 and 7 required manual creation, clustering in cryptographic invariants (KZG edge cases, BLS12-381 identity element) and protocol lifecycle rules (custody bounds, cache key completeness, fork-transition refresh)—areas requiring mathematical domain knowledge or multi-specification cross-referencing. The automated-only configuration thus recov-ers 8/15 (53%); the expert-augmented configuration recovers 15/15 (100%) (Table VII). 7TABLE VII AUTOMATED -ONLY VS . EXPERT -AUGMENTED CONFIGURATIONS . T HE 7  

> MANUAL PROPERTIES AMORTIZE ACROSS ALL 10 IMPLEMENTATIONS ,
> TURNING EXPERT KNOWLEDGE INJECTION INTO A ONE -TIME COST PER SPECIFICATION CORPUS .

Config Properties H/M/L Cov. 

Automated-only Auto (Phases 1–3) 8 / 15 53% Expert-augmented Auto + 7 manual 15 / 15 100%                    

> TABLE VIII FALSE -POSITIVE ROOT CAUSES WITH PHASE ORIGIN (N=16 DEEPLY ANALYZED FROM A POPULATION OF 44 TOTAL FP S). E ACH ROOT CAUSE MAPS TO A SPECIFIC PIPELINE PHASE AND TO A CONCRETE ,
> IMPLEMENTABLE IMPROVEMENT .
> Root Cause Phase Origin N%
> Trust boundary misunderstanding Phase 3 850.0 Code reading error Phase 5 637.5 Specification misinterpretation Phase 3 212.5
> Total 16 100

The current evidence supports characterizing SPECA as a 

specification-anchored audit framework with expert augmen-tation . The framework’s value lies in the property-centered representation, the structured proof-attempt audit pipeline, and the severity-preserving review filter—each fully automated and property-source-agnostic. A manually authored property passes through the same pipeline as an auto-generated one, and the 7 manual properties amortize across all 10 implemen-tations: expert knowledge injection has high leverage in multi-implementation settings. Improving automated extraction for cryptographic and protocol-lifecycle properties is a concrete research frontier (Appendix I). 

4) Structured False-Positive Analysis: SPECA produces 44 total FPs across both phases (24 surviving Phase 6, 20 correctly filtered). We selected 16 FPs for detailed pipeline tracing; all trace to three identifiable pipeline limitations (Table VIII). 

Trust-boundary misunderstanding (50%, Phase 3): trusted inter-component channels (e.g., consensus–execution JWT) treated as untrusted. Code-reading error (37.5%, Phase 5): misreading implementation logic (e.g., confusing a bounds check with a missing one). Specification misinterpretation 

(12.5%, Phase 3): properties from ambiguous spec text the protocol team reads differently. Each maps to a concrete improvement; the Phase 6 gate filters half the trust-boundary FPs and two-thirds of code-reading FPs but none of the mis-interpretation ones. Appendix G provides per-category traces and gate breakdowns. 

Property-type ablation. Ablating precision by property type over an N=88 subset (Table IX): invariants drive 76% of findings at 75% precision; preconditions reach 100% (small sample); postconditions are moderate (50%); assumptions are too noisy for reliable auditing (0%) and are best treated as an exploratory mode. The mechanism behind the assumption result is structural: a trust assumption asserts a property  

> TABLE IX PROPERTY -TYPE ABLATION (N=88).

Property Type N TP FP Precision 

Invariant 67 18 6 75.0% Precondition 11 4 0 100.0% Postcondition 5 1 1 50.0% Assumption 5 0 1 0.0%          

> TABLE X PHASE 6VERDICT DISTRIBUTION AND RETROSPECTIVE TP RATE
> (N=102). DISPUTED_FP ’S33.3% TP RATE MEANS THE FILTER ACHIEVES 66.7% PRECISION AS A FALSE -POSITIVE DETECTOR WHILE INCURRING ONLY INFORMATIONAL RECALL LOSS .

Verdict Count TP TP Rate 

CONFIRMED VULNERABILITY 39 29 74.4% CONFIRMED POTENTIAL 24 13 54.2% DOWNGRADED 8 5 62.5% DISPUTED FP 30 10 33.3% NEEDS MANUAL REVIEW 1 1 100.0% 

the audited component does not itself enforce (e.g., “Engine API returns valid block data”), so Phase 5 has no in-scope discharge target and any flagged deviation is by design out of the audited code’s responsibility—most assumption-flagged cases on inspection turn out to be invariants miscategorized at Phase 3. Excluding assumption properties leaves precision essentially unchanged (67.1%) and recall stable (27.1% strict), confirming that assumptions contribute negligibly to actionable detections. Postcondition and assumption generation are the concrete research frontiers for the automated-only configura-tion. 

Phase 6 verdict breakdown. Table X reports the Phase 6 verdict distribution and retrospective TP rate over the 102 pre-review findings. The DISPUTED_FP verdict filters two-thirds of the false positives it flags while preserving H/M/L recall— the severity-preserving design point. The three-gate filter was simplified from a five-gate prototype after the dropped gates (Spec Cross-Reference, Exploitability) filtered informational TPs at zero precision. Figure 9 (appendix) visualizes per-gate effectiveness. 

5) Specification Contribution: To test whether SPECA’s detections truly depend on specification-derived information, we retrospectively classified each of the 15 detecting properties as spec-essential or code-inferrable and traced its provenance to a specification source. All 15 were judged spec-essential, falling into four recurring patterns (Table XI). The categories illustrate why code-local analysis cannot synthesize these properties. Issue #40 recomputes the proposer index correctly by the original algorithm but the Fulu spec redefines the function to use a cached lookahead array; the bug is non-conformance with the new spec. Issue #48 in-volves a KZG commitment equal to the BLS12-381 identity element, which passes group-membership checks but violates a mathematical invariant only the specification defines. Is-sue #376 involves prev_randao and randao_mix , in-8TABLE XI RETROSPECTIVE SPEC -ESSENTIALITY CLASSIFICATION OF ALL 15              

> MATCHED ISSUES . A LL 15 WERE JUDGED SPEC -ESSENTIAL ; 0 WERE JUDGED CODE -INFERRABLE . A UTHORS ’ASSESSMENT .
> Category Issues Count
> Spec-defined algorithm #40, #176, #210, #308, #319 5Mathematical invariant #48, #203 2Cross-field constraint #190, #343, #371, #376, #381 5Protocol parameter #15, #109, #216 3

dividually correct but required to be equal by the spec’s 

process_execution_payload —a cross-field constraint no single function reveals. The remaining categories follow the same pattern at scale: the four other cross-field constraints (#190, #343, #371, #381) all require correlating fields whose individual local invariants hold; the three protocol-parameter issues (#15, #109, #216) involve constants whose authoritative value lives in the specification’s parameters table and that the implementation hard-codes inconsistently; and the four other spec-defined-algorithm issues (#176, #210, #308, #319) all instantiate the same “algorithm redefined by spec but not by the implementation” pattern as #40. All 15 trace through the property →subgraph →spec-section provenance chain to specification sources; 2 of 15 terminate at a specific INV 

label (e.g., issue #319 traces through subgraph SG-001 for 

get_blob_parameters to INV-004 : “if no schedule entry matches, defaults to ELECTRA parameters”), making the spec-essential claim mechanically auditable rather than retrospective assertion. This supports characterizing SPECA’s gains as representation-induced rather than model-capability-induced. 

D. RQ2: Comparison Against Code-Driven Baselines 

We run SPECA on the 15 C/C++ projects from RepoAudit using the same pipeline as RQ1. Table XII compares against published baselines, organized into a same-backbone compar-ison (DeepSeek R1), SPECA’s best configuration, and other configurations. 

Matched-backbone comparison. Under a partially controlled same-backbone comparison (DeepSeek R1; agent architecture and retrieval still differ), SPECA reports 7 author-validated candidate bugs beyond ground truth while RepoAudit achieves higher precision (87.2% vs. 72.7%)—consistent with a repre-sentation effect but not isolating it. With Sonnet 4.5, SPECA’s precision improves to 88.9% (matching the best RepoAudit config) while discovering 12 author-validated bugs beyond ground truth; Sonnet 4, intermediate in capability, discovers 

more candidates (18) at 81.2% precision—an apparent in-version explained by the property-adherence effect elaborated below: stronger models stay within the stated property scope, while weaker models drift into adjacent code patterns where some genuine bugs happen to live. Combined with 100% recall on the 35 non-disputed ground-truth bugs, Sonnet 4.5 reaches F1=0 .94 , on par with RepoAudit’s strongest published configuration (Claude 3.7 Sonnet, F1=0 .94 ); the differentia-tion is qualitative, in the form of beyond-GT discoveries and disputed-bug verdicts. 

Divergent security judgments. SPECA and RepoAudit pro-duce qualitatively different verdicts on 5 disputed patterns, reflecting a methodological difference: SPECA applies an exploitability-centered interpretation (vulnerability only with a concrete attack path), while RepoAudit flags best-practice vi-olations regardless of exploitability. For example, RA-M2-O1 

(memcached server_sockets leak) is not exploitable— both call sites immediately invoke exit() —so SPECA clas-sifies it as not-a-vulnerability while RepoAudit flags it as a leak. We report these as divergent security judgments rather than declaring either tool correct. This judgment is model-dependent: DeepSeek R1 rejects all 5, Sonnet 4.5 rejects 4 of 5, Sonnet 4 detects 4 of 5—consistent with the principle that exploitability-centered classification requires counterfactual reasoning where larger models improve most. The takeaway is that a specification-grounded pipeline surfaces methodological disagreement explicitly as a property-level verdict, available for human adjudication. 

Beyond-GT candidates: discovery rate and diversity. 

Across all model configurations SPECA discovers 7–18 author-validated candidate bugs beyond ground truth. Sonnet 4 contributes the highest count (18, listed in Table XVI, Ap-pendix I), spanning three bug types (use-after-free 9, memory leak 6, NPD 3) and eleven projects (with the Linux kernel contributing the largest share); 7 of 18 (39%) are corroborated by at least one other model, providing weak but non-trivial cross-model evidence that the discoveries are not artifacts of a single model’s idiosyncrasies. 

Property adherence as causal mechanism. The per-model count pattern (Sonnet 4: 18; Sonnet 4.5: 12; DeepSeek R1: 7) is not a simple precision–discovery tradeoff but reflects increasing property adherence : more capable models au-dit more faithfully within the stated property scope, while weaker models drift to related-but-unspecified patterns—some of which turn out to be genuine bugs and others FPs. The empirical signature of this drift is concrete: 5 of 6 externally submitted PRs originate from Sonnet 4’s additional (out-of-property-scope) discoveries, not from Sonnet 4.5’s tighter set. The engineering implication is that as model capability advances, property-generation quality (Phases 1–3) becomes the binding constraint on coverage—the model will faithfully audit precisely what the properties tell it to audit, and no more. Figure 7 situates SPECA’s cost–precision position: at Son-net 4.5, SPECA matches the top RepoAudit precision while uniquely contributing double-digit beyond-GT candidates at 

∼ $1 .69 /bug. 

External validation status. We classify validation evidence into four levels of decreasing strength: (A) developer fix commit; (B) maintainer acknowledgement; (C) independent reproduction with documented steps; (D) author analysis only. To upgrade levels, we submitted 8 pull requests across model configurations. Two candidates are externally validated above Level D: a coturn NULL-deref (PROP-N3-npd-001) at Level A (fix in later release; PR #1841 self-withdrawn after discovering 9TABLE XII COMPARISON ON THE REPO AUDIT BENCHMARK . TP NUMBERS FOR REPO AUDIT ARE PUBLISHED BY GUO ET AL . AND INCLUDE BOTH GT-MATCHED BUGS AND ADDITIONAL DISCOVERIES . F OR SPECA, WE OMIT AN AGGREGATE TP COUNT BECAUSE COMPUTING IT REQUIRES ESTIMATING GT              

> MATCHES —AN INHERENTLY APPROXIMATE PROCEDURE . R ECALL IS NOT REPORTED BECAUSE THE GT WAS CONSTRUCTED FROM REPO AUDIT ’S OWN DISCOVERIES .bNEW CANDIDATES =AUTHOR -VALIDATED BUGS BEYOND THE ESTABLISHED GT (L EVEL DVALIDATION ,SEE APPENDIX I).

Method TP FP Precision New cand. b Cost 

Partially controlled comparison (DeepSeek R1) 

RepoAudit (DeepSeek R1) 41 6 87.2% (in TP) $8.55 SPECA (DeepSeek R1) — 15 72.7% 7 $93.51 

Latest models 

RepoAudit (Claude 3.7 Sonnet) 40 5 88.9% (in TP) $23.85 

SPECA (Sonnet 4.5) — 6 88.9% 12 $81.05 

Other configurations 

Amazon CodeGuru 0 18 0.0% 0 —Meta Infer 7 2 77.8% 0 free RepoAudit (o3-mini) 36 9 80.0% (in TP) $4.50 RepoAudit (Claude 3.5 Sonnet) 40 11 78.4% (in TP) $38.10 SPECA (Sonnet 4) — 13 81.2% 18 $100.68  

> Fig. 7. Cost vs. detection performance on the RepoAudit benchmark. At Sonnet 4.5, SPECA matches top precision while uniquely contributing author-validated beyond-GT candidates; per-bug cost remains competitive with the best published baseline.

the fix), and an ICU use-after-free race (PROP-U5-uaf-002) at Level B (maintainer-approved Jira PR #3921). Two further PRs were rejected as FPs (ImageMagick PR #8628; mem-cached PR #1282), 4 remain open; candidates with incomplete disclosure coordination by camera-ready will be anonymized. Appendix I reports full per-model cross-corroboration and auxiliary figures. V. D ISCUSSION 

The central finding is that specification-grounded represen-tation changes not just what a tool detects but what its failures mean : SPECA’s false positives cluster into three interpretable, phase-traceable categories. 

From research artifact to audit pipeline. Several engineering choices emerged from live deployment, not offline bench-marking: the proof-attempt framing replaced an adversarial prototype after the latter produced an 88% FP rate under contest pressure (§III-D); the review filter was reduced from five gates to three (§III-E) after the dropped gates filtered informational TPs at zero precision; the property neighborhood effect (§IV-C), initially unexpected, proved valuable for triage when no single alert was self-validating. The controlled re-experiment in §IV is therefore both a methodological isolation step and a record of design choices whose first validation was operational—grounding the claims in deployment, not just offline tuning. 

Model capability, property adherence, and asymmetric security. SPECA benefits disproportionately from model capa-bility: precision climbs from 72.7% (DeepSeek R1) to 88.9% (Sonnet 4.5), a 16.2 pp gain vs. 10.5 pp across RepoAudit’s configurations. The gain comes with a structural shift: more capable models adhere more closely to the stated property scope, reducing FPs but also reducing beyond-property dis-coveries (Sonnet 4.5: 12 new, 6 FP; Sonnet 4: 18 new, 13 FP). The implication is that as models improve, property generation quality becomes the dominant factor in coverage : the model faithfully verifies what the properties encode but will not compensate for properties the pipeline fails to derive. This makes Phases 1–3 the primary research frontier—a concrete, tractable target in contrast to general code-reasoning improve-ment. More broadly, this exposes a structural asymmetry: open-ended bug finding favors the attacker, whereas SPECA turns LLM capability into a defensive asset by grounding search in explicit specification-derived properties. 

Limitations. (i) Causal attribution: although RQ2 is partially controlled at the model backbone, architecture and retrieval still differ; results are consistent with a representation ef-fect but do not isolate it. (ii) External validation: the 12 Sonnet 4.5 candidates were initially Level D; two cross-model beyond-GT discoveries have been externally validated (Level A, Level B), both from Sonnet 4/DeepSeek R1; two others were maintainer-confirmed FPs. (iii) External validity: 

RQ1 covers Ethereum clients and RQ2 a C/C++ benchmark; 10 broader validation across protocol stacks and cryptographic libraries remains future work. Appendix J discusses additional threats to validity. VI. C ONCLUSION 

We presented SPECA, a specification-anchored audit frame-work that turns natural-language protocol specifications into a shared property vocabulary for multi-implementation dis-tributed systems. The expert-augmented configuration recovers all 15 H/M/L Sherlock vulnerabilities (automated-only: 8/15) and discovers 4 fix-confirmed bugs across 10 audit targets spanning 6 languages; cluster-level precision (48.7%) nearly doubles the finding-level rate, and all 15 detecting proper-ties encode specification-derived information unavailable from code alone. On RepoAudit, SPECA matches the best baseline precision (88.9%) and surfaces 12 author-validated beyond-GT candidates with Sonnet 4.5, with two cross-model discov-eries externally validated (Level A, Level B). All false pos-itives trace to three pipeline-specific root causes, identifying property-generation quality—especially for cryptographic in-variants and protocol-lifecycle rules—as the binding constraint and the most tractable extension of this work. ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS 

Responsible disclosure. All Sherlock findings correspond to already-adjudicated contest issues. The 4 novel bugs have been remediated upstream (we reference only public fix commits). The RepoAudit candidate bugs follow responsible disclosure: 8 pull requests have been submitted to upstream repositories, 2 candidates externally validated above author review (one Level A, fix confirmed in a later release; one Level B, maintainer Jira approval), and 2 confirmed as false positives; any unresolved candidate will be anonymized in the camera-ready version. 

Dual-use considerations. SPECA is a defensive tool, but vulnerability-finding is inherently dual-use. We believe pub-lication benefits outweigh risks: the compute budget is al-ready accessible to well-resourced attackers, every finding is traceable to an explicit property (aiding governance), and the pipeline is most useful in specification-grounded contexts where defenders operate. 

Human subjects and compute cost. This work involves no human subjects; we used only publicly released contest adjudication data. Total API cost was $400–620 (RQ1) and $81–101 per model (RQ2), reported transparently in §IV-B. REFERENCES [1] J. Guo, C. Wang, X. Xu, Z. Su, and X. Zhang, “RepoAudit: An autonomous LLM-agent for repository-level code auditing,” in 

Proceedings of the 42nd International Conference on Machine Learning ,ser. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, A. Singh, M. Fazel, D. Hsu, S. Lacoste-Julien, F. Berkenkamp, T. Maharaj, K. Wagstaff, and J. Zhu, Eds., vol. 267. PMLR, 13–19 Jul 2025, pp. 21 083–21 100. [Online]. Available: https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/guo25n.html [2] H. Li, Y. Hao, Y. Zhai, and Z. Qian, “Enhancing static analysis for practical bug detection: An llm-integrated approach,” Proc. ACM Program. Lang. , vol. 8, no. OOPSLA1, Apr. 2024. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3649828 [3] H. Li, H. Zhang, K. Pei, and Z. Qian, “Towards more accurate static analysis for taint-style bug detection in linux kernel,” in 

2025 40th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE) . IEEE Press, 2025, p. 380–392. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/ASE63991.2025.00039 [4] Y. Liu, Y. Xue, D. Wu, Y. Sun, Y. Li, M. Shi, and Y. Liu, “PropertyGPT: LLM-driven formal verification of smart contracts through retrieval-augmented property generation,” in Proceedings of the 32nd Network and Distributed System Security Symposium (NDSS) , 2025, distinguished Paper Award. [5] Z. Li, S. Dutta, and M. Naik, “IRIS: LLM-assisted static analysis for detecting security vulnerabilities,” in The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2025. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/forum?id=9LdJDU7E91 [6] A. Lekssays, H. Mouhcine, K. Tran, T. Yu, and I. Khalil, “LLMxCPG: Context-aware vulnerability detection through code property graph-guided large language models,” in Proceedings of the 34th USENIX Security Symposium , 2025. [Online]. Available: https: //www.usenix.org/conference/usenixsecurity25/presentation/lekssays [7] S. Ullah, M. Han, S. Pujar, H. Pearce, A. Coskun, and G. Stringhini, “ LLMs Cannot Reliably Identify and Reason About Security Vulnerabilities (Yet?): A Comprehensive Evaluation, Framework, and Benchmarks ,” in 2024 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP) . Los Alamitos, CA, USA: IEEE Computer Society, May 2024, pp. 862–880. [Online]. Available: https://doi.ieeecomputersociety.org/ 10.1109/SP54263.2024.00210 [8] Y. Ding, Y. Fu, O. Ibrahim, C. Sitawarin, X. Chen, B. Alomair, D. Wagner, B. Ray, and Y. Chen, “Vulnerability detection with code language models: How far are we?” in Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM 47th International Conference on Software Engineering ,ser. ICSE ’25. IEEE Press, 2025, p. 1729–1741. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/ICSE55347.2025.00038 [9] Y. Sun, D. Wu, Y. Xue, H. Liu, H. Wang, Z. Xu, X. Xie, and Y. Liu, “ GPTScan: Detecting Logic Vulnerabilities in Smart Contracts by Combining GPT with Program Analysis ,” in 2024 IEEE/ACM 46th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE) . Los Alamitos, CA, USA: IEEE Computer Society, Apr. 2024, pp. 2048– 2060. [Online]. Available: https://doi.ieeecomputersociety.org/10.1145/ 3597503.3639117 [10] W. Ma, D. Wu, Y. Sun, T. Wang, S. Liu, J. Zhang, Y. Xue, and Y. Liu, “Combining fine-tuning and llm-based agents for intuitive smart contract auditing with justifications,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM 47th International Conference on Software Engineering ,ser. ICSE ’25. IEEE Press, 2025, p. 1742–1754. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/ICSE55347.2025.00027 [11] T. Le-Cong, B. Le, and T. Murray, “Can LLMs reason about program semantics? a comprehensive evaluation of LLMs on formal specification inference,” in Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , W. Che, J. Nabende, E. Shutova, and M. T. Pilehvar, Eds. Vienna, Austria: Association for Computational Linguistics, Jul. 2025, pp. 21 991–22 014. [Online]. Available: https://aclanthology.org/2025.acl-long.1068/ [12] M. Zheng, C. Wang, X. Liu, J. Guo, S. Feng, and X. Zhang, “Rfcaudit: Ai agent for auditing protocol implementations against rfc specifica-tions,” in 2025 40th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE) , 2025, pp. 1221–1233. [13] L. Pan, S. Cohney, T. Murray, and V.-T. Pham, “Edefuzz: A web api fuzzer for excessive data exposures,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM 46th International Conference on Software Engineering , ser. ICSE ’24. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2024. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3597503.3608133 [14] H. Jin and H. Chen, “Uncovering systematic failures of llms in verifying code against natural language specifications,” in 2025 40th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE) ,2025, pp. 3819–3823. [15] M. Arapinis, V. Cortier, H. de Groote, C. Jacomme, and S. Kremer, “Are ideal functionalities really ideal?” Lisbonne, Portugal, Jul. 2026. [Online]. Available: https://inria.hal.science/hal-05422941 [16] Y. David, N. Christou, A. D. Kellas, V. P. Kemerlis, and J. Yang, “QUACK: Hindering deserialization attacks via static duck typing,” in Proceedings of the 31st Network and Distributed System Security Symposium (NDSS) , 2024. [17] M. Momeu, F. Kilger, C. Roemheld, S. Schn¨ uckel, S. Proskurin, M. Polychronakis, and V. P. Kemerlis, “Islab: Immutable memory 

11 management metadata for commodity operating system kernels,” in                                                        

> Proceedings of the 19th ACM Asia Conference on Computer and Communications Security , ser. ASIA CCS ’24. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2024, p. 1159–1172. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3634737.3644994 [18] S. Wadhwa, L. Zanolini, A. Asgaonkar, F. D’Amato, C. Fang, F. Zhang, and K. Nayak, “Data independent order policy enforcement: Limitations and solutions,” in Proceedings of the 2024 on ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security , ser. CCS ’24. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2024, p. 378–392. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3658644.3670367 [19] H. R. Nielson and F. Nielson, Semantics with Applications: A Formal Introduction , ser. Wiley Professional Computing. Chichester, England: John Wiley & Sons, 1992. [20] M. S. Anwar, C. Yagemann, and Z. Lin, “ GoSonar: Detecting Logical Vulnerabilities in Memory Safe Language Using Inductive Constraint Reasoning ,” in 2025 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP) .Los Alamitos, CA, USA: IEEE Computer Society, May 2025, pp. 758–773. [Online]. Available: https://doi.ieeecomputersociety.org/ 10.1109/SP61157.2025.00043 [21] D. Arp, E. Quiring, F. Pendlebury, A. Warnecke, F. Pierazzi, C. Wressnegger, L. Cavallaro, and K. Rieck, “Dos and don’ts of machine learning in computer security,” in 31st USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 22) .Boston, MA: USENIX Association, Aug. 2022, pp. 3971–3988. [Online]. Available: https: //www.usenix.org/conference/usenixsecurity22/presentation/arp

OPEN SCIENCE 

In accordance with the NDSS 2027 open science guidance, we enumerate the artifacts supporting this work, their avail-ability, and justifications for any restrictions. 

Artifacts provided for review. The following artifacts are available at https://anonymous.4open.science/r/speca and via the submission system: (i) the evaluation scripts (evaluate.py , matchers.py , analyze_deep.py ); (ii) all raw result data (evaluation_summary.json ,

findings_labels.csv , deep_analysis.json ) and generated figures; (iii) per-repository output directories for all 10 Sherlock clients and all 15 RepoAudit C/C++ projects; (iv) all intermediate phase outputs (specification indices, sub-graphs, generated properties, pre-/post-review findings) en-abling offline inspection and partial re-execution; and (v) the SPECA pipeline implementation, including orchestration code, worker prompts, schema definitions, the STRIDE+CWE prop-erty generation templates, and the severity-preserving review filter. 

Artifacts not publicly released and justification. The pipeline source code and prompt templates are provided to reviewers via the anonymous artifact but will not be released as open-source software. This decision reflects dual-use risk: the pipeline constitutes a vulnerability-finding capability that, if publicly released, could lower the cost of offensive exploita-tion against specification-governed systems. While the per-bug cost is already within reach of well-resourced attackers (§IV-B), broad public release would remove the barrier for less sophisticated adversaries. Additionally, responsible dis-closure for the RepoAudit candidate bugs is in progress (8 PRs submitted, 2 maintainer-confirmed, 2 confirmed FP, 4 awaiting response); raw LLM responses referencing unfixed vulnerabilities are redacted from the artifact and will remain so until disclosure is complete. 

Reproducibility. SPECA’s pipeline is deterministic given a fixed model configuration and seed, except for residual non-determinism in provider-side LLM responses. We report exact model versions (Claude Opus, Claude Sonnet 4.5, Sonnet 4, DeepSeek R1) and total token consumption per phase to enable cost estimation prior to replication. The artifact includes all intermediate phase outputs so that reviewers can inspect the full pipeline trace and re-run individual phases offline without API access. 

Data provenance. The Sherlock contest data is sourced from the publicly released Sherlock Ethereum Fusaka contest adju-dication record; we use only publicly released contest issues and severity judgments. The RepoAudit benchmark data is sourced from the published RepoAudit artifact [1]; we use only the 15 open-source C/C++ projects included in that benchmark. APPENDIX 

This appendix supplements Section II with additional dif-ferentiation along the same three-axis organization. 

LLM-augmented code-level vulnerability detection. Recent work pairs LLMs with classical static analysis or graph representations to improve taint-style and path-sensitive bug detection: LLift [2], BugLens [3], IRIS [5], LLMxCPG [6], and the autonomous repository-scale agent RepoAudit [1]; GoSonar [20] extends this to logical bugs in memory-safe languages. Empirical studies further show that LLMs exhibit non-determinism and reasoning errors on this task [7] and that popular benchmarks overstate model performance [8]. All of these methods start from repository-local information; SPECA instead derives security properties from specifications before reading code, addressing correctness conditions that are not visible at the code level alone. 

LLM-driven security property generation. PropertyGPT [4] (NDSS 2025 Distinguished Paper) applies retrieval-augmented generation to transfer human-written properties to new smart contracts; GPTScan [9] and iAudit [10] target smart-contract logic vulnerabilities by decomposing them into scenarios and properties; FormalBench [11] evaluates LLM ability to syn-thesize formal program specifications and finds that multi-phase pipelines with structured review are necessary for re-liable inference. These works share SPECA’s emphasis on explicit properties as the unit of analysis but derive properties from code or pre-existing verified properties rather than from authoritative natural-language specifications, and target pre-dominantly smart contracts rather than multi-implementation distributed systems. 

Specification-driven security analysis. RFCAudit [12] audits protocol implementations against RFCs using an autonomous LLM agent (47 functional bugs at 81.9% precision); EDE-Fuzz [13] uses API specs to test for data-exposure vulnera-bilities; Jin et al. [14] show that complex prompting paradox-ically raises false-negative rates due to overcorrection bias— a finding that motivates SPECA’s severity-preserving filter rather than aggressive LLM post-processing; Cortier et al. [15] show that even formal specifications can miss intuitively 12 expected security properties, paralleling SPECA’s empirical observation that many false positives stem from specification-interpretation mismatches. QUACK [16] and ISLAB [17] demonstrate property-based security enforcement that SPECA extends from enforcement to auditing. Wadhwa et al. [18] for-malize specification–implementation gaps in blockchain order-ing protocols, confirming that such gaps are an actively studied problem in the multi-implementation setting SPECA targets. Among these, RFCAudit is closest in spirit; SPECA differs in three respects beyond the functional-correctness vs. security-property axis: it derives explicit, typed properties (vs. implicit RFC compliance), supports controlled cross-implementation comparison under a shared property vocabulary, and traces every false positive to a specific pipeline phase. 

Evaluation methodology considerations. Arp et al. [21] catalog common pitfalls in ML-based security evaluation (sampling bias, label leakage, unrealistic distributions) that inflate reported performance. Our design mitigates these: the Sherlock benchmark uses independently adjudicated real-world contest data, precision is reported at three granularities, and the structured false-positive taxonomy adds failure-mode analysis beyond aggregate metrics. 

A. Phase 4: code pre-resolution details 

Phase 4 uses Tree-sitter-based symbol analysis (via 

get_symbols and run_query ) to link each prop-erty to concrete source locations. It identifies the pri-mary enforcement location by matching specification con-cepts (function names, data structures, protocol messages) to source code symbols, discovers callers and callees to establish the relevant code neighborhood, and builds asubgraph index ( 01b_SUBGRAPH_INDEX.json ) mapping specification-level concepts to implementation artifacts. Prop-erties classified as Informational severity are dropped at this stage. Pre-resolution decouples code discovery from security reasoning; an alternative would be to let Phase 5 search for relevant code on-the-fly, but on-the-fly search is expensive and produces inconsistent code neighborhoods across properties. Pre-resolution reduces downstream audit token consumption by 40–60%. The trade-off is that pre-resolution may miss code locations unreachable through symbol analysis. 

B. Cross-implementation end-to-end example 

Consider auditing a property requiring nodes to rotate custody columns every CUSTODY_ROTATION_INTERVAL 

epochs across two implementations. Phase 3 generates the property from the specification with a unique identifier and invariant classification. Phase 4 resolves this property to 

rotateCustody() in Implementation A’s Nim source and to handleCustodyRotation() in Implementation B’s Go source. Phase 5 audits both: in Implementation A, the interval check uses >= instead of == , causing premature rotation (finding: Low severity); in Implementation B, the function is called correctly (finding: PASS). Phase 6 confirms Implementation A’s finding as a confirmed vulnerability (the rotation interval is controlled by protocol parameters, not trusted input). The same property produces a true positive in one implementation and a pass in another—exactly the kind of divergence that a shared property vocabulary is designed to reveal. 

C. Experimental setup details                        

> TABLE XIII FINDING LABEL DEFINITIONS . P RECISION =NON -FP RATE :ALL LABELS EXCEPT F P _I N V A L I D AND F P _R E V I E W COUNT AS NON -FP. *P O T E N T I A L -I N F O FINDINGS ARE PLAUSIBLE SECURITY OBSERVATIONS BELOW THE THRESHOLD FOR CONFIRMED VULNERABILITY .
> Label Definition TP?
> tp Matches valid H/M/L contest issue Yes
> tp_info Informational-severity or real low-severity Yes
> fixed Independently fixed on target repository Yes
> partially_fixed Partially addressed Yes
> potential-info Plausible but unconfirmed Yes*
> fp_invalid False positive (invalid reasoning) No
> fp_review False positive (review-gate error) No

Table XIII provides the complete finding-label definitions referenced from the main body. Below we give a worked matching example. 

Matching example. Contest issue #308 reports a missing validation of data column index bounds in gossip message han-dling. SPECA produces four findings for the same repositories: finding PROP-6a4369e9-inv-009 (Lighthouse), “Col-umn index must be validated against NUMBER_OF_COLUMNS 

before acceptance”— match accepted , same root cause and same impact; PROP-6a4369e9-inv-010 (Lighthouse), “EL-sourced custody columns skip KZG verification”— 

partial match, excluded (different root cause); and 

PROP-6a4369e9-inv-008 (Nimbus), “Unreachable code path in data column sidecar construction”— no match . Under our protocol, issue #308 is counted as recovered (at least one match), and PROP-6a4369e9-inv-009 counts as one true positive. 

D. Auxiliary RQ1 figures and tables 

Table XIV provides a full accounting reconciliation of all finding counts reported in RQ1; Figure 10 provides the output-quality breakdown. 

E. Property neighborhoods and cluster-level evaluation 

Many issues are recovered not by a single alert but by multiple complementary properties that form a property neigh-borhood around the root cause. The deep analysis identifies 11 issues matched by 2 or more properties (e.g., issues #308 and #331 each matched by 4 properties, issue #169 by 3). Conversely, 2 properties each match multiple issues (e.g., 

PROP-6a4369e9-inv-047 matches both #109 and #15). The main body Table VI reports the finding-level vs cluster-level comparison. At the cluster level, 39 distinct root-cause clusters produce 19 clusters matching H/M/L issues (some issues are detected across multiple repositories, producing 13 Fig. 8. Phase 5 (Audit) vs Phase 6 (FP Filter). Phase 6 improves precision from 56.9% to 66.7% while preserving 100% recall on H/M/L findings, raising F1 from 72.5% to 80.0%. 

Fig. 9. Phase 6 three-gate FP filter effectiveness (N=30 DISPUTED FP). 

separate clusters per repository). The cluster-level strict pre-cision (48.7%) is substantially higher than finding-level strict precision (26.4%), confirming that the property neighborhood provides genuine redundancy rather than alert duplication. 

F. Cross-implementation patterns 

Eleven issues appear across multiple repositories under the same property vocabulary (e.g., issue #308 appears in Grandine, Lighthouse, Nimbus, and Prysm; #169 in Gran-dine, Lodestar, and Prysm; #331 in Lighthouse, Lodestar, and Prysm). Property PROP-6a4369e9-inv-014 asserts that blob parameters at fork boundaries must be computed from the specification’s canonical schedule. Under the shared prop-erty vocabulary, this property produces divergent outcomes: Grandine, Lighthouse, and Prysm use a local config default that diverges from the specification at fork epochs (all three TP, matched to issue #11), while Nimbus correctly reads the canonical schedule and the property passes—illustrating how a single property can function simultaneously as a true-positive 

TABLE XIV ACCOUNTING RECONCILIATION OF ALL FINDING COUNTS REPORTED IN 

RQ1. E ACH COUNT TRACES TO A SINGLE PARTITION SO THAT THE PRECISION NUMERATOR /DENOMINATOR AND FP-ANALYSIS POPULATION CAN BE VERIFIED BY A READER .

Stage Findings Source 

Phase 5 total output 647 All properties audited Not-a-vuln / out-of-scope 545 Proof succeeded Positive output 102 Flagged findings 

Pre-review (N=102): 

Non-FP 58 19+5+26+2+6 FP 44 40+4 

Phase 6 review of 102: 

Survived 72 

DISPUTED FP 30 20 FP, 10 TP 

Post-review (N=72): 

Non-FP 48 19+18+5+1+5 FP 24 23+1 Confirmed-useful 43 19+18+5+1 

FP analysis universes: 

Total FPs (both phases) 44 40+4 Deeply analyzed FPs 16 8 post + 8 filtered Property-type ablation subset 88 31+7+50 

Fig. 10. SPECA output quality breakdown (N=102). Of 102 pre-review findings, 48 are security-relevant in the final output, 24 are confirmed FPs, 20 are correctly filtered by Phase 6, and 10 are TPs lost to Phase 6 filtering. 

detector in deviating implementations and a conformance certificate in compliant ones. Figure 6 (main body) shows the per-repository finding distribution. 

G. False-positive analysis: full detail 

Figure 12 visualizes the false-positive root-cause taxonomy. Of the 16 deeply analyzed FPs, trust-boundary errors ac-count for 8 findings, code reading errors for 6, and spec-ification misinterpretation for 2. Phase 6 catches half of trust-boundary FPs (4/8) and two-thirds of code-reading FPs (4/6), but none of the specification-misinterpretation FPs (0/2), because the mechanical gates cannot resolve semantic am-biguity. Each root cause maps to a specific, implementable improvement: adding explicit trust boundary configuration to Phase 3 would address trust-boundary FPs; improving Phase 5’s code reading through richer context windows or 14 Fig. 11. Issue × property family TP finding counts (post-review). The property neighborhood effect is visible as horizontal bands where a single issue is detected by multiple complementary properties; shared vertical structure across repositories reflects the cross-implementation comparability the property vocabulary enables.  

> Fig. 12. False-positive root-cause taxonomy with pipeline-phase origins (N=16 deeply analyzed from 44 total FPs; see Table VIII). The three causes each map to a distinct pipeline phase, making the failure surface structurally analyzable.

multi-pass verification would address code reading errors; and requiring Phase 5 to re-read the relevant specification section before classifying a deviation as a vulnerability would address specification-misinterpretation FPs. 

H. Property-type ablation: supporting detail 

The main body Table IX reports precision by property type over the 88-finding ablation subset. Figure 13 visualizes the per-type precision; the effect of excluding assumption-type findings on the post-review universe is shown in Table XV.   

> Fig. 13. Precision by property type (final output). TABLE XV EFFECT OF EXCLUDING ASSUMPTION PROPERTIES ON THE POST -REVIEW UNIVERSE (N=72).

Metric All types Excl. asm 

Precision 66.7% 67.1% H/M/L match rate 26.4% 27.1% 

I. Specification contribution analysis: supporting detail 

The main body Table XI and §IV-C5 summarize the ret-rospective spec-essentiality classification. For each detecting property, the provenance chain is: property → subgraph (SG-NNN ) → specification section → INV label. For issues #319 and #376, the complete chain terminates at a specific 

INV label; for the remaining 13, the chain establishes spec provenance through subgraph references.  

> Fig. 14. Tool precision on the RepoAudit benchmark. SPECA (Sonnet 4.5) matches the best RepoAudit configuration (88.9%) while surfacing 12 author-validated candidate bugs beyond the established ground truth.

J. Cost–output trade-off 

SPECA’s cost ($400–620 for RQ1, $81.05 for RQ2) is approximately 2× higher than the best code-driven baseline, reflecting a deliberate trade-off: code-driven tools optimize for cost-efficient bug detection, while SPECA trades cost for richer artifact generation. The per-bug cost on RepoAudit ($1.69/bug) remains orders of magnitude below manual audit rates ($200–500/hour), and specification-processing phases 15 TABLE XVI EIGHTEEN AUTHOR -VALIDATED CANDIDATE BUGS IDENTIFIED BY SPECA (S ONNET 4) BEYOND THE REPO AUDIT GROUND TRUTH . T WO CANDIDATES HAVE BEEN EXTERNALLY VALIDATED ABOVE LEVEL D: ONE AT LEVEL A ( FIX CONFIRMED IN LATER RELEASE ) AND ONE AT LEVEL B ( MAINTAINER 

JIRA APPROVAL ). C ROSS -MODEL CORROBORATION : 7 OF 18 (39%) DETECTED BY AT LEAST ONE OTHER MODEL CONFIGURATION .

# Property ID Project Type Description Val. Evidence 

1 PROP-M1-mlk-014 libsass MLK Memory leak in CSS AST processing on error path D Author review 2 PROP-M4-mlk-001 linux/sound MLK Resource leak in audio graph setup on error path D Author review 3 PROP-M4-mlk-009 linux/sound MLK q6apm dai open: graph resource leak on constraints D Author review 4 PROP-M5-mlk-003 linux/mm MLK DAMON resource leak on reclaim error path D Author review 5 PROP-M5-mlk-004 linux/mm MLK DAMON target allocation leak on setup failure D Author review 6 PROP-M5-mlk-007 linux/mm MLK DAMON scheme resource leak on init error D Author review 7 PROP-N1-npd-003 sofa-pbrpc NPD ResolveAddress: NULL-deref on DNS resolution failure D PR #251 (awaiting) 8 PROP-N3-npd-001 coturn NPD allocation get new ch info: NULL channel-map deref A Fix in later release 9 PROP-N4-npd-005 libfreenect NPD registration table: NULL-deref on malloc failure D PR #697 (awaiting) 10 PROP-U1-uaf-004 Redis UAF Use-after-free in benchmark client error path D Author review 11 PROP-U2-uaf-004 linux/drivers/peci UAF Use-after-free in PECI driver error path D Author review 12 PROP-U2-uaf-007 linux/drivers/peci UAF Use-after-free in PECI auxiliary device cleanup D Author review 13 PROP-U3-uaf-002 shadowsocks-libev UAF Use-after-free in server connection teardown D Author review 14 PROP-U3-uaf-003 shadowsocks-libev UAF Use-after-free in UDP relay cleanup D Author review 15 PROP-U3-uaf-007 shadowsocks-libev UAF Use-after-free in tunnel connection handler D Author review 16 PROP-U3-uaf-008 shadowsocks-libev UAF Use-after-free in connection cleanup path D Author review 17 PROP-U5-uaf-002 icu/i18n UAF collationroot cleanup: thread-safety race condition B Jira approved (PR #3921) 18 PROP-U5-uaf-003 icu/i18n UAF Region cleanupRegionData: double-delete on shutdown D PR #3922 (Jira pending) 

Fig. 15. True positives vs false positives across all tools. 

Fig. 16. Partially controlled comparison across model backbones. Left: same-backbone (DeepSeek R1) isolates the representation effect under matched model capability. Right: latest-models comparison shows SPECA matching the best baseline precision while uniquely contributing beyond-GT candidates. 

(Phases 1–3) amortize across multiple implementations of the same specification. 

K. Unexpected results 

The most unexpected finding is the dominance of the property neighborhood effect: 11 of 15 matched issues are recovered by 2 or more distinct properties. We initially ex-pected a one-to-one relationship between properties and issues, but the many-to-one structure suggests that real vulnerabilities manifest as clusters of related property violations rather than isolated deviations. This has implications for triage: rather than presenting individual alerts, security tools could group findings by their shared root cause. The false-positive phase-origin analysis revealed an unex-pected compounding pattern: most FPs originate in Phase 5, but many are seeded by weaker outputs from earlier phases. A property with an over-broad assertion from Phase 3, com-bined with a missed code resolution in Phase 4, produces a confident-but-wrong finding in Phase 5. This suggests that targeted improvements to early-phase output quality would disproportionately reduce downstream false positives. 

L. Extended threats to validity 

Internal validity. Issue matching uses LLM-assisted semantic matching with manual verification of all matches; the 4independently discovered bugs are confirmed by fix commits, providing objective validation independent of the matching procedure. 

Construct validity. Precision depends on contest-organizer severity judgments. The contest’s network-wide-impact thresh-old for Medium/High means operationally significant but localized bugs may surface as Informational or out-of-scope; our tp vs. tp_info distinction preserves this transparency. 

Statistical validity. We do not report significance tests because the benchmarks are deterministic (single-run, fixed model configurations); RQ2 baseline numbers from RepoAudit are also single-run. The cost estimate reflects actual API charges and is reproducible at the same model pricing. 16