Title: An Orlov theorem for matrix factorizations with multiple factors

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.01641v1

Published Time: Tue, 05 May 2026 00:54:18 GMT

Number of Pages: 21

Markdown Content:
AN ORLOV THEOREM FOR MATRIX FACTORIZATIONS WITH MULTIPLE FACTORS 

ALESSANDRO LEHMANN AND NICOL `O SIBILLA 

Abstract. We prove a generalization of Orlov’s theorem [Orl04] for matrix factorizations with n steps. Let X be a regular scheme, W : X →

A1 a flat morphism and D := W −1(0) its central fiber. We construct an appropriate triangulated category of matrix factorizations with n-steps [Tri21] and show that it is equivalent to the singularity category of the root stack n

p(X, D ). We also show that this category admits a semiorthogonal decomposition into n − 1 copies of the usual (absolute derived) category of matrix factorizations with 2 steps. 

1. Introduction 

In this paper we study categories of n-step matrix factorizations. These categories have a rich structure, but are ultimately rooted in one of the most basic operations in algebra. If R is a ring and W ∈ R is a non-zero element of R, a matrix factorization of W is a pair of square matrices A1, A2 with entries in R satisfying 

A1A2 = A2A1 = W · I

where I is the identity matrix. This notion can be generalized by letting A1

and A2 be maps of R-modules (satisfying suitable properties) rather than just matrices i.e. maps of free R-modules. From a geometric view-point, it is natural to further generalize this set-up and look at pairs of morphisms be-tween coherent sheaves on a variety X providing a factorization of a regular function 

W : X → A1.

It turns out that matrix factorizations naturally form a triangulated cate-gory, denoted MF( X, W ). The importance of matrix factorizations within homological algebra was first realized by Eisenbud, who in [Eis80] used them to study Cohen–Macaulay modules on hypersurface rings. After Eisenbud’s work they became a key tool in the algebraic study of singularities, see e.g. [Kn¨ o87]. Remarkably, matrix factorizations were rediscovered by Kontsevich as a mathematical encoding of the category of B-branes in a Landau–Ginzburg 

2020 Mathematics Subject Classification. 14F08 (Primary), 16E65, 18G80 (Secondary). The first author acknowledges financial support from the Research Foundation - Flan-ders (FWO) under the postdoctoral fellowship n. 1266526N .  

> 1
> arXiv:2605.01641v1 [math.AG] 2 May 2026 2ALESSANDRO LEHMANN AND NICOL `O SIBILLA

model ( X, W ). Categories of matrix factorizations have played since a ma-jor role in homological mirror symmetry, acting as the B-side mirror of the Fukaya category in a vast number of geometric contexts, including Fano va-rieties, punctured Riemann surfaces, affine hypersurfaces and more. Shortly after Kontsevich’s proposal, Orlov proved one of the most fundamental theo-rems in this area, establishing a dictionary that relates matrix factorizations and derived categories of singularities [Orl04]. Following Orlov, the triangulated category of singularities of a scheme S

is defined as the Verdier quotient of the bounded derived category of S by its full sub-category of perfect complexes 

Db Sing( S) := Db Coh( S)Perf( S)Now, let X be a regular scheme and let W : X → A1 be a flat morphism. Let X0 be the fiber of W at 0 ∈ A1. Orlov proves that there is an equivalence of triangulated categories MF( X, W ) ∼= Db Sing( X0)A natural generalization of the notion of matrix factorization is that of 

matrix factorization with multiple factors – that is, factorizations where instead of having two factors A1 and A2, one has n matrices (or maps of 

R-modules) A1, . . . A n satisfying the conditions 

A1A2 . . . A n = AnA1A2 . . . A n−1 = A2A3 . . . A nA1 = W · I. 

While on the surface the generalization is straightforward, there are signif-icant subtleties; namely, while the category of matrix factorization is nat-urally a dg-category – a category enriched over chain complexes – matrix factorizations with n factors only have a natural enrichment over the cate-gory of n-complexes. This makes a homotopical study of these objects and, in particular, the definition of a (triangulated) homotopy category of n-step matrix factorizations a much more challenging task. The question has al-ready been widely considered in several settings [Tri21; BJ23; FS25; ZZ25; SZ26]. In particular, it has been shown that the category of n-matrix fac-torization can be given a Frobenius exact structure, giving thus a working definition of a (triangulated) homotopy category of n-step matrix factoriza-tions. Our main goal in this paper is establishing a version of Orlov’s Theorem in this context; in the next section of the introduction we shall explain in greater detail our main contributions in this article. 1.1. Structure of the paper. We begin (Section 2) by recalling some rel-evant notions and results about exact and Frobenius categories. Then (Sec-tion 3) we define the category of n-fold matrix factorizations with entries in an additive category and prove (Corollary 3.7) that it admits the structure of a Frobenius category, giving a well defined homotopy category of n-step matrix factorizations. At least morally, none of this is new, see e.g. [Tri21, AN ORLOV THEOREM FOR MATRIX FACTORIZATIONS WITH MULTIPLE FACTORS 3

Section 2] or [ZZ25, Section 4]. We do however streamline some of the proofs of the results that are most relevant for us. In Section 4 we introduce the 

absolute derived category of n-step matrix factorizations, a certain quotient of the homotopy category of matrix factorizations which generalizes the clas-sical absolute derived category involved in the non-affine version of Orlov’s theorem [LP13; EP15]; we show (Proposition 5.6) that in the smooth affine case this reduces to the homotopy category of factorizations with projective entries. This, in particular, implies that the category considered in [Tri21; LT23] coincides with the one that we study in this paper. To prove this fact, we pass through a careful study of various semiorthogonal decompositions of the relevant categories. The last section (Section 6) of the paper contains our main result. Let 

X be a regular scheme and let W : X → A1 be a flat morphism, and let D := W −1(0) be the central fiber. On a conceptual level, our main contribution is highlighting the interplay between matrix factorizations and the root stack of the pair ( X, D ). This is not entirely new, as constructions related to the root stack have already made an appearance in the literature on matrix factorizations (e.g. under the guise of the skew group algebra of branched covers, see [Tri21]). What might be new in our approach, however, is the centrality of root stacks in our study of n-step matrix factorizations in the geometric setting. Recall that the n-th root stack of ( X, D ) is a DM stack equipped with a flat map to Xp : n

p(X, D ) → X

carrying the universal n-th root of the divisor D. It is classical that the abelian category coherent sheaves on n

p(X, D ) is equivalent to the abelian category of coherent matrix factorizations for ( X, W ): that is, the category whose objects are length-n chains of coherent sheaves 

M1 δ1

→ M2 → . . . δn−1

→ Mn δn

→ M1

such that the composition of n consecutive morphisms is equal to W . Our first main result is that the absolute derived category of n-step matrix fac-torizations can also be fully described in terms of the root stack. 

Theorem A (Proposition 6.4) . There is an equivalence of categories MF n(X, W ) ∼= Db Sing( n

p(X, D )) As an easy consequence, we obtain an Orlov-type theorem for n-step matrix factorizations. This is our main result. The key technical input here is given by the existence of canonical semi-orthogonal decompositions on the derived categories of root stacks, which have been studied most recently by Bodzenta–Donovan [BD24]. 

Theorem B (Corollary 6.5) . There is a semi-orthogonal decomposition of length n − 1MF n(X, W ) ∼= ⟨Db Sing( D), . . . , D b Sing( D)⟩ ∼= ⟨MF( X, W ), . . . , MF( X, W )⟩4 ALESSANDRO LEHMANN AND NICOL `O SIBILLA 

Acknowledgments: This relatively short paper has had a long period of gestation. We thank Qiangru Kuang, who was involved in the early stages of the project, for many useful discussions. We benefited from conversation with many colleagues on different aspects of this project. We want to thank particularly Sasha Efimov, Felix K¨ ung, James Pascaleff, and Mattia Talpo. 2. Preliminaries 

We begin with a recollection of some basic facts about exact categories, which will also serve the purpose of fixing our notation; we refer to [B¨ uh10] for more details. 2.1. Exact structures. We will assume all of our additive categories to be idempotent complete. Let E be an additive category, and let E be a a class of kernel-cokernel pairs in E. We’ll call sequences in E admissible short exact sequences, and say that a morphism is an admissible mono (resp. epi) if it appears as the first (resp. second) arrow in a sequence in E. The class 

E is said to give an exact structure on the category E if it is closed under isomorphisms and satisfies the following conditions: E0) For any object M ∈ E, the identity morphism id M is both an ad-missible mono and an admissible epi; E1) The classes of admissible epis and admissible monos are closed under composition; E2) Pushouts (resp. pullbacks) along admissible monos (resp. epis) exist and are again admissible monos (resp. epis) An exact category is an additive category equipped with an exact structure. We’ll denote with 

M , → N ↠ L. 

an admissible short exact sequence in the exact category E; in practice, we’ll often leave the class E implicit and call the exact structure by its underlying category. 2.2. Pulling back exact structures. Let A be an additive category, E an exact category, and F : A → E an additive functor. We can define a class A of admissible short exact sequences in A given by the sequences 

X , → Y ↠ Z such that F X , → F Y ↠ F Z is admissible in E. 

Lemma 2.1. If the functor F reflects and creates finite limits and colimits, then the class A defines an exact structure on A.Proof. It follows immediately from the fact that F creates the relevant pushouts/pullbacks that the class A satisfies the axioms E0-E2. □AN ORLOV THEOREM FOR MATRIX FACTORIZATIONS WITH MULTIPLE FACTORS 5

2.3. Derived categories. If E is an exact category, one defines its homo-topy category K(E) as the quotient of the category of chain complexes of objects of E by the relation of chain homotopy; similarly one has its bounded variants K+(E), K−(E) and Kb(E). These all come equipped with a canon-ical triangulated structure. A chain complex 

. . . → Cn−1 → Cn → Cn+1 → . . . 

is said to be acyclic if each differential splits into admissible short exact sequences (1) 

Zn Zn+1 

. . . Cn−1 Cn Cn+1 . . . 

Zn−1 Zn+1 

The derived category D(E) is defined as the Verdier quotient of the homo-topy category K(E) by the subcategory given by the acyclic complexes; its bounded variants D+(E), D−(E) and Db(E) are defined similarly. In an exact category one can define projective and injective objects by imposing the relevant lifting properties against admissible epis/monos. Denote with Proj E and Inj E the full subcategories of E spanned by respectively the pro-jective and injective objects. Like in the abelian case, one can show that if E has enough projectives the natural inclusion induces an equivalence 

K−(Proj E) ∼

→ D−(E) ,

and dually for the injective case. Again like in the abelian case, the functor 

Db(E) → D−(E) induced by the inclusion Kb(E) → K−(E) is fully faithful and its essential image is given by the complexes that are eventually acyclic, in the sense that there is an N for which the splitting (1) exists for all 

n < N .2.4. Frobenius categories. An exact category E is said to be a Frobe-nius category if it has enough projectives and injectives, and the classes of projective and injective objects coincide. In that case, we’ll denote the full subcategory spanned by this class with ProjInj(E) and call its object the projective-injective objects; if the category is clear from the context, we’ll just write ProjInj instead of ProjInj(E) . Its stable category S(E) has the same objects of E and as hom-spaces the quotient of the ones in E by the ideal given by the morphism that factor through a projective-injective. By a theorem of Happel [Hap88], the category S(E) carries a natural triangulated structure, with shift defined by choosing, for M ∈ E, an admissible short exact sequence 

M , → I ↠ M [1] 6 ALESSANDRO LEHMANN AND NICOL `O SIBILLA 

with I injective. Triangles are given by the admissible short exact sequences. We’ll need the following result, see [Kal17, Proposition 2.36]: 

Proposition 2.2. For a Frobenius category E, there is an equivalence 

S(E) ∼= Db(E) 

Kb(ProjInj) 

which carries an object X to the complex X[0] having X in degree 0 and 0

elsewhere. 

In particular, there is a quotient functor Tot : Db(E) → S(E) .

which carries the complexes of the form X[0] to X ∈ S(E). For future use, we’ll need the following explicit description of the functor Tot: concretely, an element in Db(E) can be represented by a right-bounded complex P of injective-projectives which is eventually acyclic; this means that for n ≤ N

the complex P splits into admissible short exact sequences 

ZN

. . . PN −1 PN PN +1 . . . 

ZN −1 ZN +1 

One then takes Tot( P ) = ZN +1 . An interpretation of this definition comes from the fact that the complex P , truncated at PN , gives a projective reso-lution of Tot( P ). Note that different choices of truncation indices give rise to objects isomorphic in the stable category. 2.5. Semi-orthogonal decompositions. We will use frequently the no-tion of semiorthogonal decomposition (SOD) of a triangulated category. For more information on this important construction we refer the reader to the beautiful survey [Kuz14]. Let us fix the notations which we will use through-out the paper when working with SODs. Let T be a triangulated category, and let 

A1, . . . , An

be a finite collection of triangulated subcategories of T . We denote by span {A 1, . . . , An}

the smallest thick triangulated subcategory of T containing them. We re-serve the notation 

A1, . . . , An

for the case in which these subcategories make up a semiorthogonal decom-position of T , i.e. the following conditions are satisfied AN ORLOV THEOREM FOR MATRIX FACTORIZATIONS WITH MULTIPLE FACTORS 7

(1) The category T is generated by the subcategories Ai, i.e. is the smallest triangulated subcategory containing all of them. (2) the subcategories Ai are semiorthogonal, that is for all i < j and all pairs of objects Ai ∈ A i and Aj ∈ A j

Hom T (Aj , A i) = 0 .

3. Matrix factorizations 

Let C be an additive category and W : id C → id C a natural transformation. A matrix factorization with n steps of W (n-matrix factorization for short) is given by n objects M1, . . . , M n of C together with morphisms 

M1 δ1

→ M2 → . . . δn−1

→ Mn δn

→ M1

such that the composition of n consecutive morphisms equals the action of 

W ; a morphism of n-matrix factorization is given by the morphisms com-muting with the differentials. The category C always admits a trivial exact structure given by the split exact sequences. This also gives, in the same way, an exact structure on the category Gr n(C) of Z/n Z-graded objects. Those are trivially Frobenius, since every object is both injective and projective. There is a functor Gr n : MF n(C, W ) → Gr n(C)which sends a matrix factorization to its corresponding graded object by forgetting the morphisms δi. The functor Gr n satisfies the hypotheses of Lemma 2.1, yielding: 

Proposition 3.1. The additive category MF n(C, W ) inherits from Gr n(C)

an exact structure, making the functor Gr n into an exact functor. 

We will call this the graded-split exact structure, and denote it by MF nex (C, W ). Explicitly, a short exact sequence 0 → M → N → L → 0is admissible if for each i the sequence 0 → Mi → Ni → Li → 0splits. 3.1. The stable category. The next goal is to show that the exact cate-gory MF nex (C, W ) is a Frobenius category. 

Definition 3.2. For any X ∈ C , we define the object PiX ∈ MF n(C, W ) as 

X id X

→ X W

→ X id X

→ . . . → X

where W is placed in the i-th position and the other arrows are all identities. It is clear that this is matrix factorization of W .8 ALESSANDRO LEHMANN AND NICOL `O SIBILLA 

Proposition 3.3. The functors C → MF n(C, W )

X → P iX and X → P i−1

> X

are respectively left and right adjoint to the functor MF n(C, W ) → C which takes the i-th graded piece Mi.Proof. Straightforward. □

Proposition 3.4. The objects PX [i] are both injective and projective in 

MF nex (C, W ).Proof. Follows from the fact that left (resp. right) adjoints to exact func-tors preserve projective (resp. injective) objects, since every object is both projective and injective in the split exact structure on C. □

In particular we obtain, for any M ∈ MF n(C, W ) and i ∈ Z/n Z, natural (co)unit maps 

PiMi → M and M → P i−1

> Mi

given by 

Xi Xi Xi . . . Xi Xi

Xi Xi+1 Xi+2 . . . Xi−1 Xi      

> id
> id
> id
> d
> id
> d2
> id W
> dn−1id
> ddddd

and 

Xi Xi+1 . . . Xi−2 Xi−1 Xi

Xi Xi . . . Xi Xi Xi.      

> d
> id
> d
> dn−1
> dd
> d2
> d
> did
> Wid id id id

We’ll call factorizations of the form PiX trivial factorizations. 

Proposition 3.5. The exact category MF nex (C, W ) has enough projectives and injectives. Proof. For any matrix factorization M , we can consider the maps 

⊕iPiMi → M and M → ⊕ iPi−1

> Mi

given by the sum/product of the (co)unit maps. These admit splittings (which need not commute with the differentials) given by 

⊕iMi ⊕iMi . . . ⊕iMi

M0 M1 . . . Mn     

> (id M0,0,0,... )(0 ,id M1,0,... )(0 ,..., id Mn )

and AN ORLOV THEOREM FOR MATRIX FACTORIZATIONS WITH MULTIPLE FACTORS 9

M0 M1 . . . Mn

⊕iMi ⊕iMi . . . ⊕iMi.  

> id M0id M1id Mi

□

Remark. In fact, the functors 

{Mi}i∈Z/n Z → ⊕ iPiMi and {Mi}i∈Z/n Z → ⊕ iPi−1

> Mi

are respectively left and right adjoints to the forgetful functor Gr n, and the splittings are the (co)units of the respective adjunctions. 

Proposition 3.6. The classes of projective objects and injective objects in 

MF nex (C, W ) coincide, and can be described as the summands of the objects of the form ⊕Z/n ZPXi for Xi ∈ C .Proof. For any projective Q one can take an injective hull Q → I(Q); since 

I(Q) is projective, this splits and we find I(Q) ∼= Q⊕X. So Q is a summand of an injective module, hence injective itself. The converse is dual. □

Corollary 3.7. The category MF nex (C, W ) is a Frobenius category. Remark. Taking as C the category of finitely generated free modules over a regular ring and W as the action of a non-zero non-unit element f , one recovers [Tri21, Theorem 2.15]; we’ll come back to this in Section 5. We will thus onward denote with S(MF n(C, W )) the stable category of the exact category MF nex (C, W ). 3.2. The exact case. Assume now that the category C comes already equipped with an exact structure E. We can thus apply again Lemma 2.1 to obtain a different exact structure on the category of matrix factorizations, this time pulled back from E via the functor Gr n. Since the case that we will be interested in this exact structure will be abelian, we’ll denote this second exact structure with MF nab (C, W ); note that if C is abelian, the same holds for MF nab (C, W ). 

Proposition 3.8. If X is projective (resp. injective) in C, then PiX is pro-jective (resp. injective) in MF nab (C, W ). If C has enough projectives (resp. injectives), the exact category MF nab (C, W ) has enough projectives (resp. in-jectives). Proof. The first statement follows again by the fact that the functors Pi

are both left and right adjoint to an exact functor. For the second, let 

M ∈ MF n(C, W ), take for every i ∈ Z/n Z a projective cover 1 Pi → Mi

(resp. injective hull Mi → Ii.) and consider the compositions 

⊕iPiPi → ⊕ iPiMi → M and M → ⊕ iPi−1 

> Mi

→ ⊕ iPi−1 

> Ii

.    

> 1By this we simply mean that Piis a projective object surjecting onto Mi10 ALESSANDRO LEHMANN AND NICOL `O SIBILLA

□

Proposition 3.9. A matrix factorization is projective (resp. injective) in 

MF nab (C, W ) if and only if it is projective-injective in MF ex (C, W ) and its graded components are projective (resp. injective) in C.Proof. We prove the projective case, the injective being dual. If P is pro-jective in MF ab (C, W ), then it is all the more projective in MF ex (C, W ). Since taking graded pieces is left adjoint to an exact functor, the graded components of P must also be projective. For the converse, let P be a matrix factorization that is projective in MF ex (C, W ) and has projective components. Then by Proposition 3.4 its canonical projective cover ⊕iPiPi

is projective in MF nab (C, W ), and since P is projective in MF ex (C, W ), the map ⊕iPiPi → P must split; so P is a summand of a projective object, hence projective itself. □

4. The absolute derived category of matrix factorizations 

Assume now that C is an abelian category. There are then two exact struc-tures on MF n(C, W ): the graded-split one MF nex (C, W ), that is Frobenius, and the abelian one MF nab (C, W ). We can thus consider the two derived categories. Explicitly, the complexes which are quotiented out to obtain 

Db(MF nex (C, W )) are those which admit a contracting homotopy that may, in general, not be a map of matrix factorizations but only of graded objects. This is a strict subclass of the larger class of acyclic (in the usual, abelian, sense) complexes. There is thus a localization functor 

Db(MF nex (C, W )) → Db(MF nab (C, W )) whose kernel is the subcategory K ⊆ Db(MF nex (C, W )) given by the acyclic complexes. Since MF nex (C, W ) is Frobenius, by Proposition 2.2 there is an equivalence 

Db(MF nex (C, W )) 

Kb(ProjInj) 

> ∼

→ S(MF n(C, W )) ,

induced by a localization (2) Tot : Db(MF nex (C, W )) → S(MF n(C, W )) .

Definition 4.1. We define the absolute derived category Dabs MF n(C, W )of n-matrix factorizations as the quotient 

Dabs MF n(C, W ) := S(MF n(C, W )) Tot( K) .

By construction, we also have a commutative diagram 

Db(MF nex (C, W ) Db(MF nex (C, W )S(MF n(C, W )) Dabs (MF n(C, W ))  

> q1
> Tot Tot
> q2AN ORLOV THEOREM FOR MATRIX FACTORIZATIONS WITH MULTIPLE FACTORS 11

where the right arrow is induced by (2). Reasoning exactly as in [Efi20, Proposition A.3] one sees that the right arrow is a localization with kernel given by q1(Ker Tot) = q1(Kb(ProjInj)), which we will denote (by a slight abuse of notation) with 

Kb(ProjInj) ⊆ Db(MF nab (C, W )) .

We have thus obtained: 

Corollary 4.2. The functor Tot induces an equivalence 

Dabs MF n(C, W ) ∼= Db(MF nab (C, W )) 

Kb(ProjInj) For future use, it’s worth remarking that the subcategory Kb(ProjInj) is generated inside Db(MF nab (C, W )) by the trivial matrix factorizations (not necessarily with projective entries) concentrated in degree 0. 5. The affine case 

One of the classical facts about matrix factorizations (of length two) is that for smooth affine schemes, to obtain the category with the correct geometric interpretation it is not necessary to use the quotient construction of the absolute derived category; a more explicit model is simply given by the homotopy category of matrix factorization with entries that are projective (that is, vector spaces) see [EP15; Orl04; LP13]. In this section, we show that the same holds for the n-fold case. This explicit model for the category of n-matrix factorizations with projective entries was introduced in [Tri21]. Indeed for a regular local ring R, taking as C the exact category of finitely generated free R-modules and W equal to the action of a non-unit non-zerodivisor, Tribone already showed in [Tri21] that the category MF n(C, W )admits a Frobenius exact structure. We place ourselves in a more general setting, since our proofs still work in the non-local (and non-commutative) case. 

Remark. Since every short exact sequence of projective objects splits, the exact structure considered in [Tri21] is precisely the one pulled back from the split exact structure on Proj C .Let now C be an abelian category with enough projectives and finite projective dimension. Let MF n

> proj

(C, W ) := MF nex (Proj C , W )be the Frobenius exact category of degreewise projective matrix factoriza-tions. The inclusion Proj C ,→ C induces a fully faithful exact functor MF n

> proj

(C, W ) ,→ MF nex (C, W )

Lemma 5.1. The induced functor 

S(MF n

> proj

(C, W )) ,→ S(MF n(C, W )) .

is fully faithful. 12 ALESSANDRO LEHMANN AND NICOL `O SIBILLA 

Proof. This follows from the fact that if N ∈ MF n(C, W ) has projective entries, then its projective cover PN → N also has projective entries. Hence if M, N ∈ MF n

> proj

(C, W ) and f : M → N is a morphism that factors through a projective Q ∈ MF nex (C, W ), then it must also factor through the projective object PN . □

Lemma 5.2. There is a semiorthogonal decomposition 

(3) K−(MF nex (C, W )) = ⟨K−(Proj MF nab (C,W )), K−⟩,

where we have denoted with K− ⊆ K−(MF nex (C, W )) the subcategory given by the acyclic (in the abelian sense) complexes. Proof. This follows from the standard fact that for any abelian category A with enough projectives, there is a SOD 

K−(A) = ⟨K−(Proj A), K−⟩

owing to the fact that any right-bounded complex admits a resolution by a right-bounded complex of projectives, together with the fact that since the definition of the homotopy category does not involve the exact structure, 

K−(MF nex (C, W )) = K−(MF nab (C, W )). □

We will repeatedly make use of the following lemma: 

Lemma 5.3. Let T be a triangulated category admitting a semiorthogonal decomposition 

T = ⟨T 1, T2⟩

and let S ⊆ T be a triangulated subcategory compatible with the SOD, in the sense that if 

S2 → S → S1 → S2[1] 

is a triangle with Si ∈ T i and S ∈ S , then S1, S 2 ∈ S . Then there is an induced semiorthogonal decomposition 

T /S = ⟨Q(T1), Q (T2)⟩,

where we have denoted with Q the quotient functor T → T /S.Proof. The nontrivial thing to show is the orthogonality in the quotient, since the existence of the necessary triangle in T descends to the quotient. Let Xi ∈ T i, and consider a roof 

T2 s

← X f

→ T1,

in T representing a morphism T2

> φ

→ T1 in the quotient T /S, where Cone( s) ∈S. We have a triangle 

X2 → X → X1 → X2[1] AN ORLOV THEOREM FOR MATRIX FACTORIZATIONS WITH MULTIPLE FACTORS 13 

with Xi ∈ T i; the composition X2 → X f

→ T1 vanishes because of the orthogonality, so f factors as 

T2 X T1

X1 

> sf
> f

We also have a triangle 

X s

→ T2 → S → X[1] with S ∈ S . Applying the functor of projection to T1, we obtain a triangle 

X1 → 0 → S1 → X1[1]; since by hypothesis S1 ∈ S , we conclude that X1 ∈ S and is thus killed by the quotient. Hence the morphism φ factors through the zero object, and we are done. □

The conclusion in particular follows if S is a subcategory of one of the two factors. Hence from Lemma 5.2 we immediately get 

Corollary 5.4. The decomposition (3) descends to a semiorthogonal de-composition 

(4) D−(MF nex (C, W )) = ⟨K−(Proj(MF nab (C, W )) , K−⟩,

where by abuse of notation we have again denoted with K− the subcategory of D−(MF nex (C, W )) given by the acyclic complexes. 

Note that the composition 

K−(Proj MF nab (C,W )) ,→ K−(MF nab (C, W )) → D−(MF nab (C, W )) is fully faithful by virtue of Lemma 5.2, identifying thus K−(Proj MF nab (C,W ))with a subcategory of D−(MF nab (C, W )). Up until this point, we have not made use of the fact that C has finite projective dimension; that will however soon be needed in order to prove that the decomposition descends to the subcategory of bounded complexes. 

Proposition 5.5. The decomposition (4) restricts to a semiorthogonal de-composition 

Db(MF nex (C, W )) = ⟨K−(Proj MF nab (C,W )) ∩ Db(MF nex (C, W )) , K⟩ .

Proof. Consider the projection functor 

P : D−(MF nex (C, W )) → K−(Proj MF nab (C,W ))which takes a projective resolution of a complex. The claim will follow if we prove that this functor preserves the subcategory Db(MF nex (C, W )) ⊆

D−(MF nex (C, W )). Since Db(MF nex (C, W )) is generated by the complexes concentrated in degree 0, by functoriality it is enough to check the condition 14 ALESSANDRO LEHMANN AND NICOL `O SIBILLA 

on those. Here the functor P acts simply by taking projective resolutions (in the abelian sense), carrying an object M ∈ MF n(C, W ) to a resolution 

P M = . . . → P1 → P0

where each Pi is projective in MF nab (C, W ). This resolution may well be infinite – the category MF nab (C, W ) does not necessarily have finite projective dimension. However by Lemma 3.9 each Pi has projective components, and since C (and hence a fortiori also its category of graded objects) has finite projective dimension, there must exist an index after which the sequence admits a splitting as a complex of graded objects (again, the splittings may not be morphisms of matrix factorizations). This is however precisely what it means for P M to lie in Db(MF nex (C, W )) ⊆ D−(MF nex (C, W )), and we are done. □

Proposition 5.6. The semiorthogonal decomposition of Db(MF nex (C, W )) 

descends to a semiorthogonal decomposition of 

Db(MF nex (C, W )) 

Kb(ProjInj) ∼= S(MF nex (C, W )) = ⟨S(MF n

> proj

(C, W )) , Tot( K)⟩.

In particular, we obtain an equivalence 

Dabs MF n(C, W ) ∼= S(MF n

> proj

(C, W )) 

between the absolute derived category of matrix factorizations and the stable category of factorizations with projective components considered in [Tri21]. Proof. There are two things to check: first that the SOD descends to the quo-tient, and that the subcategory given by the image of K−(Proj MF nab (C,W )) ∩

Db(MF ex (C, W )) via the functor Tot : Db(MF ex (C, W ) → S(MF nex (C, W )) corresponds to S(MF n

> proj

(C, W )). By Lemma 5.3, for the first claim we just need to check that for a bounded complex of projective-injective matrix factorizations (not necessarily with entries that are projective in C), its pro-jective resolution lies again in the subcategory Kb(ProjInj). Since the sub-category Kb(ProjInj) is generated under finite direct sums, cones and direct summands by factorizations of the form PiX concentrated in degree 0, it’s enough to check the claim on objects of this form. Since C has finite projec-tive dimension, there exists a finite projective resolution 0 → Qn → . . . → Q1 → Q0;of X ∈ C . Now 0 → P iQn → . . . → P iQ1 → P iQ0

gives a resolution of PiX , which clearly still lies in Kb(ProjInj). For the second claim, we use the description of the functor Tot discussed in Section 2.4. Let 

P = . . . → P2 → P1 → P0 → P−1 → 0AN ORLOV THEOREM FOR MATRIX FACTORIZATIONS WITH MULTIPLE FACTORS 15 

be a complex in K−(Proj(MF nab (C, W )) ∩ Db(MF ex (C, W )); since P is even-tually acyclic (in the graded-split exact structure), after some index N the complex splits giving rise in particular to a graded split short exact sequence 0 → ZN → PN → Tot( P ) → 0.

Since at the graded level Tot( P ) is a summand of PN and PN has projective components, the same must hold for Tot( P ). Vice versa, it follows from the explicit construction of the projective covers that any resolution of a graded projective matrix factorization can be built out of graded projective modules. □

6. Matrix factorizations and root stacks 

In this section we establish a link between the theory of n-step matrix factorizations and the singularity category of the root stack. This will allow us to deduce a version of Orlov’s theorem for n-step matrix factorizations. Assume that X is a smooth variety. Let W : X → A1 be a flat morphism. Note that by so called miracle flatness , the morphism W is automatically flat as soon as it is given by a regular function which is non-constant on each of the connected components of X. Recall that we have established a general identification (5) Dabs MF n(C, W ) ∼= Db(MF nab (C, W )) 

Kb(ProjInj) Throughout this section C = Coh( X) is the abelian category of coherent sheaves on X, and W is given by the regular function W : X → A1. We shall adopt the notation MF n(X, W ) := Dabs MF n(C, W )When n = 2 the category MF 2(X, W ) coincides with the ordinary category of matrix factorizations, so we denote it simply MF( X, W ). First, we need to recall some preliminaries from the theory of root stacks. We refer to [TV18] and references therein for a comprehensive introduction to these objects. We limit ourselves to a very short summary, geared to the applications we have in mind. Let X be a variety equipped with a Cartier divisor D. This determines a line bundle O(D) and a section σ ∈ O (D).

such that D = σ−1(0) .

Definition 6.1. The n-th root stack n

p(X, D ) is a DM stack equipped with a flat map 

p : n

p(X, D ) → X

which carries a universal n-th root of the line bundle O(D) and of σ.The stack n

p(X, D ) carries a stacky divisor Dn which is in a precise sense the universal n-th root of D. The divisor Dn is cut out by a section n

√σ of the line bundle O(Dn), and there are canonical isomorphisms 

p∗O(D) ∼= O(Dn)⊗n ∼= O(n · Dn), and p∗σ = ( n

√σ)⊗n16 ALESSANDRO LEHMANN AND NICOL `O SIBILLA 

In our setting σ is given by the regular function W , viewed as a section of the structure sheaf, and D := W −1(0). In this context, the root stack can be easily constructed in an explicit way. Let n

√A1 be the n-th root stack of the pair ( A1, {0}). This can be seen to be equal to 

q : n

p(A1, {0}) ∼= [ A1/μ n] → A1

where [ A1/μ n] is the quotient stack by the standard action of n-th roots of unity, and p is the n-th power map. Then we have that n

p(X, D ) can be obtained as the following fiber product 

> n

p(X, D ) X

[A1/μ n] A1

> p
> Wn√W
> q

Proposition 6.2. There is an equivalence of abelian categories between the category of n-matrix factorizations MF nab (Coh( X), W ) and Coh( n

p(X, D )) ,inducing an equivalence of derived categories 

Db(MF nab (Coh( X), W )) ∼= Db Coh( n

p(X, D )) .

Further, under this equivalence, the subcategory Kb(ProjInj) is generated, as a split-complete triangulated subcategory, by p∗Db Coh( X) and its twists by the universal line bundle and its powers: 

D

p∗Db Coh( X), p ∗Db Coh( X) ⊗ O (Dn), . . . , p ∗Db Coh( X) ⊗ O (Dn)⊗n−1E

Proof. The first statement is standard, and follows from the general theory developed in [TV18]. As for the second statement, it is clear once we identify 

Kb(ProjInj) with the subcategory generated by trivial factorizations. Since 

p is flat, the pull-back p∗ is exact. Then p∗Db Coh( X) can be described as the triangulated sub-category generated by trivial factorizations of the form (6) F =

→ F =

→ . . . ·W

→ F 

where F is a coherent sheaf on X. The effect of tensoring this with a power of 

O(Dn) is simply to shift cyclically these trivial factorizations to the right of a number of steps equal to the power of the twist we are applying. Concretely, tensoring this object with O(Dn) will yield the trivial factorization 

F ·W

→ F =

→ . . . =

→ F 

and similarly when we twist by a higher power of O(Dn). Since all projective-injective factorizations are generated by trivial factorizations of the type (6), and their twists, this concludes the proof. □

We record next the definition of singularity category. Classically, this is mostly studied for schemes, but we shall need it in the slightly more general setting of DM stacks. AN ORLOV THEOREM FOR MATRIX FACTORIZATIONS WITH MULTIPLE FACTORS 17 

Definition 6.3. Let S be a DM stack. Then its singularity category, de-noted by Db Sing( S), is defined as the following localization Perf( S) ,→ Db Coh( S) → Db Sing( S)We will be interested in the singularity category of root stacks. Both the bounded derived category and the category of perfect complexes of a root stack carry natural semi-orthogonal decompositions. This will be helpful in studying their singularity category. For the category of perfect complexes, some of the relevant references are [IU15], [BLS16], and [SST20]; an explicit construction of a semi-orthogonal decomposition for the bounded derived category of coherent sheaves on a root stack was obtained in [BD24]. As far as we know, the following proposition has not been explicitly stated in the literature even in the classical case n = 2, even though in that setting it is certainly well-known to experts. 

Proposition 6.4. Assume that X is a smooth variety. Let W : X → A1

be a flat morphism, and let D = W −1(0) . Then there is an equivalence of categories 

MF n(X, W ) ∼= Db Sing( n

p(X, D )) 

Proof. Combining the key equivalence (5) and Proposition 6.2, it is enough to prove that the following subcategories of Db Coh( n

p(X, D )) are equal: (1) The first is the subcategory generated by p∗Db Coh( X) and its twists, that is span {p∗Db Coh( X), p ∗Db Coh( X)⊗O (Dn), . . . , p ∗Db Coh( X)⊗O (Dn)⊗n−1}

(2) The second is the category of perfect complexes on n

p(X, D ), Perf( n

p(X, D )) Now note that there is an obvious inclusion of category (1) inside category (2). Indeed by assumption X is smooth, hence there is an identification Perf( X) ∼= Db Coh( X).

Further perfect complexes are stable under pull-backs, and the tensor prod-uct of perfect complexes is again a perfect complex. So all the generators of category (1) are contained in Perf( n

p(X, D )); and hence also the subcate-gory they generate is contained in Perf( n

p(X, D )). Let us now prove the opposite inclusion. The categories involved in our statement have good local-to-global behaviour: in particular, they satisfy descent with respect to the pull-back of Zariski open covers along the root map 

p : n

p(X, D ) → X

This allows us to reduce to the case when X is affine. It follows from the semi-orthogonal decompositions constructed in [IU15; BLS16] that Perf( n

p(X, D )) is generated by the following subcategories: 18 ALESSANDRO LEHMANN AND NICOL `O SIBILLA 

• The image of the category of perfect complexes on X along p∗,

p∗(Perf( X)) 

• Full subcategories Perf( Dn)χ, which are indexed by characters χ of 

μn. Each of these is equivalent to the category of perfect complexes on D,Perf( Dn)χ ∼= Perf( D)The reader can find the definition of Perf( Dn)χ in [BLS16]. We will not recall it here as in fact we do not need it. Indeed, since X is affine, we can express these subcategories in a more direct way. The divisor D is affine, and hence its category of perfect complexes is generated by the structure sheaf Perf( D) ∼= span {O D}.

So instead of looking at the subcategories Perf( Dn)χ, we can just consider as generators the structure sheaf of the stacky divisor Dn on n

p(X, D ), and its twists by O(Dn) and its powers. This implies that in order to prove that Perf( n

p(X, D )) is contained in category (1), it is sufficient to show that the sheaf ODn lies in category (1). Indeed, then its twists would also be automatically contained in category (1). We can reduce to the case when the pair ( X, D ) is given by ( A1, 0), where we denote by q : n

√A1 → A1 the root map. This follows from flat base-change applied to the fiber product 

Dn n

p(X, D )

Bμ n [A1/μ n].

> j
> n√Wl
> i

In the diagram above Bμ n is the n-th root of the divisor {0} inside [A1/μ n] ∼= n

√A1

Note that the map n

√W is flat because it is obtained by base-change from the regular map W , which is flat. Flat base change yields an equivalence (7) ODn ∼= j∗(l∗OBμ n ) ∼= n

√W ∗(i∗OBμ n ).

Thanks to (7), in order to prove the claim it is enough to show that i∗OBμ n

lies in the subcategory of Db Coh( n

√A1) generated by q∗(Db Coh( A1)), and its twists. Note that indeed the subcategory span {q∗Db Coh( A1), . . . , q ∗Db Coh( A1) ⊗ O ({0}n)⊗n−1} ⊂ Db Coh( n

√A1)pulls back along n

√W ∗ to the subcategory (1) of Db Coh( n

p(X, D )). So we are reduced to the case of the pair ( A1, 0). This can be proved via a simple direct calculation. Note that since n

√A1 is isomorphic to the global quotient [ A1/μ n], we can view coherent sheaves on this stack as μn-equivariant sheaves on A1, i.e. as μn-equivariant k[T ]-modules. The univer-sal line bundle on n

√A1 corresponds to k[T ] equipped with the μn-equivariant AN ORLOV THEOREM FOR MATRIX FACTORIZATIONS WITH MULTIPLE FACTORS 19 

structure such that k has weight 1. Let k(0) be the skyscraper sheaf at 0 ∈ A1. Then q∗(k(0)) is given by the equivariant K[T ]-module k[T ]/T n

such that k has weight 0 (and hence T has weight 1). It is convenient to keep track of the equivariant structure, so we will denote this object by (k[T ]/T n)0

Similarly we shall denote (k[T ]/T n)m

the same object but with the equivariant structure which places k in weight 

m.Now consider the following four term exact sequence of equivariant K[T ]-modules (8) 0 → k0 → (k[T ]/T n)1 −· T

→ (k[T ]/T n)0 → k0 → 0The equivariant K[T ]-module k0, i.e. k equipped with the trivial μn-action, corresponds to the structure sheaf of the stacky divisor {0}n on n

√A1. Note that k0 has no non-trivial self-extensions. Hence, sequence (8) implies that we have an isomorphism in Db Coh( n

√A1)Cone 



(k[T ]/T n)1 −· T

→ (k[T ]/T n)0)

 ∼= k0 ⊕ k0[1] We see therefore that k0 can be expressed as a summand of the cone of a map between an object in q∗Db Coh( A1) and an object in q∗Db Coh( A1) ⊗O({0}n). In particular, it is contained in the subcategory span {q∗Db Coh( A1), . . . , q ∗Db Coh( A1) ⊗ O ({0}n)⊗n−1} ⊂ Db Coh( n

√A1)and this concludes the proof. □

We place ourselves under the assumptions of Proposition 6.4. Recall that 

D is the central fiber W −1(0). One of the key results in the theory of matrix factorizations is a theorem of Orlov [Orl04] stating that there is an equivalence MF( X, W ) ∼= Db Sing( D)The next result gives an analogue of Orlov’s theorem in the setting of n-fold matrix factorizations. 

Corollary 6.5. There is a semi-orthogonal decomposition of length n − 1MF n(X, W ) ∼= ⟨Db Sing( D), . . . , D b Sing( D)⟩ ∼= ⟨MF( X, W ), . . . , MF( X, W )⟩

Proof. This follows easily from Proposition 6.4 and [BD24]. In particu-lar, Theorem 1.2 from that paper gives a semi-orthogonal decomposition of 

Db Coh( n

p(X, D )) given by 

D

Db Coh( D) ⊗ O ((1 − n)Dn), . . . , D b Coh( D) ⊗ O (−Dn), p ∗Db Coh( X)

E

As the authors explain in the comments right after the statement of Theorem 1.2, this extends to Db Coh( n

p(X, D )) the semi-orthogonal decomposition 20 ALESSANDRO LEHMANN AND NICOL `O SIBILLA 

on the category of perfect complexes of the root stack which had been con-structed in [BLS16]. Indeed, as we have already mentioned, in [BLS16] the authors construct a semi-orthogonal decomposition for Perf( n

p(X, D )) with factors 

D

Perf( D) ⊗ O ((1 − n)Dn), . . . , Perf( D) ⊗ O (−Dn), p ∗Db Coh( X)

E

Further, as explained in [BD24], the natural inclusion Perf( n

p(X, D )) ⊂ Db Coh( n

p(X, D )) is compatible with the semi-orthogonal decompositions on its source and on its target. That is, we are in the situation considered in Lemma 5.3. Note that we had stated the Lemma only for length two semi-orthogonal decompositions, but the conclusion holds for SODs with an arbitrary number of factors. Using Proposition 6.4 we conclude that MF n(X, W ) ∼= Db Sing( n

p(X, D )) = Db Coh( n

p(X, D )) / Perf( n

p(X, D )) admits a length n − 1 semi-orthogonal decomposition with factors 

Db Coh( D)/ Perf( D) = Db Sing( D)and this concludes the proof. □

References 

[BLS16] Daniel Bergh, Valery A Lunts, and Olaf M Schn¨ urer. “Geometric-ity for derived categories of algebraic stacks”. In: Selecta Mathe-matica 22.4 (2016), pp. 2535–2568. [BJ23] Petter Andreas Bergh and David A. Jorgensen. “Categorical ma-trix factorizations”. In: Ann. K-Theory 8.3 (2023), pp. 355–378. 

doi : 10.2140/akt.2023.8.355 .[BD24] Agnieszka Bodzenta and Will Donovan. “Root stacks and peri-odic decompositions”. In: manuscripta mathematica 175.1 (2024), pp. 53–73. [B¨ uh10] Theo B¨ uhler. “Exact categories”. In: Expo. Math. 28.1 (2010), pp. 1–69. doi : 10.1016/j.exmath.2009.04.004 .[Efi20] Alexander I. Efimov. “Homotopy finiteness of some DG categories from algebraic geometry”. In: J. Eur. Math. Soc. (JEMS) 22.9 (2020), pp. 2879–2942. doi : 10.4171/JEMS/979 .[EP15] Alexander I. Efimov and Leonid Positselski. “Coherent analogues of matrix factorizations and relative singularity categories”. In: 

Algebra Number Theory 9.5 (2015). doi : 10.2140/ant.2015.9. 1159 .[Eis80] David Eisenbud. “Homological algebra on a complete intersec-tion, with an application to group representations”. In: Trans. Am. Math. Soc. 260 (1980), pp. 35–64. doi : 10.2307/1999875 .REFERENCES 21 

[FS25] Jonas Frank and Mathias Schulze. Categorical matrix factoriza-tions and monomorphism categories . 2025. arXiv: 2504.06052 .[Hap88] Dieter Happel. Triangulated categories in the representation theory of finite dimensional algebras . Vol. 119. Lond. Math. Soc. Lect. Note Ser. Cambridge (UK) etc.: Cambridge University Press, 1988. [IU15] Akira Ishii and Kazushi Ueda. “The special McKay correspon-dence and exceptional collections”. In: Tohoku Mathematical Jour-nal, Second Series 67.4 (2015), pp. 585–609. [Kal17] Martin Kalck. Relative Singularity Categories . 2017. arXiv: 1709. 04753 .[Kn¨ o87] Horst Kn¨ orrer. “Cohen-Macaulay modules on hypersurface singu-larities I”. In: Inventiones mathematicae 88.1 (1987), pp. 153–164. [Kuz14] A Kuznetsov. “Semiorthogonal decompositions in algebraic geom-etry”. In: Proceedings of the International Congress of Mathemat-icans, ICM 2014 . 2014, pp. 635–660. [LT23] Graham J. Leuschke and Tim Tribone. “Branched covers and matrix factorizations”. In: Bull. Lond. Math. Soc. 55.6 (2023), pp. 2907–2927. doi : 10.1112/blms.12901 .[LP13] Kevin H. Lin and Daniel Pomerleano. “Global matrix factoriza-tions”. In: Math. Res. Lett. 20.1 (2013), pp. 91–106. doi : 10.4310/ MRL.2013.v20.n1.a9 .[Orl04] DO Orlov. “Triangulated categories of singularities and D-branes in Landau-Ginzburg models”. In: Proceedings of the Steklov Insti-tute of Mathematics 246 (2004), pp. 227–248. [SST20] Sarah Scherotzke, Nicolo Sibilla, and Mattia Talpo. “Parabolic semi-orthogonal decompositions and Kummer flat invariants of log schemes”. In: Documenta Mathematica 25 (2020), pp. 955–1009. [SZ26] Yongliang Sun and Yaohua Zhang. “ N -fold module factorizations: triangle equivalences and recollements”. In: J. Algebra 685 (2026), pp. 1–25. doi : 10.1016/j.jalgebra.2025.07.024 .[TV18] Mattia Talpo and Angelo Vistoli. “Infinite root stacks and quasi-coherent sheaves on logarithmic schemes”. In: Proc. Lond. Math. Soc. (3) 116.5 (2018), pp. 1187–1243. doi : 10.1112/plms.12109 .[Tri21] Tim Tribone. Matrix factorizations with more than two factors .2021. arXiv: 2102.06819 [math.AC] .[ZZ25] Yixia Zhang and Panyue Zhou. Triangulated categories arising from n-fold matrix factorizations . 2025. arXiv: 2511.21379 .