Title: A velocity-dependent two-scale model for cosmic string networks with small-scale structure

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.23619v1

Published Time: Thu, 26 Mar 2026 00:12:41 GMT

Number of Pages: 15

Markdown Content:
# A velocity-dependent two-scale model for cosmic string networks with small-scale structure 

T. O. Miranda ∗

Departamento de F´ ısica e Astronomia, Faculdade de Ciˆ encias, Universidade do Porto, Rua do Campo Alegre 687, PT4169-007 Porto, Portugal and Instituto de Astrof´ ısica e Ciˆ encias do Espa¸ co, Universidade do Porto, CAUP, Rua das Estrelas, PT4150-762 Porto, Portugal 

L. Sousa †

Instituto de Astrof´ ısica e Ciˆ encias do Espa¸ co, Universidade do Porto, CAUP, Rua das Estrelas, PT4150-762 Porto, Portugal and Departamento de F´ ısica e Astronomia, Faculdade de Ciˆ encias, Universidade do Porto, Rua do Campo Alegre 687, PT4169-007 Porto, Portugal 

(Dated: March 26, 2026) We develop a semi-analytical model to describe the cosmological evolution of networks of cosmic strings with small-scale structure, by extending the velocity-dependent one-scale model to include an additional lengthscale describing the typical interkink density. We study the impact of the different physical processes involved in the production and removal of small-scale structure from cosmic strings on the attainment of a full linear scaling regime, in which the characteristic lengths of the network and of small-scale structure evolve proportionally to physical time and the root-mean-squared velocity of the network remains constant. We find, using this novel velocity-dependent two-scale model, that quite generally small-scale structure does not prevent the attainment of a linear scaling regime since, even if not enough kinks are carried away when loops are chopped from the network, gravitational backreaction is generally enough to ensure that the interkink density scales. We find, however, that this regime is characterized by a smaller energy density and root-mean-squared velocity when compared to strings without small-scale structure and that this reduction may be significant when scaling is maintained by gravitational backreaction. In this case, we also find that, before reaching full scaling, the network should evolve in a transient quasi-scaling regime, in which its evolution is very similar to that of cosmic strings without small-scale structure. 

I. INTRODUCTION 

Cosmic strings provide us with a valuable observational window into high-energy physics. These line-like topolog-ical defects are predicted to form in symmetry-breaking phase transitions in a large variety of early universe sce-narios [1–7], but they are, in general, expected to survive until the present time. As a result, cosmic strings may potentially leave characteristic imprints on various ob-servational probes — including the Cosmic Microwave Background [8–10], the primordial Stochastic Gravita-tional Wave Background [11–13] and large-scale structure surveys [14, 15] — that enable us to probe them observa-tionally and to uncover the physics of the early universe through them. A detailed understanding of the cosmo-logical evolution of cosmic string networks, however, is crucial to perform accurate characterizations of their ob-servational signatures and to use this observational data to its full potential. Cosmic string networks have been extensively studied using both numerical simulations [16–18] and analytical   

> ∗Electronic address: teresa.miranda99@gmail.com
> †Electronic address: lara.sousa@astro.up.pt

models [19–24] and a general picture about their cos-mological evolution has emerged: string networks evolve towards a linear scaling regime in which their energy density remains a fixed fraction of the background en-ergy density. This means that a single lengthscale — the characteristic length L = ( ρ/μ )1/2, where ρ is the cosmic string energy density and μ is cosmic string mass per unit length — may be sufficient to describe their cosmo-logical evolution on sufficiently large scales. Numerical simulations, however, also revealed that cosmic strings accumulate, as a result of string intersections and in-tercommutations, structure on scales much smaller than this characteristic length. This small-scale structure may have a significant impact not only on the evolution of the network, as it may provide an additional energy loss channel for long strings [25–27] and have an important role in loop production [28, 29], but also on their observa-tional signatures [30–33]. In particular, it is not yet clear whether small-scale structure will scale or build up on cosmic strings and potentially prevent the network from fully reaching a linear scaling regime. Numerical simulations of cosmic string networks, due to resolution and dynamical range limitations and be-cause they generally do not include gravitational back-reaction, are yet to provide a definite answer to these open questions. As an alternative, several semi-analytical 

> arXiv:2603.23619v1 [astro-ph.CO] 24 Mar 2026

2models [20, 21, 34–36], often including multiple length-scales, have been developed in the literature to study and quantify the impact of small-scale structure on string net-works, but these models are usually complex and include a large number of phenomenological parameters. Here, we build up on this work and develop a semi-analytical model that describes the evolution of the cosmic string networks using two distinct lengthscales, the character-istic length L and a characteristic length for small-scale structure lk, but that also treats the root-mean-squared velocity of the network as a dynamical variable. This results in a model that is simpler than many others mod-els in the literature and that has a significantly smaller number of free parameters, thus making the study of the evolution of cosmic string networks with small-scale structure analytically a more tractable problem. Despite this, this velocity-dependent two scales model for cos-mic string networks with small-scale structure produces results that are similar to those obtained with more com-plex models that exist in the literature. In particular, it indicates that, although small-scale structure should not prevent the network from attaining a full linear scaling regime, it may have a significant impact on their cosmo-logical evolution and lead to a decrease of their energy density at the present time. This paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II we revisit the Velocity-dependent One-Scale (VOS) model for the evolution of cosmic string networks without small-scale structure. In Sec. III, we derive an evolution equation for the linear kink density of long strings and discuss the impact of the different physical processes involved in the attainment of a linear scaling regime. In Sec. IV, we ex-tend the VOS model to allow for the description of small-scale structure, by incorporating the evolution equation for the characteristic lengthscale of small-scale structure derived in the previous section. We also study the at-tainment of a full linear scaling regime in this model and derive analytical expressions to characterize this regime. We then discuss the results in Sec. V. Throughout this paper, we will use natural units with 

c = ℏ = 1, where c is the speed of light in vacuum and ℏ

is the reduced Planck constant. Moreover, unless stated otherwise, we assume a ΛCDM cosmological background, with the cosmological parameters determined by Planck 2018 data [37]: the values of the density parameters for radiation, matter and dark energy at the present time are respectively given by Ω r = 9 .1476 · 10 −5, Ω m = 0 .308, ΩΛ = 1 − Ωr − Ωm and the Hubble constant is H0 =2.13 · h · 10 −33 eV, with h = 0 .678.  

> II. THE VELOCITY-DEPENDENT ONE-SCALE MODEL

In a Friedmann-Lemaˆ ıtre-Robertson-Walker (FLRW) universe, described by the line element 

ds 2 = dt 2 − a2(t)dx · dx , (1) (where a is the cosmological scale factor, t is physical time and x are comoving coordinates), a cosmic string net-work may be assumed to be homogeneous and isotropic on sufficiently large scales. The Velocity-dependent One-Scale (VOS) Model describes macroscopically the dy-namics of such a cosmic string network, thus enabling for a quantitative description of its cosmological evolu-tion. It makes use of two dynamic variables: the root-mean-squared (RMS) velocity, ¯ v, and the characteristic length, L ≡ (μ/ρ )1/2, where μ is the cosmic string tension and ρ the average energy density of long strings. In this context, this lengthscale also describes approximately the mean distance between two neighboring strings and their typical curvature radius. Assuming that the cos-mic strings are infinitely thin, evolution equations for these macroscopic variables may be obtained by aver-aging the Nambu-Goto equations of motion [22, 23] over the whole network. There are, however, two additional important mechanisms to consider. When strings col-lide, they exchange partners and reconnect, in a process usually known as intercommutation. When two strings simply intercommute, there is no immediate energy loss by the network. However, when a closed loop of string is formed, it detaches from the network, evolving sepa-rately, and decays, therefore resulting in an energy loss. The rate of energy loss into loops is given by [1]: 

 dρ dt 



> loops

= ˜ c¯v ρL , (2) where ˜ c is a phenomenological parameter that character-izes the loop-chopping efficiency. Numerical simulations show that ˜ c = 0 .23 ± 0.04 is a good fit in both radia-tion and matter dominated eras [23]. The second aspect one needs to consider is that, during their evolution, cos-mic strings will scatter off the relativistic particles of the background plasma, resulting in a frictional force that effectively decelerates the strings in the early stages of their evolution and leads to considerable additional en-ergy loss during this stage. The impact of friction can be described by adding a characteristic friction length-scale, lf ∝ a3 [4, 22]. However, since frictional forces be-come negligible as the Universe expands and becomes less dense, they only affect the dynamics of the network very early on. For the remainder of this paper, we will then consider only the evolution of the networks in the friction-less epoch. The VOS Model equations are then [22, 23]: 

dL dt = (1 + ¯ v2)HL + 12 ˜c¯v (3) 

d¯vdt = (1 − ¯v2)

 k(¯ v)

L − 2H ¯v



, (4) where H = ˙ a/a is the Hubble parameter and 

k(¯ v) = 2√2

π (1 − ¯v2)(1 + 2 √2¯ v3) 1 − 8¯ v6

1 + 8¯ v6 (5) is a dimensionless curvature/momentum parameter [23]. It was first introduced to provide a phenomenological de-3scription of the effect of small-scale structure on the dy-namics of the cosmic string network, but, as we shall see, introducing other lengthscales may be necessary to pro-vide a more precise description of its effects. We discuss this parameter further in Sec. V. The VOS Model predicts the existence of a linear scal-ing regime, in which the energy density of the network remains constant relative to the background energy den-sity, characterized by a linear attractor solution of the form: 

Lt = ξ =

s

k(¯ v)( k(¯ v) + ˜ c)4β(1 − β) and ¯v =

s

k(¯ v)(1 − β)(k(¯ v) + ˜ c)β ,

(6) where we are assuming that the evolution of the Uni-verse is ruled by a power law of the form of a ∝ tβ ,with constant 0 < β < 1. This linear scaling regime only occurs for a constant value of β, meaning that it is only attainable either deep in the radiation-dominated or the matter-dominated eras, breaking off during the radiation-matter transition and once the cosmological constant starts to become relevant to the dynamics of the Universe. Note however that, since the matter era does not last long enough for the cosmic string network to re-establish scaling, in general, it should not be ex-pected to be in a linear scaling regime after the onset of the matter era.  

> III. EVOLUTION OF SMALL-SCALE STRUCTURE ON COSMIC STRINGS

The production and evolution of small-scale structure on cosmic string networks has been studied and modeled by different groups throughout the years [20, 21, 25, 34– 36, 38–42]. Although these studies sometimes treat the physical processes involved differently and use different methodologies, a general picture for the evolution of small-scale structure has emerged. Discontinuities in the string tangent, known as kinks, are created when inter-commutations occur, independently of loops being pro-duced or not. These kinks, however, decay by emitting Gravitational Waves (GWs) and due to the stretching caused by the expansion of the Universe and may also be carried away by loops, as they detach from the network. In this section, we will study the impact of each of these processes on the evolution of the characteristic length-scale of small-scale structure, lk, describing the average distance between kinks. The objective is to understand their impact and relevance for the achievement of a lin-ear scaling regime for lk, in order to develop an effective model to describe the evolution of small-scale structure that combines the relevant features of the different mod-els proposed in the literature. Following [34, 35], we will often express our results in terms of the linear kink den-sity, K = 1 /l k, describing the number of kinks per unit physical length of string. Bearing in mind that the num-ber density of kinks is given by K/L 2, we should have that [35] 

ddt 

 KL2



=

 dn c

dt − dn r

dt 



− 3H KL2 , (7) where nc and nr are, respectively, the number density of kinks created on and removed from the strings. More-over, the last term in this expression accounts for the dilution of the kink number density caused by the ex-pansion of the background.  

> A. Impact of Loop Production

Loop chopping plays a crucial role in the evolution of small-scale structure and, as a result, characterizing the rate of loop production accurately is essential for the de-velopment of our model. Let nloops be the total number density of loops produced until a time t. The loop pro-duction rate is given by: 

dn loops 

dt = 1

Eloop 

 dρ dt 



> loops

, (8) where dρ loops /dt is given by Eq. (2) and Eloop = μℓ is the energy of loops at the moment of formation, which is determined by their physical length at that instant of time ℓ. We will assume, from this point forward, that loops are all created with the same length 1, ℓ, as is often assumed in computations of the stochastic gravitational wave background generated by cosmic string loops. In these computations, it is also commonly assumed that 

ℓ is determined by physical time (see e.g. [13, 43, 45]), since the string network is often assumed to always evolve in a linear scaling regime. However, this was shown [12] to lead to a significant underestimation of the number of loops created after the radiation-matter transition, wherein networks can no longer be assumed to be in a linear scaling regime. Since we want our study to ap-ply to cosmic string networks in a realistic cosmological background, we will assume that the length of loops is a fixed fraction of the characteristic lengthscale as pro-posed in [12]: ℓ = αL , where α is a constant such that 0 ≤ α ≤ 1. This assumption is supported by numerical simulations of Nambu-Goto string networks [43], which show that the large loops produced by the network are well described by α ∼ 0.34 both in the radiation and mat-ter eras. Later, in Sec. III E, we will relax this assumption and consider the possibility that ℓ is determined by the characteristic lengthscale of small scale structure, lk, as well.  

> 1Note that, although realistically one does not expect all loops to be created with exactly the same length, the results obtained by making this assumption can be used to get results in situations where the length of loops at birth follows any distribution [43, 44].

4In [25, 34], the authors propose that the rate of kink creation is proportional to the rate of loop production: 

dn c

dt = F dn loops 

dt , (9) where F is the average number of kinks created on the long string network for each loop formed. Although two kinks are created on each long string when strings in-tercommute, multiple reconnections may be necessary before a loop is produced. We should then have that 

F ≥ 2 [34]. Every time a loop detaches from the network, a length 

ℓ of string is removed, alongside Nr = Kℓ kinks. There-fore, every time a loop detaches, Nr = αL/l k kinks are removed from the network. However, in [20], the authors proposed that loop production could be more likely in re-gions that have a larger density of kinks — since strings are more curved in these regions and move with higher speeds — and, as a result, loops may carry away more kinks than this naive expectation may indicate. This ef-fect may be modeled by introducing a parameter, q, that characterizes the relative kinkiness between the loop and the long string, so that the linear kink density of the loops is larger than that of the long strings by a factor of 

q. This means that, when a loop detaches from the net-work, it will remove qKℓ kinks, instead of Kℓ and then, the rate at which kinks are removed from the network is then [20, 25, 34]: 

dn r

dt = ℓqK (t) dn loops 

dt . (10) Using Eq. (7), we may write 

dK dt = [ F − αqLK ]L2 dn loops 

dt + 2KLdL dt − 3HK == F ˜c¯vαL 2 − q˜c¯v KL + 2KLdL dt − 3HK. 

(11) Assuming that the long string network is in a linear scaling regime (i.e. that ξ and ¯ v remain constant), this equation admits an analytical solution of the form: 

K(t) = AN t

" tti

N

− 1

#

, (12) where we defined A = F ˜c¯v/ (αξ 2) and N = 3 − (˜ c¯vq )/ξ −

3β and we have assumed that the network is formed at a time ti without small-scale structure (i.e., K(ti) = 0). The characteristic lengthscale of small-scale structure is in linear scaling regime if lk ∝ t (or, equivalently, K ∝

1/t ), which only occurs if N < 0. We may then see that, if q is larger than a critical value 

q∗ 

> c

= 3ξ

˜c¯v (1 − β) , (13) the removal of kinks from the network by loops is enough to ensure linear scaling, as was shown in [34]. Note that, using Eq. (6), we may rewrite this as 

q∗ 

> c

= 1 + ξ

˜c¯v

(1 − β) + 2 β¯v2 , (14) which shows that q∗ 

> c

> 1 for all values of β. This demon-strates that the attainment of a linear scaling regime by the characteristic length of small-scale structure is only possible if loops are indeed typically kinkier than the long strings. As a matter of fact, they would have to be signif-icantly kinkier: in the radiation era, we have q∗ 

> c,r

∼ 2.67, while q∗ 

> c,m

∼ 4.67 in the matter era. When q < q ∗ 

> c

,the linear kink density will evolve as K ∝ tN − 1 and, therefore, the amount of small-scale structure on cosmic strings grows continuously over time. Also, for q = q∗ 

> c

, it is also not possible to attain a linear scaling regime for 

lk and we have that tK ∝ log( t/t i).  

> B. Impact of Non-Loop Forming Intercommutations

Kinks are formed in the network every time strings in-teract, even when that interaction does not lead to the creation of a loop. A question then arises: do the in-tercommutations that do not form loops have a signifi-cant impact on the creation of small-scale structure? The effect of these non-loop-forming intercommutations was treated in two different ways in the literature. In [25, 34], the authors assume that the total number of intercom-mutations is also proportional to the number of loops produced and therefore this effect may be described by considering a value of F larger than 2. Refs. [20, 21], on the other hand, describe non-loop-forming intercom-mutations by including an additional term in Eq. (9): 

dn c

dt = F dn loops 

dt + dn int 

dt ≡ F dn loops 

dt + χ(¯ v)

L4 , (15) where nint is the number density of kinks added to the network by non-loop forming intercommutations, and 

χ(¯ v) = 2¯ v(1 − ¯v2)/π describes the probability of long string intercommutation. Let us start by considering the latter case and, for consistency, let us set F = 2 to avoid considering the same effect twice. Eq. (11) now becomes: 

dK dt = [2 − αqLK ]L2 dn loops 

dt + 2KLdL dt − 3HK + χ(¯ v)

L2 .

(16) If one now assumes a linear scaling regime, it is straight-forward to see that Eq. (16) also admits a solution of the form of Eq. (12), but now 

F −→ F (¯ v) ≡ 2 + χ(¯ v)α

˜c¯v = 2 



1 + α(1 − ¯v2)

π˜c



. (17) which in a linear scaling regime is also a constant. This clearly shows that, in a linear scaling regime, the effect of non-loop-forming intercommutations is indeed similar to 5taking a larger value of F : the critical value of q remains unchanged, but there is an increase of the linear kink den-sity as K ∝ F . However, because the scaling value of ¯ v is typically dependent on the expansion rate β (cf . Eq. (6)), no single value of F can be chosen throughout the evolu-tion (especially when we consider, as in Sec. IV, a realis-tic cosmological background and treat ¯ v as a dynamical variable). Note also that F (¯ v) is also dependent on α.As may be seen from Eq. (17), if the loops produced are small (and then many loop-forming intercommutations occur), the impact of these additional intercommutations is negligible and we have F ≈ 2. For larger values of α,however, this is no longer the case and the linear kink density may be indeed be enhanced. For these reasons, from this point forward, we will then consider by effect by replacing F by F (¯ v).  

> C. Impact of Expansion

Let us now consider the impact of the stretching of kinks caused by the Hubble expansion of the background. This effect may be described by a term of the form[20]: 1

KdK dt stretching 

= −2H(1 − 2¯ v2) , (18) so that Eq. (11) then becomes 

dK dt = F (¯ v) ˜c¯vαL 2 − q˜c¯v KL + 2KLdL dt − (19) 

− HK 3 + 2(1 − 2¯ v2) .

Assuming that the long string network is in a linear scal-ing regime, once again we find that the solution to this equation is given by (12), but now we have 

N = 3 − q ˜c¯vξ − β 3 − 2(1 − 2¯ v2) . (20) The linear kink density may then attain a linear scal-ing regime if the relative kinkiness exceeds a new critical value given by 

qc ≡ q∗ 

> c

− 2βξ 

˜c¯v (1 −2¯ v2) = 1+ ξ

˜c¯v

1 − 3β(1 − 2¯ v2) . (21) The decay of kinks caused by stretching then facilitates the attainment of a linear scaling regime, as it leads to a reduction in the critical value of q. Its impact becomes more and more relevant as the expansion rate increases and, in fact, the values of the critical kinkiness in the radiation and matter era become similar: qc,r = 2 .45 and qc,m = 2 .67. Interestingly, for fast enough expansion rates with β > 0.73, a linear scaling regime may now be attained even for q = 1.  

> D. Impact of Kink Decay due to the emission of gravitational waves

The decrease in the linear kink density caused by the emission of gravitational radiation is of the form [25, 35]: 1

KdK dt gw 

= − ˆCΓGμK = −ˆΓGμK , (22) where ˆΓ ≡ Γ ˆC, Γ ≃ 50 [46–48] is the power emitted in GWs by long strings in units of Gμ 2 and ˆC > 1 was in-troduced to account for the impact of gravitational back-reaction, which should lead to a smoothing of the kinks as they emit GWs and may make their decay more ef-ficient [21]. The larger the value of ˆC considered, the faster kinks will be smoothed out, and, therefore, ˆΓ could be interpreted as an effective value for the GW emission efficiency, accounting for the effects of gravitational back-reaction. Considering now both the decay by Hubble stretching and by GW emission, Eq. (10) becomes 

dn r

dt = ℓK dn loop 

dt + dn GW 

dt + dn H

dt , (23) and so, Eq. (11) may be written as 

dK dt = F (¯ v) ˜c¯vαL 2 − q˜c¯v KL + 2KLdL dt − (24) 

− HK 3 + 2(1 − 2¯ v2) − ˆCΓGμK 2 .

Let us start by looking for the conditions that need to be satisfied for the linear kink density to reach a linear scaling regime, by solving this equation analytically. In this case, again assuming that K(ti) = 0 and that the long string network remains in a linear scaling regime, the general solution for Eq. (24) is of the form: 

K(t) = N (1 − M )2ˆΓGμt 



1 −

 tti

N M 

1 + 

 M− 1

> M+1

  tti

N M , (25) where N is given by Eq. (20), M2 = 1 + 4 ˆΓGμ A/N 2 and 

A = F (¯ v)˜ c¯v/ (αξ 2). Note that this solution is valid for 

N̸ = 0 (or, equivalently, for q̸ = qc). The characteristic lengthscale of small-scale structure, however, may now achieve a linear scaling regime, with lk ∝ t, both for 

N > 0 (or q < q c) and N < 0 (or q > q c), but these regimes will be qualitatively different. For N > 0, we have that 

K(t) ≃ N (1 + M)2ˆΓGμt , (26) for t ≫ ti. Let us consider a value of q = qc − δ−, with 

qc > δ − > 0. In this case, we may write 6

K(t) ≃ ˜c¯vδ −

2ξ ˆΓGμt 

1 + 1 + 4ˆΓGμF (¯ v)

α˜c¯vδ 2

> −

!1/2 . (27) Assuming that the length of the loops produced is signif-icantly larger than the gravitational backreaction scale 2,with α ≫ ˆΓGμ , we have that: 

K(t) ≃ ˜c¯v

ˆΓGμ δ−

L −→ lk(t) ≃ ˆΓGμL δ− ˜c¯v . (28) We then see that, in this case, the characteristic length-scale of small-scale structure is essentially determined by the gravitational backreaction scale. The attainment of a linear scaling is therefore guaranteed by the decay of kinks due to their emission of gravitational radiation. When N < 0, on the other hand, we have: 

K(t) ≃ N (1 − M )2ˆΓGμt , (29) for t ≫ ti. By writing q = qc + δ+, with δ+ > 0, one finds 

K(t) ≃ ˜c¯vδ +

2ξ ˆΓGμt 

−1 + 1 + 4ˆΓGμF (¯ v)

α˜c¯vδ 2+

!1/2 . (30) We now have, up to first order in ˆΓGμ/α , that: 

K(t) ≃ F (¯ v)

δ+ℓ −→ lk(t) ≈ δ+

F (¯ v) ℓ . (31) In this case, loop production, and the consequent removal of kinks, is now sufficient to ensure that lk reaches a linear scaling regime. The characteristic lengthscale of small-scale structure is determined by the typical length of loops. This means that, typically, the linear kink den-sity on long strings will be much smaller than in the previous case and, as we shall see, small-scale structure will have a smaller impact on the large-scale dynamics of the cosmic string network 3. The critical value of q

then now separates these two different scaling regimes that are achieved through two distinct physical processes, loop production and kink decay, and in which the overall impact on the evolution of the network may be, as we will see in Sec. IV, quite different. For q = qc, or N = 0, we have instead that: 

tK critical (t) = 

 A

ˆΓGμ 

1/2

tanh 



AˆΓGμ 

1/2

log 

 tti

 

,

(32) and therefore the attainment of a linear scaling regime is not possible.      

> 2This is a natural expectation since gravitational backreaction smooths out cosmic strings on scales smaller than ˆΓGμL .
> 3Note that a similar result may be found using equation Eq. (12) for q > q ∗
> cor q > q c, depending on whether the impact of Hubble stretching is considered or not.

E. Modified loop production 

In this subsection, we relax the assumption that the length of loops is determined by the characteristic length of the network and consider other loop forming scenarios proposed in the literature and motivated by numerical simulations. 

1. Loop length determined by lk

Loop production and small-scale structure are intrin-sically related and, for this reason, in [35] the authors proposed that loops could be formed with a physical length that is determined by the typical interkink dis-tance ℓ = αklk, where αk > 1 is a constant. In this scenario (we will refer to it as Case 2), every time a loop detaches Nr = αk kinks are removed, unlike in the pre-viously discussed scenario (Case 1) in which the number of kinks removed by a loop increases when lk decreases. The attainment of a linear scaling regime through loop production alone is then necessarily harder to achieve. As a matter of fact, considering just the impact of loop production, Eq. (7) now becomes 

dK dt = ˜ c¯v KL

 Fαk

− q



+ 2KLdL dt − 3HK , (33) and, if one once again one assumes scaling of the network, we should have that 

K(t) = Ki

 tti

 ˜N − 1

, (34) where ˜N = ( F/α k − q) ˜ c¯v/ξ + 3(1 − β) and Ki = K(ti)is the initial kink energy density 4. From this, one may see that a linear scaling regime is only attainable if q =˜q∗ 

> c

≡ F/α k + q∗ 

> c

, or equivalently, whenever the number of kinks removed αk compensates exactly for the number of kinks that are created. For q > ˜q∗ 

> c

, more kinks are removed than are created and therefore the linear kink density monotonically decreases. For q < ˜q∗ 

> c

, not enough kinks are created and small-scale structure builds up on strings. The picture changes however if one adds the impact of non-loop forming intercommutations to the evolution equation for K (by considering, in Eq. (33), that the rate of kink production is given by Eq. (15)). Assuming linear scaling, we again find that the general solution for K is of the form of Eq. (12), but now with   

> 4Note that, in this scenario, we cannot assume that K(ti) = 0, as this would imply that the first loops would be created with infinite length.

7

N → ˜N and A → ˜A ≡ χ(¯ v)/ξ 2 (35) The introduction of non-loop forming intercommutations then has a significant impact in Case 2: it makes it qual-itatively more very similar to Case 1. We then have scal-ing for q > ˜q∗ 

> c

as well and the scaling interkink distance is given by: 

lk ≃ δ−

˜c¯vL χ(¯ v) , (36) which, as in Case 1, is determined by the characteristic length of the cosmic string network (recall that, in case 1, the length of loops is determined by the characteristic length) 5.If one now introduces kink decay due to Hubble stretching and gravitational wave emission, the situation remains qualitatively similar to Case 1. As a matter of fact, if one assumes that the network is in linear scaling, 

K should still be of the form in Eq. (25), but now with 

N → ˜N − 2β(1 − ¯v2) and A → ˜A . (37) A major difference between these two loop production scenarios is that quite generally the critical value of q in case 2 is larger than in case 1: we have ˜ qc = F/α k + qc.Only when αk → +∞ we have that ˜ qc → qc. It is then harder to reach scaling without gravitational backreac-tion and, even when possible, the expected number den-sity of kinks should be different. But the predictions for values of q smaller than the critical value are identical in both scenarios. Nevertheless, since we have that 

ℓ = αklk = αkεt = αkεξ L , (38) where we have introduced ε ≡ L/t , choosing a time-dependent α equal to α(t) = αkε/ξ would make Case 1 equivalent to Case 2. Moreover, in a linear scaling regime 

ε and ξ should remain constant and, therefore, once this regime is reached one scenario can be easily translated into the other.  

> 2. Two loop populations

One may wonder also whether these two loop forma-tion scenarios may co-exist. As a matter of fact, Nambu-Goto numerical simulations [16, 43] seem to indicate that       

> 5Notice that the dependence of lkon χ(¯ v) is also present in Eq. (31), but is “hidden” inside F(¯ v).

there are two distinct loop populations: one of large loops with lengths determined by the characteristic length of the network and another of much smaller loops whose lengths may be related to small-scale structure on cos-mic string and that comprise the majority of the energy loss 6. We will then consider a scenario in which a fraction 

p of the loops is created with a length ℓ2 = αklk, while the rest of the loops are created with a length ℓ1 = αL 

(throughout this subsection, we will use the subscripts 1 and 2 to label the contribution of these two loop popula-tions). We may then write that 

dn loops 

dt = dn loops ,1

dt + dn loops ,2

dt = ˜c1 ¯vαL 4 + ˜c2 ¯vαk

KL3 , (39) where ˜ c1 = (1 − p)˜ c and ˜ c2 = p˜c are parameters that quantify the energy loss into loops of populations 1 and 2 respectively (notice that ˜ c1 + ˜ c2 = ˜ c). In this case, the rates of kink production and kink removal are given by 

dn c

dt = 2 dn loops 

dt + χ(v)

L4 = [ F (¯ v) − 2p] ˜c¯vαL 4 + 2 p ˜c¯vαk

KL3

(40) (where, as before, we separated the contribution of non-loop-forming intercommutations and used Eqs. (17) and (39) in the last equality) and 

dn r

dt = ℓ1qK dn loops ,1

dt + ℓ2qk dn loops ,2

dt = q˜c¯vK L3 . (41) Inserting Eqs. (40) and (41) into Eq. (7) and assum-ing that the cosmic string network is in a linear scaling regime, we find that the linear kink density should evolve as 

dK dt = [ F (¯ v) − 2p] ˜c¯vαL 2 −



q − 2pαk



˜c¯v KL + (42) + 2KLdL dt − HK [3 + 2(1 − 2¯ v)] − ˆΓGμK 2 .

By comparing this equation to Eq. (24), one may see that they are very similar: this scenario with two dis-tinct loop populations reduces effectively to case 1 but with a reduced rate of kink production and a value of 

q that is effectively reduced as well. When linear scal-ing is maintained as a result of the GW emission, there should be no discernible differences between this scenario and case 1. However, quite generally, when the scaling regime is maintained by loop production, it is still loop population 1 that determines the kink density, but this density is reduced. For instance, if one considers the loop  

> 6There is, however, a discrepancy between the number of small loops predicted in these two simulation-inferred models.

8production scenario measured in the simulations of [11], wherein population 1 is characterized by α ∼ 0.34 and 1 − p = 0 .1, in the radiation era, the linear kink density is reduced by a factor of 3.2 when compared to the case in which there is only one loop population characterized by the same α.Moreover, as result of the effective decrease in the rel-ative kinkiness, the critical value of q is increased as well: 

qc → qc+2 p/α k. So, as the fraction of loops in population 2 increases, attaining scaling only through loop produc-tion requires higher and higher q (recall that achieving this type of scaling in case 2 is always harder).  

> IV. A VELOCITY-DEPENDENT 2-SCALE MODEL FOR STRINGS WITH SMALL-SCALE STRUCTURE

Up to now, we have neglected the impact of small-scale structure on the large-scale evolution of the cosmic string network. Since kinks decay by emitting gravitational ra-diation, however, the string network is expected to lose energy at a rate [25, 27, 49]: 

dρ dt kinks 

= −ΓGμρK . (43) The evolution of the characteristic length of the network 

L should then be coupled to the evolution of the char-acteristic length of small-scale structure lk, through an additional term of the form: 

dL dt kinks 

= 12 ΓGμ Llk

. (44) This modification will, in turn, result in an additional term in the evolution equation for lk (or K), through its dependence on dL/dt (see, e.g., Eq. (24)). This will result effectively in a weakening of the impact of kink decay due to gravitational radiation on the evolution of 

lk, as ˆC in Eq. (24) will be reduced to ˆC − 1. We may then describe the evolution of a cosmic string network with small-scale structure using 

d¯vdt = (1 − ¯v2)

 k(¯ v)

L − 2H ¯v



, (45) 

dL dt = (1 + ¯ v2)HL + 12 ˜c¯v + 12 ΓGμ Llk

, (46) 

dl k

dt = 2(1 − 2¯ v2)Hl k + ( ˆC − 1)Γ Gμ − (47) 

− (1 − q)˜ c¯v lk

L − F (¯ v) ˜c¯vα

 lk

L

2

.

So, to account for the impact of small-scale structure, we need to include (at least) one additional lengthscale in the VOS model, making it a two-scale model instead. In this section, we will use this Velocity-dependent 2-Scale model (or V2S model, for short) to study the impact of small-scale on the evolution of cosmic string networks. Let us start by investigating whether the existence of small-scale structure may prevent the attainment of a linear scaling regime. In particular, we will investigate the existence of attractor solutions of the form ¯v = constant , L = ξt and lk = εt , (48) in which both lengthscales evolve linearly with physical time. Substituting these solutions into Eqs. (45)-(47), we find: ¯v2 =

k(¯ v)



1 − β − ΓGμ 

> 2ε



β[k(¯ v) + ˜ c] , (49) 

ξ2 = k(¯ v)[ k(¯ v) + ˜ c]4β



1 − β − ΓGμ 

> 2ε

 , (50) 

ε = Γ Gμ D + ( ˆC − 1) [ k(¯ v) + ˜ c]2D(1 − β) + [ k(¯ v) + ˜ c] (1 − 3β) , (51) where 

D = ˜ c

 F (v)

αk

+ (1 − q)



+ 3 k(¯ v) . (52) In deriving Eq. (51), we took advantage of the fact that, as discussed in Sec. III E, case 1 (in which L determines the length of loops) and case 2 (in which it is determined by lk) are fully equivalent in a linear scaling regime, since re-writing Eq. (47) in terms of αk = αξ/ε allows us to derive a more concise expression. Note however that, despite this, Eq. (51) has a implicit dependence on ¯ v, ξ

and ε through the factor D.From Eqs. (49) or (50), we may see that the cosmic string network can only attain linear scaling provided that 

ε > ΓGμ 

2(1 − β) . (53) Using Eq. (51), we find that scaling then requires that ˆC > 1 + 1 − 3β

2(1 − β) , (54) which corresponds to ˆC > 0.5 ( −0.5) in the radiation (matter) era. This indicates that attaining a linear scal-ing regime is always possible in a realistic cosmological background, since quite generally we expect ˆC ≥ 1. As to the impact of small-scale structure, Eqs. (49) and (50) show that the effect of the energy loss caused by kink decay is to decelerate the strings and decrease their energy density (i.e., increase the characteristic length). They also indicate that the large-scale evolution of the string network will only be significantly affected by small-scale structure when ε is comparable to or not much larger than the gravitational backreaction scale Γ Gμ or, 9          

> FIG. 1. Evolution of a cosmic string network with small-scale structure for q= 1 and different values of ˆC. The top, middle and bottom panels display, respectively, the evolution of ¯ v,ξ
> and εin a ΛCDM cosmological background (with cosmological parameters as suggested by Planck data [37]). Here, we also took Gμ = 10 −7,α= 10 −1, and ˜ c= 0 .23.

in other words, if scaling is maintained through kink de-cay by GW emission (and not by the loop production). Let us then consider this limit. Since, in this case, typ-ically ε ∼ O (Γ Gμ ), we have αk ∼ O (αξ/ ΓGμ ). There-fore, if one assumes that the length of loops is much larger than the gravitational backreaction scale, we should gen-erally have αk ≫ 1 and, therefore, D ≃ ˜c(1 − q) + 3 k(¯ v). In this case, Eqs. (49)-(51) may be written as: 

v2 = k(¯ v)

β

 ˆC − 32



(1 − β) − β

( ˆC − q)˜ c + ( ˆC + 2) k(¯ v) , (55) 

ξ2 = k(¯ v)4β

( ˆC − q)˜ c + ( ˆC + 2) k(¯ v)

 ˆC − 32



(1 − β) − β, (56) 

ε =ΓGμ 

h

( ˆC − q)˜ c + ( ˆC + 2) k(¯ v)

i

[k(¯ v) + ˜ c] (1 − 3β) + 2 [˜ c(1 − q) + 3 k(¯ v)] (1 − β) .(57) Using these expressions, we may quantify the maxi-mum impact of small-scale structure on the evolution of cosmic string networks. This corresponds to a scenario in which there is no gravitational backreaction (i.e., ˆC = 1)           

> FIG. 2. Evolution of a cosmic string network with small-scale structure for ˆC= 2 and different values of q. The top, middle and bottom panels display, respectively, the evolution of ¯ v,ξ
> and εin a ΛCDM cosmological background (with cosmological parameters as suggested by Planck data [37]). Here, we also took Gμ = 10 −7,α= 10 −1, and ˜ c= 0 .23.

and with q = 1. In the radiation era, this corresponds to ¯vr 

> ∗

= 1

√6 , ξr 

> ∗

= √6k(¯ vr

> ∗

) ≃ 2.04 , (58) 

εr

> ∗

ΓGμ = 6k(¯ vr

> ∗

)5k(¯ vr

> ∗

) − ˜c ≃ 1.27 .

Small-scale structure may then have a very significant impact in the radiation era: the energy density may ne suppressed by a factor of up to ∼ 55, while the RMS velocity may be suppressed ∼ 1.66. Its effect, however, is not strong enough to freeze the network and prevent the attainment of a linear scaling regime, as we previ-ously discussed. The effect would be less significant in a matter-only universe, since the decay caused by Hubble stretching is more efficient in that case: ¯vm 

> ∗

= 1

√4 , ξr 

> ∗

= 32 k(¯ vm 

> ∗

) ≃ 1.07 , (59) 

εm

> ∗

ΓGμ = 3k(¯ vr

> ∗

)

k(¯ vr

> ∗

) − ˜c ≃ 4.43 .

In this case, the velocity is reduced only by a factor of 

∼ 1.3, while the energy density decreases by a factor of roughly 3. 10 The impact of small-scale structure progressively de-creases as ˆC increases and gravitational backreaction be-comes increasingly more efficient in smoothing out the kinks. This may be seen clearly in Fig. 1, where we dis-play the evolution of ¯ v, ξ and ε for q = 1 and different values of ˆC.7 Therein one may see that, for all values of ˆC, the network evolves in a linear scaling regime during the radiation era (we have verified that it indeed is well described by Eqs. (55)-(57) with β = 1 /2). On the onset of the radiation-matter transition, however, the network enters a transitional regime during which it starts evolv-ing towards the matter-era scaling regime. The matter era, however, does not last long enough for scaling to be reestablished before dark energy becomes cosmologically relevant. From this point forward, the network starts to be quickly diluted by the fast expansion of the back-ground, with L, l k ∝ a and v ∝ 1/a . This figure also clearly shows that, as ˆC increases, the impact of small-scale structure quickly decreases and the evolution of the network becomes increasingly closer to that predicted by the VOS model. In Fig. 2, for visualization purposes, we have assumed that the network is already in the linear scaling regime initially. However, in a realistic setting, one would expect strings to be featureless initially and for kinks to build up dynamically as strings collide and intercommute. So, for now on, we will assume that initially the network is in the standard linear scaling regime predicted by the VOS model for strings without small-scale structure and that lk = L initially. As the purple line in Fig. 2 (repre-senting the case q = 1, the same value used for Fig. 1) shows, this has a significant impact on the evolution of the network: initially the impact of small-scale structure is negligible and the network evolves similarly to strings without small-scale structure. Only when enough struc-ture builds up for lk to approach scaling will its impact be felt and the network will evolve towards the regime in Eqs. (55)-(57). When GW emission is the mecha-nism that ensures scaling of lk, the network will then go through two different regimes. The duration of the first (quasi-)scaling regime — which is characterized roughly by the same ¯ v and ξ as that of bare strings — depends on the parameters of the model. The smaller the value of 

α, the shorter the duration of this initial regime will be. Moreover, for smaller values of Gμ , this regime will last longer, since the linear scaling regime will be character-ized by a larger kink density that takes longer to attain. Its duration is, however, only weakly dependent on the value of ˆC.Fig. 2 also displays the evolution of the cosmic string network for a fixed value of ˆC and different values of q.Therein, one may see that, as q increases (but remains      

> 7We do not include ˆC= 1 as, in this limit, the integration of the V2S equations is significantly affected by numerical errors. The results obtained in the ˆC→1 limit, however, clearly approach the analytical solution in Eq. (58) in the radiation era.

below the critical value), the approach to scaling becomes increasingly slower and, as a result, the transient regime (in which strings are effectively kinkless) lasts longer and longer. As a matter of fact, as q → qc,r , the build up of small-scale structure is so slow that the radiation era may not be long enough for lk to attain scaling. We have found that, in this particular instance, this happens roughly for 2 .35 ≲ q ≤ qc,r . Note however that the range of values q in which full scaling is not effectively attained in the radiation era depends on the other parameters of the model (namely, Gμ , α, ˆC). For instance, if we decrease cosmic string tension to Gμ = 10 −10 , we find the radiation era does not last long enough to reach full scaling for 2 .15 ≲ q ≤ qc,r . Not attaining full scaling of lk, however, should not be regarded as problematic in this case: in fact, the deviations from the evolution predicted by the VOS model for strings without small-scale structure are minimal (see, for example, the line corresponding to q = 2 .4). In this figure, one may see that, as q is increases above a critical value, loop chopping becomes sufficient to en-sure scaling of lk and the network then reaches a scaling regime that is characterized by a low kink density. We may also see that the critical value of q is not signifi-cantly altered when one adds the energy loss caused by kink decay to the evolution of the string network and, as a result, the values of qc,r and qc,m derived in Sec. III C are still valid. As a matter of fact, our numerical results indicate that Eq. (31) provides a very good description of the results if α ≫ ΓGμ . We then have that, for q > q c,the linear scaling regime is approximately characterized by ¯v ≃ ¯vVOS [1 − ∆] , (60) 

ξ ≃ ξVOS [1 + ∆] , (61) 

ε ≃ q − qc

F (¯ vVOS ) αξ VOS , (62) where the subscript ‘VOS’ is used to label the values pre-dicted by the VOS model for the corresponding quantity (obtained using Eq. (6)) and, in Eqs. (60) and (61), we have kept terms up to first order in ∆ ≡ ΓGμ/ (4 ε). In the radiation era, we then have that 

εr ≃ 0.126( q − 2.45) α , ∆r ≃ 2

q − 2.45 ΓGμ α , (63) while in the matter era 

εm ≃ 0.286( q − 2.67) α , ∆m ≃ 0.9

q − 2.67 ΓGμ α . (64) So, the smaller the length of the loops created is, the larger the impact of small-scale structure will be. How-ever, this effect is typically negligible in this limit, except 11 when the length of loops approaches the gravitational backreaction scale 8. 

> V. DISCUSSION

In this paper, we have developed an effective model to describe the cosmological evolution of cosmic string networks with small-scale structure. As in [34, 35], we followed a more phenomenological approach and used two lengthscales to describe the network, the character-istic length L and the typical interkink distance lk. We have extended the model in [34, 35] by including rele-vant physical phenomena that have been considered in the literature — including, for instance, the impact on non-loop-forming intercommutations [20] and the energy loss caused by kink decay [25] — and by treating the RMS velocity of the network ¯ v as an additional dynamical vari-able. We have also incorporated the velocity-dependence into the different terms in the evolution equations for L

and lk, as this allows for a better description of the net-work outside of the linear scaling regime. This is partic-ularly important to model the evolution of the network in a realistic cosmological background (that transitions form the radiation to the matter era and later to Λ dom-ination) and to accurately model loop production. This resulted in a model that, besides cosmic string tension Gμ (the fundamental parameter of the model) has five additional free parameters: the GW emission efficiency Γ (whose value has already been established through analytical and numerical studies); the loop-chopping parameter ˜ c and the loop-size parameter α

(both of which are fairly well known from Nambu-Goto numerical simulations); the relative kinkiness of loops q

and the gravitational backreaction constant ˆC (which are currently unknown). All these parameters have clear physical meaning and may, in principle, be extracted from numerical simulations in the future. Note however that, at the present, numerical simulations of Nambu-Goto cosmic strings do not include the impact of gravi-tational backreaction on long strings 9 and, as result, this is not yet possible. This obviously means that ˆC and 

q have to be treated as free parameters, but all other parameters could be affected by the inclusion of gravita-tional backreaction. On one hand, since the kinks created in simulations do not decay by emitting gravitational ra-diation, this energy loss is absent and the networks are, in principle, denser and have higher velocities than they would have in the presence of gravitational backreaction. Although Abelian-Higgs simulations also do not include gravitational backreaction, in that case there is an ad-ditional decay channel for small-scale structure on long        

> 8How close it needs to be, however, depends on the value of q, as ∆ also grows quite fast in the q→qclimit.
> 9The impact of gravitational backreaction on loops has been stud-ied in [50].

strings, the emission of scalar and gauge radiation, and this was shown to lead to values of L that are about 25% higher and to values of ¯ v2 that are about 10% smaller [18]. Although the nature of energy loss is quite different, this clearly shows that the decay of kinks may have a sig-nificant impact on the evolution of the network on large scales. On the other hand, this accumulation of small-scale structure on long strings in Nambu-Goto simula-tions should, in principle, potentiate the production of small loops (which are, as previously discussed, the vast majority of the loops measured in simulations). So, at least part of the energy that would be lost directly by the long strings may be, in current Nambu-Goto sim-ulations, “transferred” to small loops and, as a result the current inferred value of ˜ c may as well not be en-tirely realistic. If we again draw a parallel with Abelian-Higgs simulations (again with the caveat that the energy loss mechanism is different), the latest calibration with a VOS-type model [24] indicates larger values for this pa-rameter. Finally, loop sizes and, especially, their relative kinkiness should also be affected by gravitational backre-action. This means that, at the present, the V2S model cannot be fully calibrate, but, since simulations also have limitations and do not yet include all relevant physical processes, these semi-analytical models currently provide us with one of the few tools to study the potential impact of small-scale structure and to quantify our uncertainty as to the expected energy density of cosmic string net-works (something that is crucial to make observational predictions and to accurately constrain string-forming scenarios). The model derived in this paper shows that the im-pact of small-scale structure on the evolution of a cosmic string network may range from irrelevant, when loop pro-duction is enough to ensure scaling of lk (although, even in this limit, there may be some impact if α ≪ 1), to quite significant when scaling is only achieved as a result of gravitational backreaction. In this limit, the energy density of the network may be reduced, compared to the predictions of current models, by up to a factor of 55, depending on the value of ˆC. Notice however that the limiting values we derived for ¯ v and ξ in the ˆC → 1 limit are independent of the other parameters of the model ( cf. 

Eqs. (58) and (59)) and thus we may, in fact, consider this to be an absolute limiting case, in which small-scale structure has the most substantial effect. The attainment a full scaling regime, with constant ¯ v,

ξ and ε, seems quite generally to always be possible for all values of ˆC and q (except for q = qc). However, when loop production is insufficient to ensure scaling of lk, the network will only attain this regime once enough small-scale structure has built up on the strings for lk to scale. Until this happens, the network evolves in a quasi-scaling regime, in which ξ and ¯ v are varying very slowly and assume values that are very close to those expected for bare strings, without small-scale structure. The duration of this transient regime, however, is strongly dependent on the parameters of the model — in particular, on α12 and Gμ and, even more crucially, on q — and, in fact, for values of q close to the critical value in Eq. (21), it may not be possible to reach full scaling within the radiation era. Nevertheless, in this case, the deviations from the standard evolution predicted by the VOS model would always remain quite small. It is interesting to note that the general picture that emerges from this V2S model is quite similar to what is predicted by the 3-Scale (3S) model introduced in [21]. The 3S model was derived using a different formalism (based on the analysis of the probability distribution of the extension of a segment of left-moving string) and in-cludes a third lengthscale — the persistence length ¯L

— in addition to the two lengthscales considered here 10 .The persistence length roughly characterizes the distance along which the direction of strings is correlated and may be roughly defined as [20, 21, 51]: ¯L = 32

ςH , with ς = −⟨ x− · x+⟩ , (65) where ⟨· · · ⟩ = R · · · ϵdσ/ R ϵdσ represents a weighted av-erage over the whole network and x± = ˙ x ± ϵ−1x′ repre-sent the left- and right-moving modes of a string in the lightcone gauge (see e.g. [4]). Here, ϵ2 = ( x′)/(1 − ˙x2), ˙ x

represents the physical velocity of the string, x′ = dx/dσ 

its tangent vector (satisfying ˙ x.x′ = 0) and σ is the space-like coordinate along the string worldsheet. The quantity 

ς is related to the RMS velocity of the network ¯ v = p⟨ ˙x2⟩

through ¯ v2 = (1 − ς)/2 [20] and, as result, the evolution of the persistence length may simply be extracted from ¯v:¯L = 32H (1 − 2¯ v2) . (66) Using this expression, we find that the results obtained with the V2S model introduced here are in excellent qual-itative agreement with the results of the 3S model. In Fig. 3, we display the evolution of γ = 1 /(HL ), ¯ γ =1/(H ¯L), ζ = 1 /(Hl k) and ¯ v for q = 1 .05, Γ Gμ = 10 −8

and different values of ˆC. We chose these variables and these values fot the parameters to allow for a simpler comparison with the results of the 3S Model, as pre-sented in [30] 11 , and, for the same reason, we consider a universe containing only radiation and matter. Therein, one may see that the agreement between the results of the two models is indeed remarkable and that every vari-able displays qualitatively identical behaviour. In the       

> 10 Although their definition for the characteristic lengthscale of small-scale structure differs from ours, it may be roughly identi-fied with lk.
> 11 Note that some parameters in the 3S model do not have an equiv-alent in the V2S and that their parameter ˆCcorresponds to ˆC+1 in this model.

case of γ, ζ and ¯ v the results are in excellent quantita-tive agreement as well. The V2S model seems to predict overall smaller values for ¯ γ, but notice that in the 3S model χ(¯ v) is treated as a constant and, in the example in [30], set to 0 .1. In the V2S model, however, we take into account its velocity-dependence and, in fact, typi-cally for these examples we find that χ(v) ∼ 0.23 − 0.24. Since χ(¯ v) enters directly in the equation for ¯ γ in [21], this may be a potential explanation for these differences. Aside from this small difference (roughly a factor of 1 .3), these results indicate that the (deceptively) simpler evo-lution equation for ¯ v includes all the relevant physical processes included in the more complex equation for ¯L

derived in [21]. The explanation for this lies in the form chosen for the momentum parameter, formally defined as [22, 23] ¯v(1 − ¯v2) ak (¯ v)

L ≡ ϵ−2x′′ · ˙x . (67) This parameter may also be interpreted as the mean cur-vature of the string along the velocity direction: curved regions of string are accelerated as a result of tension and this naturally affects the evolution of ¯ v. The curvature on a string, by measuring the rate of change of the string tangent along the string, is naturally related to its per-sistence length: the higher the curvature, the shorter the distance along which the strings are correlated in direc-tion. As a matter of fact, one may show that ¯v(1 − ¯v2) k(¯ v)

L = H

4

 1 − (x+ · x−)2  , (68) and therefore k(¯ v) may also be interpreted as a measure of the directional correlation of the left- and right-moving modes. The form of k(¯ v) in Eq. (5) — introduced in Ref. [23] and constructed phenomenologically by resort-ing to the helicoidal string solution [26] (which oscillates periodically between a straight line and a helix) — seems then to capture appropriately the dependence of the av-eraged acceleration felt by the strings on ¯ v and then pro-vides us with an alternative way to describe the evolu-tion of the persistence length. So, one may say that the V2S model derived here is actually a model with three lengthscales (and that the VOS model, in fact, has two different lengthscales). However, choosing ¯ v as the third variable of the model instead of ¯L, while incorporating the velocity-dependence into the different terms, allows not only for a simplification of the equations, but also reduces the number of free parameters necessary signifi-cantly (the 3S model has 11 free parameters). More recently, an alternative model to describe cos-mic string networks with small-scale structure was intro-duced in [36, 40]. In this model, following [38], cosmic strings with small-scale structure are effectively treated as straight elastic strings that have a higher effective mass per unit length μeff = wμ (which is now different from their effective tension Teff w = μ). This model also has 13               

> FIG. 3. Evolution of a cosmic string network with small-scale structure as predicted by the V2S model derived in this paper, expressed in terms of the variables typically used in the 3-scale model in [21, 30], γ= 1 /(HL ) (top left panel), ¯ γ= 1 /(H¯L)(top right panel), ζ= 1 /(Hl k) (bottom left panel) and ¯ v(bottom right panel). Here, we took q= 1 .05, Γ Gμ = 10 −8, ˜ c= 0 .23 and α= 0 .1 and display the results from different values of ˆC.

two lengthscales — the characteristic length L and a cor-relation length that, although defined differently, is akin to ¯L — and also treats ¯ v as a dynamical variable (but a relation between ¯L and ¯ v is not established). The effec-tive tension in this model is then given by μeff = ( ¯L/L )2.This model also includes a mesoscopic/renormalization scale (that is not a a dynamical variable of the model), but defines the scale at which μeff is defined (or, in other words, defines what is small-scale structure). This leads to additional terms in the evolution equations that de-pend on the multi-fractal dimension of a string segment at this scale. This quantity is modelled through a phe-nomenological function that yields 1 at very small scales and 2 on super-horizon scales as observed in Nambu-Goto numerical simulations (which crucially do not in-clude gravitational backreaction). This model also does not fully account for the decay of wiggles as a result of the emission of gravitational radiation and, as a result, a detailed comparison is not possible. Their predictions for a constant renormalization scale [41] are however con-sistent with our results (in the absence of gravitational backreaction): they find that depending on the balance between the kinks that are produced and removed, the cosmic string network may evolve towards a full scaling regime or a growing wiggliness regime. This is equivalent to the scenario we have described before Sec. III D. Beyond these thermodynamical models to describe small-scale structure, that are more concerned about macroscopic predictions for the network as a whole, other studies have been dedicated to the properties of cosmic strings on very small scales. Refs. [28, 29, 52] studied how small-scale structure affects loop production and their re-sults indicate that it may happen at two distinct scales (as observed in numerical simulations): a fraction would form at a scale not much smaller than H−1, while the vast majority would be formed around the typical small-scale structure length. We have discussed this scenario in Sec. III E 2 and showed that it may be straightforwardly described in our model by a simple redefinition of F (¯ v)and q. Moreover, a characterization of the distribution of kinks by sharpness, a measure of how sharp the disconti-nuity at the string tangent is at the kink, was performed in [30]. Their results indicate that the number of kinks with a given sharpness scales over most scales, except for very small-scales that may be irrelevant observationally. 

> ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

L.S. thanks Ivan Rybak for many enlightening dis-cussions about this subject. This work was funded by FCT - Funda¸ c˜ ao para a Ciˆ encia e Tecnologia (FCT), I.P., ( https://ror.org/00snfqn58 ) through the Strate-gic Funding UID/04434/2025 and the research grant 2024.17828.PEX - Unveiling the early universe with topological defects (https://doi.org/10.54499/2024. 17828.PEX ).           

> [1] T. W. B. Kibble, Topology of Cosmic Domains and Strings, J. Phys. A 9, 1387 (1976). [2] E. Witten, Superconducting Strings, Nucl. Phys. B 249 ,557 (1985).

14 

[3] R. L. Davis, Cosmic Axions from Cosmic Strings, Phys. Lett. B 180 , 225 (1986). [4] A. Vilenkin and E. P. S. Shellard, Cosmic Strings and Other Topological Defects (Cambridge University Press, 2000). [5] S. Sarangi and S. H. H. Tye, Cosmic string production towards the end of brane inflation, Phys. Lett. B 536 ,185 (2002), arXiv:hep-th/0204074. [6] R. Jeannerot, J. Rocher, and M. Sakellariadou, How generic is cosmic string formation in SUSY GUTs, Phys. Rev. D 68 , 103514 (2003), arXiv:hep-ph/0308134. [7] J. A. Dror, T. Hiramatsu, K. Kohri, H. Murayama, and G. White, Testing the Seesaw Mechanism and Leptoge-nesis with Gravitational Waves, Phys. Rev. Lett. 124 ,041804 (2020), arXiv:1908.03227 [hep-ph]. [8] O. S. Sazhina, D. Scognamiglio, M. V. Sazhin, and M. Capaccioli, Optical analysis of a CMB cosmic string candidate, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 485 , 1876 (2019), arXiv:1902.08156 [astro-ph.CO]. [9] J. Raidal, A. Avgoustidis, E. Copeland, and A. Moss, CMB anisotropies from cosmic (super)strings in light of ACT DR6, arXiv preprint (2026), arXiv:2602.18272 [astro-ph.CO]. [10] L. Caloni, R. Z. Ferreira, L. Sousa, and C. Winckler, Cosmic strings and domain walls: the impact of CMB 

B-mode data, arXiv preprint (2026), arXiv:2602.20050 [astro-ph.CO]. [11] J. J. Blanco-Pillado, K. D. Olum, and B. Shlaer, Number of cosmic string loops, Physical Review D 89 , 023512 (2014). [12] L. Sousa and P. P. Avelino, Stochastic Gravitational Wave Background generated by Cosmic String Net-works: Velocity-Dependent One-Scale model versus Scale-Invariant Evolution, Phys. Rev. D 88 , 023516 (2013), arXiv:1304.2445 [astro-ph.CO]. [13] Y. Cui, M. Lewicki, D. E. Morrissey, and J. D. Wells, Cosmic Archaeology with Gravitational Waves from Cosmic Strings, Phys. Rev. D 97 , 123505 (2018), arXiv:1711.03104 [hep-ph]. [14] O. F. Hern´ andez, The global 21-cm signal of a network of cosmic string wakes, Mon. Not. Roy. Astron. Soc. 508 ,408 (2021), arXiv:2108.08220 [astro-ph.CO]. [15] H. Jiao, R. Brandenberger, and A. Refregier, Early struc-ture formation from cosmic string loops in light of early JWST observations, Phys. Rev. D 108 , 043510 (2023), arXiv:2304.06429 [astro-ph.CO]. [16] L. Lorenz, C. Ringeval, and M. Sakellariadou, Cosmic string loop distribution on all length scales and at any redshift, JCAP 10 , 003, arXiv:1006.0931 [astro-ph.CO]. [17] J. J. Blanco-Pillado, K. D. Olum, and B. Shlaer, Large parallel cosmic string simulations: New results on loop production, Physical Review D—Particles, Fields, Grav-itation, and Cosmology 83 , 083514 (2011). [18] M. Hindmarsh, J. Lizarraga, J. Urrestilla, D. Daverio, and M. Kunz, Scaling from gauge and scalar radiation in Abelian Higgs string networks, Phys. Rev. D 96 , 023525 (2017), arXiv:1703.06696 [astro-ph.CO]. [19] T. W. B. Kibble, Evolution of a system of cosmic strings, Nucl. Phys. B 252 , 227 (1985), [Erratum: Nucl.Phys.B 261, 750 (1985)]. [20] T. Kibble and E. Copeland, Evolution of the small scale structure on cosmic strings, The Birth and Early Evolu-tion of Our Universe, Proceedings of Nobel Symposium 79 (1990). [21] D. Austin, E. J. Copeland, and T. W. B. Kibble, Evo-lution of cosmic string configurations, Phys. Rev. D 48 ,5594 (1993), arXiv:hep-ph/9307325. [22] C. J. A. P. Martins and E. P. S. Shellard, Quantita-tive string evolution, Phys. Rev. D 54 , 2535 (1996), arXiv:hep-ph/9602271. [23] C. J. A. P. Martins and E. P. S. Shellard, Extending the velocity dependent one scale string evolution model, Phys. Rev. D 65 , 043514 (2002), arXiv:hep-ph/0003298. [24] J. R. C. C. C. Correia and C. J. A. P. Martins, High res-olution calibration of the cosmic strings velocity depen-dent one-scale model, Phys. Rev. D 104 , 063511 (2021), arXiv:2108.07513 [astro-ph.CO]. [25] J. M. Quashnock and T. Piran, Effects of gravitational back reaction on small scale structure of cosmic strings, Phys. Rev. D 43 , R3785 (1991). [26] M. Sakellariadou, Gravitational waves emitted from in-finite strings, Phys. Rev. D 42 , 354 (1990), [Erratum: Phys.Rev.D 43, 4150 (1991)]. [27] M. Hindmarsh, Gravitational radiation from kinky infi-nite strings, Phys. Lett. B 251 , 28 (1990). [28] J. Polchinski and J. V. Rocha, Cosmic string structure at the gravitational radiation scale, Phys. Rev. D 75 ,123503 (2007), arXiv:gr-qc/0702055. [29] F. Dubath, J. Polchinski, and J. V. Rocha, Cosmic String Loops, Large and Small, Phys. Rev. D 77 , 123528 (2008), arXiv:0711.0994 [astro-ph]. [30] E. J. Copeland, J. Magueijo, and D. A. Steer, Cosmo-logical parameter dependence in local string theories of structure formation, Phys. Rev. D 61 , 063505 (2000), arXiv:astro-ph/9903174. [31] L. Pogosian and T. Vachaspati, Cosmic microwave back-ground anisotropy from wiggly strings, Phys. Rev. D 60 ,083504 (1999), arXiv:astro-ph/9903361. [32] P. G. Auclair, Impact of the small-scale structure on the Stochastic Background of Gravitational Waves from cosmic strings, JCAP 11 , 050, arXiv:2009.00334 [astro-ph.CO]. [33] R. P. Silva, L. Sousa, and I. Y. Rybak, Cosmic microwave background anisotropies generated by cosmic strings with small-scale structure, JCAP 07 , 016, arXiv:2303.07548 [astro-ph.CO]. [34] B. Allen and R. R. Caldwell, Small scale structure on a cosmic string network, Phys. Rev. D 43 , 3173 (1991). [35] B. Allen and R. Caldwell, Kinky structure on strings, Physical Review D 43 , R2457 (1991). [36] C. J. A. P. Martins, E. P. S. Shellard, and J. P. P. Vieira, Models for Small-Scale Structure on Cosmic Strings: Mathematical Formalism, Phys. Rev. D 90 ,043518 (2014), arXiv:1405.7722 [hep-ph]. [37] N. Aghanim et al. (Planck), Planck 2018 results. VI. Cosmological parameters, Astron. Astrophys. 641 , A6 (2020), [Erratum: Astron.Astrophys. 652, C4 (2021)], arXiv:1807.06209 [astro-ph.CO]. [38] B. Carter, Integrable equation of state for noisy cosmic string, Phys. Rev. D 41 , 3869 (1990). [39] B. Carter, Transonic elastic model for wiggly Goto-Nambu string, Phys. Rev. Lett. 74 , 3098 (1995), arXiv:hep-th/9411231. [40] J. P. P. Vieira, C. J. A. P. Martins, and E. P. S. Shellard, Models for small-scale structure on cosmic strings. II. Scaling and its stability, Phys. Rev. D

94 , 096005 (2016), [Erratum: Phys.Rev.D 94, 099907 (2016)], arXiv:1611.06103 [astro-ph.CO]. 15 

[41] A. R. R. Almeida and C. J. A. P. Martins, Scaling solu-tions of wiggly cosmic strings, Phys. Rev. D 104 , 043524 (2021), arXiv:2107.11653 [astro-ph.CO]. [42] A. Almeida and C. J. A. P. Martins, Scaling solu-tions of wiggly cosmic strings. II. Time-varying coarse-graining scale solutions, Phys. Rev. D 106 , 083525 (2022), arXiv:2210.09801 [astro-ph.CO]. [43] J. J. Blanco-Pillado, K. D. Olum, and B. Shlaer, Num-ber of cosmic string loops, Physical Review D 89 ,10.1103/physrevd.89.023512 (2014). [44] L. Sousa, P. P. Avelino, and G. S. F. Guedes, Full ana-lytical approximation to the stochastic gravitational wave background generated by cosmic string networks, Phys. Rev. D 101 , 103508 (2020), arXiv:2002.01079 [astro-ph.CO]. [45] S. A. Sanidas, R. A. Battye, and B. W. Stappers, Con-straints on cosmic string tension imposed by the limit on the stochastic gravitational wave background from the European Pulsar Timing Array, Phys. Rev. D 85 , 122003 (2012), arXiv:1201.2419 [astro-ph.CO]. [46] J. M. Quashnock and D. N. Spergel, Gravitational Self-interactions of Cosmic Strings, Phys. Rev. D 42 , 2505 (1990). [47] P. Casper and B. Allen, Gravitational radiation from re-alistic cosmic string loops, Phys. Rev. D 52 , 4337 (1995), arXiv:gr-qc/9505018. [48] J. J. Blanco-Pillado, K. D. Olum, and B. Shlaer, Cos-mic string loop shapes, Phys. Rev. D 92 , 063528 (2015), arXiv:1508.02693 [astro-ph.CO]. [49] M. Sakellariadou, Gravitational waves emitted from infi-nite strings, Phys. Rev. D 42 , 354 (1990). [50] J. M. Wachter, K. D. Olum, J. J. Blanco-Pillado, V. R. Gade, and K. Sivakumar, Numerical gravitational back-reaction on cosmic string loops from simulations, Phys. Rev. D 113 , 043521 (2026), arXiv:2411.10366 [gr-qc]. [51] E. J. Copeland and T. W. B. Kibble, Kinks and small-scale structure on cosmic strings, Phys. Rev. D 80 ,123523 (2009), arXiv:0909.1960 [astro-ph.CO]. [52] J. Polchinski and J. V. Rocha, Analytic study of small scale structure on cosmic strings, Phys. Rev. D 74 ,083504 (2006), arXiv:hep-ph/0606205.