Title: Diffusio-osmotic transport in nanochannels

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.02419v1

Published Time: Tue, 05 May 2026 01:50:24 GMT

Number of Pages: 35

Markdown Content:
# Diffusio-osmotic transport in nanochannels 

Lyd´ eric Bocquet 1, ∗

> 1

Laboratoire de Physique de l’Ecole Normale Sup´ erieure CNRS and ENS 24 rue Lhomond 75005 Paris (Dated: May 5, 2026) In this chapter, I will enter into the roots of entropically-driven transport with a focus on diffusio-osmotic transport in nanochannels. Diffusio-osmosis is a subtle surface transport, originating in entropic driving forces occuring within the diffuse layers at solid boundaries. Specifying diffusio-osmosis to nanochannels may first look like a marginal refinement, yet it reveals that osmotic drivings can arise in channels and membranes without the prerequisite of semi-permeability, so that diffusio-osmosis extends the domain of existence of entropically driven transport. Osmosis and diffusio-osmosis are two faces of the same phenomenon, naturally embedded in an Onsager framework and quantified by local and global force balances. This perspective clarifies why nanochannels are privileged arenas where diffusio-osmosis and its consequence do flourish. Throughout the chapter, I discuss a set of conceptually relevant examples to show how diffusio-osmosis “pops up” in various situations: as enhanced diffusion, mechano-sensitivity, rectified osmotic flows and, ultimately, as a lever for osmotic energy conversion from single nanopores to membrane modules approaching industrial reality. 

This chapter is part of the book Diffusiophore-sis and Diffusioosmosis: Theory, Experiment and Ap-plications , Editors Ankur Gupta, Guido Bolognesi, Soft Matter Series of the Royal Society of Chemistry (DOI:10.1039/9781837678136). 

CONTENTS 

I. Introduction to entropic forces 2A. General perspective 2B. A brief chronology 2II. The Onsager transport matrix 3III. Osmosis, with or without a membrane 4A. Back to basics: entropic forces 41. The membrane as an insurmountable energy barrier 42. A membrane with partial rejection of the solute 4B. Diffusio-osmosis and osmotic forces at solid interfaces 51. neutral solutes 62. charged solutes 63. Excess solute flux 74. Ion specific effects 8C. Various add-ons for diffusio-osmosis 81. Hydrodynamics slippage effects 82. Specifics of diffusio-osmosis in 0D nanopores 93. Simulations of diffusio-osmotic transport 10  

> ∗lyderic.bocquet@ens.fr

D. Coupling various sources of osmotic drivings and rejection mechanisms 10 1. Bare osmosis versus diffusio-osmosis 10 2. Combining various sources of rejection 11 E. Experimental observations of diffusio-osmosis 12 IV. A global force balance in osmotic transport across nanochannels 13 V. Local electrokinetic and osmotic transport in nanochannels: the capillary pore model 15 A. PNP+Stokes framework 15 B. Main steps of the derivation 16 C. Global transport 16 VI. Overlapping Double layers : mixed osmosis across nanochannels 17 A. The simplified PNP transport framework (without flow) 17 B. The capillary pore with uniform potential reduces to the PNP-S model 18 1. Transport and boundary conditions 18 2. Apparent osmotic pressure 19 C. Alternative routes 20 1. The integral relation 20 2. Apparent osmotic pressure from the Onsager symmetry 20 D. Osmotic ionic currents with thick layers 21 VII. Thin Double layers : diffusio-osmosis of electrolytes across nanochannels 21 A. Diffusio-osmotic transport, a quick recap and consequences 21 1. Solvent DO velocity and ion fluxes 21 2. Diffusio-osmotic ionic currents 21 B. Coupled transport in the thin layer regime 23 

> arXiv:2605.02419v1 [cond-mat.soft] 4 May 2026

21. 1D-PNP equations integrating the diffuse layer contribution 23 2. Non-convective contributions 23 3. Convective effects in the thin diffuse layer regime 24 4. Combining all elements... 24 VIII. Working cases: when diffusio-osmosis emerges in transport across nanochannels 24 A. Example 1: Enhanced diffusion in a nanochannel 24 1. Simple estimates 25 2. More insights into the inner transport 25 3. Beyond: consequences on the conductance 26 B. Example 2: Mechano-sensitive transport in nanochannels 27 1. Charge contrast as a source of mechano-sensitivity 27 2. The cherry on the cake: a huge diffusio-osmotic boost 28 C. Example 3: Beyond van ’t Hoff, osmotic diodes and its applications for desalination 28 D. Example 4: The diffusio-osmotic perspective for osmotic energy harvesting 30 1. Osmotic energy, a quick recap 30 2. Diffusio-osmosis as an alternative lever for osmotic energy harvesting 31 3. Scaling up nanofluidics 31 IX. Conclusions and perspectives 32 Acknowledgements 33 Appendix: Reminder on Poisson-Boltzmann (PB) solution 33 References 33   

> I. INTRODUCTION TO ENTROPIC FORCES A. General perspective

Diffusio-osmosis refers to the flow of a liquid on a solid boundary, induced by the gradient of a solute along the interface. This concept broadens the tradi-tional idea of osmosis by recognizing that entropic forces can also act within the interfacial layers at solid sur-face boundaries, and not only across semi-permeable membranes. From this perspective, the phenomenon of diffusio-osmosis might more appropriately be termed epi-osmosis , highlighting its interfacial roots. Now, is there any interest – as suggested by the title of this chapter – to specify the exploration of diffusio-osmosis to nanochannels . The terminlology “nanochan-nels” suggest a strong spatial confinement, but confine-ment is not a prerequisite to diffusio-osmosis, only in-terfaces. Actually, when confinement is very strong, the solute will be (partly or totally) rejected from the channel and lead to bare osmosis. Accordingly the very notion of diffusio-osmosis as a surface induced transport looses its meaning and it gets confused with bare osmosis. Using the description to be discussed below, the interpretation of diffusio-osmosis is crystal clear when the thickness of the interfacial layers is small compared to the confine-ment. But osmosis and diffusio-osmosis mechanisms be-come entangled for thick interfacial layers. But a “reverse” point of view reveals a most inter-esting aspect of diffusio-osmosis in nanochannels. In-deed, thanks to diffusio-osmotic transport, osmotic driv-ings can occur in channels and membranes without the prerequisite of semi-permeability ( i.e. when the solute is rejected from the channel), suggesting that osmotic transport can occur even in non-selective pores. There-fore surface-induced osmosis extends the conditions of applicability of standard osmosis to less constrained con-ditions. This is a considerable asset, and it has strong consequences on various applications, allowing revisiting concepts such as osmotic energy or desalination. 

Disclosure – This chapter is not a review of diffusio-osmosis in nanochannels. They are actually several good reviews about osmotic phenomena, with some emphasis on diffusio-osmosis: starting for example with the old but excellent review on diffusiophoresis by Anderson [1], the review by Marbach and myself on osmosis [2], the review by Shim [3], and of course the other chapters of this book. The litterature has been discussed exchaustively in these reviews, in particular the experimental one, and I will not repeat it here. This chapter is merely intended as an open discussion on osmotic forces and electrokinetic phenom-ena, emphasizing aspects that I find particularly insight-ful rather than aiming for completeness. I will delve into the underlying physical mechanisms governing diffusio-osmosis, their manifestation in nanoscale transport, and selected illustrative examples. On some aspects, I have chosen to examine the transport mechanisms and their couplings in great technical detail, clarifying how they can be described and modeled. Accordingly, I will dis-cuss the subtle difference between osmotic and diffusio-osmotic transport and its implication. Also, for the case of salt as a solute, I will explore in great details the two limits of thin and thick Debye layers. This approach aims to facilitate the analysis and interpretation of experimen-tal data and theoretical predictions while identifying the distinctive signatures of osmotic forces. Ultimately, I just want these notes to support readers who wish to engage deeply with this captivating topic. This will be the guiding thread of this chapter.  

> B. A brief chronology

The concept of diffusio-osmosis itself – as well as its reciprocal effect, the excess solute flux under flow – has been first introduced in a seminal paper of Derjaguin et al. in 1947 (re-published in english in [4]). The notion 3that solute (or temperature) gradients at interfaces can induce liquid motion closely parallels Marangoni flows, which arise along the interface between two phases due to gradients in surface tension [1, 5]. However, the Marangoni effect is expected to vanish on a solid surface as the viscosity of the solid phase diverges [1]. The key remark of Derjaguin et al. is then to point out the importance of the “ diffuseness of adsorption lay-ers ”. Quoting Derjaguin et al. , the diffuse nature of the interface implies“ that a considerable part of the adsorp-tion of the boundary layer is movable, similarly to the situation for a double layer of ions. Hence, it is natural to make a conclusion that kinetic phenomena must exist in the solutions of neutral molecules. ”Diffusio-osmosis is therefore rooted in the extended width of the interfacial structure close to solid surface. This structure is for example the electric double layer (EDL) for electrolytes on charged surfaces, or an adsorp-tion or depletion layer for neutral solute. As I will de-scribe below, an osmotic pressure gradient is built within the diffuse layer under a concentration gradient, leading to fluid flow along the surface. Strangely enough, the phenomenon has been quite ig-nored after Derjaguin et al. article and there was little interest in the concept of diffusio-osmosis at a surface. Interest rose again in the 1980’s in the context of col-loidal diffusiophoresis with the works of Prieve, Anderson among others, as quoted in [1]. It revided again in the 2000’s with the introduction of microfluidic tools, which allow an exquisite control of chemical gradients, see e.g. 

Abecassis et al. [6, 7] and Palacci et al. [8]. The emergence of nanofluidics since the 2010’s allowed further progress in the exploration of the diffusio-osmotic transport at nanoscales. The possibility of building in-dividual and well-controlled nanochannels allowed ex-ploring fundamentally the fluid transport properties un-der various driving, including chemical gradients [9, 10]. Nanoscale channels can be fabricated in various dimen-sions: from 0-D pores across 2D membranes, to 1-D 

nanotubes made of various materials (graphite, boron-nitride), to 2-D channels fabricated by van der Waals assembly [10]. Experiments have highlighted a whole cabinet of curiosities of transport phenomena, many of them involving diffusio-osmotic transport, e.g. the mea-surement of giant ionic currents under salinity gradients across boron-nitride nanotubes, single layer M oS 2, or 2D activated carbon channels [11–13]. Note however, there has been little direct experimental demonstration of diffusio-osmosis. One exception is the measurement of fluid flow in nanochannels ( ∼ 150nm) under the gradients of various solute species [14, 15].  

> II. THE ONSAGER TRANSPORT MATRIX

In full generality, let us consider the transport of an electrolyte and/or a neutral solute across a porous mate-rial (possibly constituted of a collection of nanochannels). In full generality, a linear relation can be written between thermodynamic forces and fluxes [16] and one can ac-cordingly relate the solvent flux Qw, excess solute flux 

Js − csol Qw and electric current Ie to the hydrodynamic pressure drop ∆ p, chemical potential drop ∆ μrmsol and the applied electric potential drop ∆ V , as a linear rela-tionship 

 Qw

Js − csol Qw

Ie

 = L ×

 −∆p

−∆μsol 

−∆V

 , (1) where the transport matrix is symetric and positive def-inite according to the Onsager principle [16]. The inter-pretation of each term of this matrix is reminded in Fig.1. The diagonal terms correspond to the standard hydrody-namic permeability, diffusion and electric conductance. The off-diagonal terms correspond to cross effects. 𝕃  =        

> Permeability
> Diffusion
> Electric
> conductance
> DO EO
> Streaming
> current
> DO
> current
> Excess fl ux
> under voltage drop
> Excess fl ux
> under pressure drop
> FIG. 1. : Transport Matrix. Explicit transport matrix L
> as introduced in Eq.(1), with explanation for each term and colors highlighting the Onsager symmetry. Diagonal terms are associated with permeability (characterizing solvent flux under a pressure drop), diffusion (characterizing solute flux under an applied solute gradient) and electrical conductance (characterizing ionic current under an applied electric field), respectively. The off-diagonal terms correspond to cross ef-fects, with similar mobilities from symmetric terms: diffusio-osmosis (DO) and excess flux under pressure drop; electro-osmosis and streaming currents; diffusio-osmotic currents and excess flux under voltage drop.

It is possible to extend this description to include ther-mal effect, in particular thermo-osmosis [17, 18]. The (combined) osmotic and diffusio-osmotic (DO) term of interest in this chapter appears in the term re-lating the flow Qw to the chemical gradient ∇μ. But due to the Onsager symmetry, they are also associated with the excess flux of solute under pressure drop. Following Kedem and Katchasky[19] (and in the ab-sence of electric drivings), it is usual to rewrite these equations in a more explicit form as 

Q = −Lhyd (∆ p − σk B T ∆csol ) , (2) 

Js = −LD P ∆csol + csol (1 − σ)Q, (3) where a small solute concentration is assumed. Here 

Lhyd is the hydrodynamic permeance across the porous material, LD = AD/L the solute permeance with D the diffusion coefficient of the solute ( L the thickness of the 4porous system, A the cross section) and σ is a rejection coefficient, P a solute permeability.   

> III. OSMOSIS, WITH OR WITHOUT A MEMBRANE A. Back to basics: entropic forces

Let us start digging into the physics principles of os-mosis. Osmosis has a long, sometimes heckled, history: this goes back to the observations of l’Abb´ e Nollet in 1748, to Dutrochet interpretation of endo- and exo- os-mosis in 1827, then Pfeffer well-controlled experiment in 1890, to the rationalization of the osmotic pressure by the celebrated van ’t Hoff equation in 1892; see for ex-ample the recent perspective by Manning and Kay [20], who also point to various misconceptions of the concept of osmosis in the literature. Osmosis is usually introduced by considering two vol-umes of a liquid, say water, with different solute con-centrations dissolved in it and separated by a semi-permeable membrane. Semi-permeable meaning that the membrane is permeable to water but not to the solute. The water being in thermal equilibrium across the mem-brane, its chemical potential should be equal in the two compartments. Since the solute concentrations differs, this cannot be realized for the same pressure and a dif-ference of pressure builds up between the two reservoirs. For dilute solutes, this reduces to the celebrated van ’t Hoff law [2]: ∆Π = kB T ∆csol . (4) with ∆ csol the solute concentration drop between reser-voirs. In the absence of a piston imposing the pressure difference, a flux of water Qw will cross the membrane to equilibrate the two solutions by diluting the reservoir with highest concentration. 

Qw = Lw(∆Π − ∆ph) (5) with Lw the hydrodynamic permeability of the semi-permeable membrane and ∆ ph a supplementary hydro-static pressure difference. The osmotic contribution to the flow is directed from the low to the high concentra-tion reservoir. For larger salt concentration, the ideal Van ’t Hoff law in Eq.(4) has to be modified to account for the activity of the salt. An osmotic correction factor is introduced as ∆Π = kB T Φ ∆ csol , the value of which is tabulated in the literature, cf. e.g. the work by Pitzer et al. [21, 22]. A first comment is that the resulting osmotic pressure is huge: a difference of solute concentration of 1 M yields an osmotic pressure of 50 bar, the pressure found at -500m below the level of the sea. A second comment is that the microscopic properties of the membrane disap-pear in the van ’t Hoff formula. This is somewhat coun-terintuitive as the membrane selectivity is at the core of the osmotic process.  

> 1. The membrane as an insurmountable energy barrier

This suggests actually an alternative perspective on the physical mechanisms of osmosis, highlighting the me-chanical origins of the van ’t Hoff law. The argument was actually presented by Debye in 1923 [23] (see Refs. [20] and [2] for further discussions), but largely forgotten. It goes as follows: Since the membrane details disappear in the final formula, one may replace the membrane by a external potential U(x) acting on the solute but not on the water molecules. Semi-permeability is ensured by assuming that the energy barrier is large compared to 

kB T . This simplistic model obviously forgets about any interaction heterogeneities inside the pores, as well as the pore structure itself. It has mainly an educational value. Since the maximum energy is large compared to kB T

the solute does not cross the barrier and one considers the solute concentration in both reservoirs cR/L indepen-dently. At equilibrium, the solute profile takes an equi-librium Boltzmann expression on each (right R or left L)side of the membrane : 

cR/L = c∞ 

> R/L

exp[ − U(x)/k B T ]. (6) The salt concentration difference between the two reser-voirs is defined as ∆ csol = c∞ 

> R

− c∞ 

> L

.Now the force acting on the global fluid reduces to the force acting on the solute, and we obtain (for an area A

of the membrane) 

FR/L = X

> solute

(−∂x U) = A

Z ∞

> 0

cR/L (x)( −∂x U)d x (7) where the sum runs on the solute molecules in the left or right reservoir. Now using the Boltzmann expression for 

cR/L (x), one gets that cR/L (x)( −∂x U) = kB T ∂ xcR/L (x). Accordingly the integral above leads immediately to the expression for the force due to the membrane and acting on the fluid as ∆Π ≡ FR − FL

A = kB T (c∞ 

> R

− c∞ 

> L

). (8) It reduces to the van’t Hoff expression for the osmotic pressure. One therefore learns from this simplistic description that the osmotic pressure is essentially the force ex-erted by the membrane to prevent the solute from passing through it . 

> 2. A membrane with partial rejection of the solute

This description can be extended in many ways. But an immediate and illustrative extension is to consider partially permeable membranes. In the context of the energy barrier description, this accounts to assuming that the energy barrier U(x) is finite so that a finite solute flux crossing the membrane will occur [24, 25]. Let us 5assume that U(x) is non-zero only over a finite width [−L/ 2, L/ 2], with L the thickness of the membrane. In the presence of a finite energy barrier U(x), the concentration profile csol (x) will obey the Smoluchowski equation: 0 = ∂tcsol = − ∂xjs

= − ∂x (−D∂ xcsol + λc sol (−∂x U)) , (9) where D is the diffusion coefficient, λ = D/k B T the mo-bility. Note that for simplicity in this section, we do neglect convection in Eq. (9), This convective term is in most cases small for flows versus the diffusive term in nanoporous structures (small P´ eclet limit); convection effects will be discussed more extensively in the sections below. The Smoluchowski equation, Eq.(9), can then be easily solved to obtain the expression for the concentra-tion profile csol (x). Now the interactions between the solute and the bar-rier will induce a force on the fluid, hence a fluid flow. The fluid velocity vw obeys the Stokes equation 

η∇2vw − ∇ p + csol (−∂x U) = 0 , (10) The membrane acts on the fluid via a global force on the solute writing F = A R ∞−∞ csol (x)( −∂x U) d x. Along the same lines as above, this force can be integrated easily to identify with an apparent osmotic pressure now taking the form ∆Π app = FA = σO ∆Π (11) where ∆Π = kB T (c∞ 

> R

− c∞ 

> L

) is the van ’t Hoff expression, and the force now introduces a rejection (or Staverman) coefficient σO , which in the present description writes 

σO = 1 − 1

⟨exp[ β U]⟩ . (12) with ⟨exp[ β U]⟩ = 1

> L

R L/ 2 

> −L/ 2

dx ′ exp[+ β U(x′)]; β =1/k B T . This equation points immediately to the in-teresting limits of a perfectly semi-permeable membrane (large energy barrier), for which σO = 1, while a perfectly permeable membrane (vanishing energy barrier U = 0) yields σO = 0 resulting in no osmotic pressure. There is a intrinsic relationship between the rejection coefficient σO and the solute permeability P , defined as js = −D P ∆csol /L . Indeed integrating the flux, as introduced in Eq.(9), one obtains. js = − DL ∆csol + 

> DkBT
> 1
> L

R L/ 2 

> −L/ 2

dx c (− U). Since according to Eq.(11) the last term identifies to σ0kB T ∆csol , one deduces that the solute permeability is 

P = 1 − σO (13) In general, one may expect the solute permeability and the rejection to be dominated by the maximum energy barrier, so that P = 1 − σO ∼ exp[ −β Umax ]. To conclude on this description, we emphasize that this mechanical perspective is mainly pedagogical and serves as a simplistic illustration. But it contains a lot of physics insights on the osmotic phenomenon. The de-scription can be also easily extended to a broad variety of situations, in particular the effects of finite convection [24], large solute concentrations [25, 26], time-dependent energy barriers and resonant osmosis [27], and even non-linear response and osmotic diodes [28]. It also provides the basic physical picture for diffusio-osmotic transport, which we now discuss.  

> B. Diffusio-osmosis and osmotic forces at solid interfaces

This mechanical perspective allows capturing similarly the phenomenon of diffusio-osmosis and the physical mechanisms at its origin. We now consider a liquid-solid interface along which a gradient of a dissolved solute ex-ists, say ∇csol along the direction x. The solute is sup-posed to interact with the surface with some interaction, say U(z) as above, but now perpendicular to the gradient direction.     

> FIG. 2. Force balance on diffusio-osmosis. A gradient of solute concentration along a solid surface induces an osmotic pressure drop within the diffuse layer via the interaction with the solid surface. This induces a diffusio-osmotic water flow along the surface.

Let us start with a back-of-the-enveloppe calculation following the same lines as in the previous reasoning. Un-der the interaction with the solid, the solute is spread over a diffuse layer within the liquid, say of thickness 

λ (range of U(z)). The solid will accordingly exert a force on the solute fz = P

> solute

(−∂z U ) (per unit sur-face) on this diffuse layer, now in the z direction. Let us emphasize that this force is localized within the dif-fuse layer and no forces is exerted outside of the layer. Along the same arguments as above, this force will take the form of an osmotic pressure fz ∼ kB T c sol (x), which is transmitted as an isotropic pressure to the fluid, but only within the diffuse layer. The concentration gradi-ents yields therefore a pressure gradient on the liquid. The force balance between the osmotic pressure within the diffuse layer and the hydrodynamic friction on the solid surface, as sketched on Fig.2, thus writes 

η vDO 

λ × L ≈ − λ × kB T ∆csol (14) 6with vDO the fluid hydrodynamic velocity and ∆ csol =

cR − cL the difference of solute concentration over a dis-tance L ≫ λ and far from the solid boundary; ∆ csol =

L × ∇ csol . We deduce that the DO velocity should scale as 

vDO ≈ kB Tη λ2 × (−∇ csol ) (15) The lengthscale λ is the range of the solute-solid interac-tion, hence typically in the order of the molecular scale for the solute. I will come back on the sign of vDO below. Now, for an electrolyte, the diffuse layer identifies with the Debye layer and λ−2 = 8 πℓ B cs, with ℓB =

e2/4πϵk B T the Bjerrum length ( ϵ the dielectric con-stant), and one imposes a gradient of salt concentration 

cs. Note that the concentration of ions as a solute is 

csol = c+ + c− = 2 cs (accounting for both anion and cation contributions). Accordingly for electrolytes, 

vDO ≈ kB T

8πηℓ B

× 2 × (−∇ log cs) (16) where ( −∇ cs) is the salt concentration gradient. In this case, the diffusio-osmotic mobility for a charged solute takes the approximate expression 

DDO ≈ kB T

4πηℓ B

(17) 

DDO has the units and the order of magnitude of a molecular diffusion coefficient. Hence, one typically expects DDO ∼ 10 −9m2/s. Accordingly, a gradi-ent occuring over a length of 1 μm to fix ideas ( i.e. 

∇ log c∞ ∼ (μm) −1) generates a flow in the millimeter per second range. Let us now make the argument more precise. This reproduces the classical derivation as developed in [1, 2] and other chapters of this book.  

> 1. neutral solutes

The relaxation towards equilibrium within the nano-metric diffuse layer occurs very fast, typically over a timescale τλ ∼ λ2/D , with λ ∼ nm the width of the diffuse layer, so that τλ ∼ ns. Under an exter-nal potential U, the z-dependent profile of the solute (in the diffuse layer perpendicular to the surface) then quickly relaxes to a local Boltzmann equilibrium c(x, z ) = 

csol (x) exp[ − U(z)/k B T ], with csol (x) the solute concen-tration far from the surface. The force balance in the z direction writes 0 = −∂z p +

c(x, z )( −∂z U). Therefore, the force per unit surface act-ing on the solute/liquid due to the solid interface (over a semi-infinite space [ z, ∞]) rewrites in terms of a local and isotropic osmotic pressure 

fz (x) = 

Z ∞

> z

c(x, z ′)( −∂z U)d z′ = kB T [c(x, z ) − csol (x)] (18) Outside of the diffuse layer ( z → ∞ ), c(x, z ) ≃ csol (x)and the force density fz ≃ 0 as expected. The cor-responding hydrostatic pressure within the diffuse layer thus writes 

p = p∞ + kB T (c(x, z ) − csol (x)) . (19) The pressure gradient induces a shear flow along x

obeying Stokes equations 

η ∂2vx 

> ∂z 2

= ∇x (kB T [c(x, z ) − csol (x)]) = kB T ∇xcsol 



e−β U(z) − 1



(20) and the DO velocity is finally obtained as 

vDO = kB Tη λ2(−∇ xcsol ) (21) with “ λ2” defined as 

λ2 =

Z ∞

> 0

z [exp[ −β U] − 1] dz (22) Formally, “ λ2” is put under guillemet since its sign de-pends on the details of the solute interaction with the wall: λ2 is indeed positive for an attractive wall-solute interaction, but can reverse sign for repulsive walls. For example for a neutral polymer repelled from a surface via excluded volume effects, one expects λ2 ≃ − R2 

> g

< 0, with Rg the radius of gyration of the polymer [14]. Note finally that these results can be generalized at high salt concentration [25] 

v∞ = KDO (−∂xΠ[ csol (x)]) , (23) with Π( c) the general expression for the osmotic pressure beyond the ideal solution limit, and the diffusio-osmotic mobility KDO is now given as 

KDO = 1

η

Z ∞

> 0

dz ′ z′

 c(x, z ′)

csol (x) − 1



. (24) This emphasizes that the driving force is indeed the osmotic pressure.  

> 2. charged solutes

For charged solutes the derivation proceeds along the same lines [29]. The pressure profile follows from the local force balance as discussed above and yields an expression similar to Eq.(19) 

p(x, z ) = p∞ + 2 kB T c s(x) [cosh ψ(z) − 1] (25) with ψ(z) = eV (z)/k T the (dimensionless) electric poten-tial profile, obeying the Poisson-Boltzmann equation; see Appendix. Let us remind that here cs is the salt concen-tration, so that the total ion concentration is csol = 2 cs.7The velocity profile vx(z) stems from the pressure gra-dient ∇xp and writes 

η d2vx

dz 2 = 2 kB T [cosh ψ(z) − 1] × ∇ xcs (26) Since the osmotic pressure gradient is localized within the EDL layer only, this leads to plug like flow beyond the EDL with a DO velocity given by 

vDO = DDO (−∇ log cs) (27) where the mobility DDO now takes the general expression 

DDO = kB Tη

Z ∞

> 0

dz z [c(z) − 2cs] . (28) with c(z) = c+(z) + c−(z) the total ion concentration. As a side note it is interesting to compare this result to that for electro-osmotic mobility: 

μEO = 1

η

Z ∞

> 0

dz z n c(z) (29) with nc(z) = −e(c+(z) − c−(z)) the charge density, lead-ing to the Helmholtz-Smoluchowski expression μEO =

− ϵζ η , with ζ the zeta potential of the surface. Within the PB framework, the DO mobility re-lates to the electrostatic potential as c(z) − 2cs =2cs [cosh ψ(z) − 1]. The mobility then takes the expres-sion [1] 

DDO = kB T

2πηℓ B

× log 



cosh 2 ψ0

4



(30) with ψ0 = eV 0/k B T is the dimensionless surface poten-tial V0. It can be equivalently expressed in terms of the surface charge σ = −eΣ, since cosh 2 ψ0 

> 4

= (1 − γ2)−1,with γ = tanh ϕ0 

> 4

solution of γ2 + 2 ℓGC /λ D γ − 1 = 0; 

ℓGC = (2 πΣℓB )−1 is the Gouy-Chapmann length (see Appendix for the PB solutions). If ions have different diffusivities ( D+̸ = D−), a diffu-sional electric field induced by the difference of ion mo-bility builds up, with 

Ediff = kB Te βs∇ log cs (31) with βs = ( D+ −D−)/(D+ +D−). This a supplementary contribution to the diffusio-osmotic which writes 

Ddiff  

> DO

= μEO × kB Te βs, (32) with μEO = − ϵζ η and ζ the zeta potential of the sur-face. Note that in principle ζ = V0, but experimentally this identification is not always pertinent, due molecu-lar effects at the surface, for example variations of the dielectric profile or interfacial slippage effects . Typically log 

h

cosh 2 ψ0

> 4

i

∼ O(10 −1) for surface poten-tials in the range of a few kB T /e and the expression in Eq.(30) qualitative agrees with the rule-of-thumb result in Eq.(17). However, the full expression in Eq.(30) de-pends on the details of the EDL via the surface potential Ψ0 and zeta potential ζ. The DO mobility may thus de-pend on the salt concentration via the salt dependence of Ψ 0 and ζ. The mobility depends on the properties of the EDL and the surface charging mechanism ( e.g. 

fixed surface charge, fixed potential or charge regulation). Typically, the surface potential usually decays with salt concentration. For example for fixed surface charge and in the Debye-H¨ uckel regime, Ψ 0 ∼ 1/c 1/2 

> s

. Also, as re-ported by Kirby et al. [30], the zeta potential decays with concentration as ζ = −a1 log 10 c⋆ for a wide range of so-lute concentrations (here for symmetric electrolytes with a valence of one; c⋆ is the salt concentration expressed in M; typically a1 ∼ 20mV). The DO mobility is therefore expected to (slowly) decrease for high salt concentration.  

> 3. Excess solute flux

The calculation of the excess solute flux corresponds to the symmetric cross-effect in the Onsager matrix, Eq.(1): an excess solute flux under a pressure-driven flow. The symmetry of the Onsager matrix shows that this excess flux is proportional to the pressure-gradient with the same diffusio-osmotic mobility, i.e. 

Js − csol Q = A × DDO 

kB T (−∇ p) (33) where A is the cross section of the considered channel. This is easily derived. Let me consider a geometry of a channel confined between two independent but similar surfaces, and height much larger than the thickness of the diffuse layer. Under a pressure gradient, a flow is generated in the channel. Since there is an excess of solute (salt) in the diffuse layer, there is an overall excess solute flux as compared to the bulk one, i.e. a non-vanishing Js − csol Q. Note again that csol = 2 cs for a salt. The excess solute flux convected by flow takes the expression: 

Js − csol Q =

Z

dA (c − csol ) × vw (34) In the diffuse layer, the Poiseuille flow is approximated as 

vw(z) ≃ ˙γ0 z, with ˙ γ0 the shear rate at the surface and z

the coordinate perpendicular to the wall. For a Poiseuille flow in parallel slits with height h, ˙ γ0 = h 

> 2η

(−∇ p), so that 

Js − csol Q = A 1

η

Z ∞

> 0

dz z (c − csol ) × (−∇ p) (35) where the contributions of the two walls are added up. One recognizes the expression of DDO in Eq.(28), yield-ing Eq.(33). 8 

> 4. Ion specific effects

As a complementary remark, it is worth mentioning that the above approach for the DO transport of elec-trolytes is universal in the sense that it does not depend on the specifics of each ion specie. This is of course a crude approximation and ion specific effects are expected to emerge at interfaces. In a simple description, ion spe-cific effect can be accounted for by simply combining the results for neutral and charged species. Indeed, in addi-tion to the electrostatic potential, ions close in the diffuse layer will be associated with specific adsorption free en-ergies and profiles, say U±(z). This supplementary free energy may originate in various mechanisms, e.g. van der Waals attraction, steric effects, image charges, (ion volume dependent) solvation energy at the surface, etc. Such effects should be added in the Poisson-Boltzmann description, as done for example in Ref.[31], in the con-text of EK transport. The ion concentration profiles now obey 

c±(z) = csexp [ ∓ψ(z) − β U±(z)] (36) with ψ = eV /k B T the dimensionless electrostatic poten-tial, together with the Poisson equation ∆ψ = −4πℓ B (c+(z) − c−(z)) (37) hence constituting a modified PB equation. Note that spatial variations of the dielectric constant may be in-cluded as well. The DO mobility, defined in general in Eq.(28), will then be altered by the ion specificity. Such effects have been investigated for osmotic trans-port in classical and ab initio molecular dynamics in Ref. [15, 32]. They reveal the subtle influence of molecular effects on interfacially driven transport and in particular diffusio-osmosis.  

> C. Various add-ons for diffusio-osmosis

The formulation of diffusio-osmosis outlined in the pre-vious sections can be extended by incorporating various additional elements and refinements. I discuss some of them in the present sections, altough the list is non ex-haustive.  

> 1. Hydrodynamics slippage effects

The classical description of fluid flows at surface usu-ally assume no slip at the interface, so that the fluid ve-locity at the surface vanishes. This widely used boundary condition has however no fundamental basis and in gen-eral a finite slip velocity may occur at the solid surface [10, 33, 34]. This is accounted for by the partial slip boundary condition which writes 

b ∂v w

∂z (z = 0) = vw(z = 0) (38) The slip length b is defined in terms of the fluid-solid friction coefficient λf , as 

b = ηλf

(39) where η is the bulk fluid viscosity. While the slip length is merely a convenient quantity to quantify slippage, the friction coefficient λf is a well-defined physical quantity, expressing the friction force on the solid in terms of the slip velocity as Ff = −λf Avslip (A the contact area). It can be expressed in terms of the molecular dynamics at the surface in the form of a Green-Kubo relationship [33]: 

λf = 1

AkB T

Z ∞

> 0

dt ⟨Ff (t) · Ff (0) ⟩equ (40) with Ff the fluctuation microscopic force of the fluid acting on the solid surface. The average is quantified in a fluid at equilibrium. I refer to previous reviews [10, 33, 34] for more exhaustive discussions of the slip phenomenon and its origin. Hydrodynamic slippage has been observed on many surfaces, with larger slippage associated with more hy-drophobic materials. Typically the slip length on hy-drophobic materials is in the range of tens of nanome-ters: b ∼ 10 − 30nm. The slip length of water on pristine graphite is in the range of 10 nanometers. However, the water-carbon interface is very specific, with considerable slippage measured for water in carbon nanotubes with slip lengths in the range of hundreds of nanometer to microns, and increasing for smaller radii [10, 34]. This feature was accounted for by the occurence of quantum solid-liquid friction on graphitic surfaces [35]. It is obvious that hydrodynamic slippage, which occurs within the diffuse layer, does strongly affect the surface-induced transport phenomena. This can be immediately recognized in the force balance within the diffuse layer, in Eq.(14), between the osmotic pressure and hydrodynamic friction. Within the diffuse layer with width λ, the flow is now sheared over the length λ+b (instead of λ), reducing accordingly the viscous stress, so that 

η vDO 

λ + b × L ≈ − λ × kB T ∆csol (41) with vDO the DO velocity and ∆ csol = cR − cL the differ-ence of concentration over a distance L ≫ λ and far from the solid boundary. This shows that the DO mobility is enhanced by a factor b/λ as 

vDO = kB Tη λ2



1 + bλ



× (−∇ csol ) (42) As shown in 36, the enhancement factor b/λ ′ is rather calculated in terms of the length λ′ defined as 

λ′ =

R ∞ 

> 0

dz z (c(z) − csol )

R ∞ 

> 0

dz (c(z) − csol ) (43) 9As a rule of thumb, in the case of salt as a solute, the length λ′ reflects the structure of the electric dou-ble layer – see appendix for a reminder of the Poisson-Boltzmann description. Accordingly, one may verify that the length λ′ reduces to the Debye length λD for weakly charged surfaces ( ℓGC ≫ λD ) – this is the De-bye regime. For highly charged surfaces then ℓGC ≪ λD ,and the length λ′ ≈ ℓGC , the Gouy-Chapmann length. These lengths are accordingly in the nanometer (or even sub-nanometer) range, and the enhancement effect for diffusio-osmosis is therefore expected to be considerable. Altogether for salts, 

DDO = Dno −slip  

> DO

×



1 + bλ′



(44) This expectation has however to be tempered by the fact that the slip length is expected to decrease for charged surfaces, typically as a scaling law b ∝ Σ−α,with the exponent α close to unity, but depending on the molecular charge pattern [37, 38]. Still, carbon surfaces – either pristine or “activated” – were shown to exhibit large DO transport which can be explained by a combination of an electrified surface and slippage enhancement [13]. Note that the latter work developped a more detailed description of the ion dy-namics inside the EDL, involving the individual friction coefficient of the ions on the surface, following the the-ory developped in [39]. Such a refined description is in particular relevant for surface electrification associated with mobile (physisorbed) charges [39, 40]. Enhanced DO transport was also reported in Ref. [41], where slip-page effects were accounted for to explain a boost of the transport in nanochannel, see Sec. VIII.B. I finally quote the result on superhydrophobic (SH) surfaces, where slippage effect are massive due to the composite nature of the interface, made of liquid-solid and liquid-vapor contacts. The effective slip length, which results from the combination of no-slip on the solid surface and perfect slip on the vapour interfaces, typically behaves as beff ∼ a/ϕ s, with a the characteristic size of the solid tips and ϕs the solid fraction ( ϕs → 0 for SH surfaces) [42]. Slip length on SH surfaces can reach tens of microns! [43] Accordingly one may show [44] that DO transport is massively enhanced over SH surfaces, with a DO velocity under salinity gradient writing as 

vDO ≈ beff 

η × Γ × (−kB T ∇ log cs) (45) with Γ = R ∞ 

> 0

dz (c+ + c− − 2cs) the surface excess at the liquid-vapour interface. Counterintuitively the effect disappears for EO transport on such composite surface, demonstrating the subtlety of the underlying nanoscale transport on heterogeneous surfaces [44].  

> 2. Specifics of diffusio-osmosis in 0D nanopores

It is interesting to briefly comment on diffusio-osmosis across nanopores, i.e. orifices drilled in 2D membranes, say of vanishing or very small thickness as compared to its diameter. Such a situation is particularly relevant for example in the context of osmotic energy harvesting across 2D membranes, as reviewed in [45]. The situation, which we previously discussed in the review [2], is both simple and subtle. Subtle because the surface is not transla-tionally invariant and the simple force balance proposed above does not apply anymore. The geometry of the flow is complex and the corresponding calculation of the DO mobility is accordingly complex and requires advanced mathematical tools [46, 47]. It is however simple because the main qualitative effect of a vanishingly small thick-ness will be to approximate the concentration gradient as 

∇c ≈ ∆c/a , with a the pore radius. This is because the Stokes equation obeyed by the flow is laplacian by nature, and hence mainly determined by the smallest dimension of the pore on which the gradients are the largest, hence 

∇c ≈ ∆c/a . Accordingly, the DO water flux through an orifice will write as 

QDO = κDO (−kB T ∆ log csol ) (46) with κDO a 2D diffusio-osmotic mobility. Now the com-plexity of the flow leads to a complex behavior of the mobility κDO as a function of Debye length (and/or inter-action range for neutral solutes). This was investigated theoretically in Refs. [46, 47] using blate-spheroidal coor-dinates, showing that multiple scaling behaviors for the mobility κDO versus the size of the pore emerge, depend-ing on the conditions. In order to grasp the underlying mechanisms, let me consider the simplest situation where the range of the po-tential for the solute (neutral or charged) is larger than the pore size. Then the potential inside the nanopore is homogeneous, as well as the excess concentration in-side the pore, which can be approximated as cin ≈

csol × exp[ − Uin /k B T ], with Uin the homogeneous po-tential inside the pore, and csol the solute concentration far from the pore. Under a pressure drop ∆ p, the flow rate Qw across the nanopore obeys the so-called Samp-son law, as Qw = a3 

> 3η

(−∆p) [10], with a the pore radius. Accordingly the excess solute flux is calculated in this limit as 

Jsol − csol Qw ≃ csol (α − 1) × a3

3η (−∆p) (47) with α = exp[ − Uin /k B T ]. Using Onsager symmetry, one deduces that in this limit the DO mobility behaves as 

κDO ≈ csol (α − 1) × a3

3η (48) In general however, a wealth of scaling behaviors is ob-tained and they depart from this scaling behaviour. It 10 depends on the Debye length, the pore radius, the lo-cal surface charge at the mouth, etc. as summarized in Ref. [47]. To my knowledge, this behavior has not been exhaustively studied on the experimental side.  

> 3. Simulations of diffusio-osmotic transport

Molecular dynamics (MD) is a tool of choice to study interfacially driven transport, and in particular diffusio-osmotic flows in nanochannels. Indeed, as any EK ef-fects, DO transport originates in subtle couplings within the first few nanometers close to the surface so that the continuum approaches which are at the basis for the de-scription of DO – see above – may fail capturing some aspects of the transport. MD can then be instrumental to get insights into the molecular mechanisms at play for interfacial transport. For example, MD simulations have put forward the ef-fect of slippage on the DO mobility [36], or the effects of specific cation/anion adsorption free energies on various surfaces, e.g. on graphene versus hBN [32], etc. These various effects require to go beyond the continuum de-scription of diffusio-osmotic transport given above. One interesting example in this context is the study of DO of poly(ethylene)glycol polymers and ethanol in wa-ter mixtures at silica surfaces [15]. In both cases, experi-ments demonstrate a flow in the direction of low-to-high concentration. This is unexpected since in both cases, the solute species are expected to adsorb on silica and DO flow with attractive surfaces should be directed from the high-to-low concentrations (opposite to bare osmo-sis). MD simulations then showed that the sign reversal of DO results from a higher friction of solute molecules close to the surface, so that the molecules in the first layers are slower than the fluid velocity, contributing less to the surface transport. Hence, even in the presence of solute adsorption, the surface behaves similarly to a re-pulsive one. This dynamical contrast does alter the DO mobility, which can even change sign under the interfacial slow-down of the solute. This is an example among others for the influence of molecular effects on DO transport which can be ac-counted for by MD simulations. Recent works even went beyond classical MD to study DO within the framework of ab initio molecular dynamics of water and solutes on various 2D materials, such as graphene, hBN, and MoS 2[32, 48]. Among various results, they revealed ion specific adsorption on various surfaces. One difficulty with the direct simulation of diffusio-osmosis is that one should account for chemical gradients as a thermodynamic force, i.e. ∇μ with μ the chemical potential. Actually, first simulations of diffusio-osmosis rather investigated the excess solute flux under pressure drop [15, 36], which allows quantifying the DO mobility via Onsager symmetry. Alternatively, various mobilities were also calculated in equilibrium MD simulations us-ing Green-Kubo relationships [49]. For example, the DO terms appearing in the transport matrix in Eq.(1) can be written as 

L21 = L12 = V

kB T

Z ∞

> 0

⟨(Js − csol Qw)( t)Qw(0) ⟩ dt. 

(49) with Js(t) the fluctuating solute flux and Qw(t) the fluc-tuating water flux, and the average is obtained from equi-librium simulations; V is the volume of the system. However, non-equilibrium chemical drivings along sur-faces or across nanopore can be mimicked by applying a specific set of molecular forces to the solute and solvent [26, 50]. Different forces are applied to each solute and solvent molecules in the microscopic system, with a net zero force. The equivalent chemical potential is defined in terms of the individual forces [26]. This simulates an osmotically driven plug-flow inside a nanochannel.   

> D. Coupling various sources of osmotic drivings and rejection mechanisms
> 1. Bare osmosis versus diffusio-osmosis

The discussion above pointed out the various osmotic mechanisms: “classical” osmosis with a semi-permeable membrane; diffusio-osmosis in the presence of a solid in-terface. In a nanochannel with “large” thickness, much larger than the interfacial diffuse layer, diffusio-osmosis will be the dominant transport mechanism, while classi-cal osmosis will come into play when the thickness of the pore is small enough to induce rejection of the solute. For intermediate thickness, both phenomena may co-exist. Let us enter into the details of such a situation, which is discussed in Ref. [2, 25]. The question may ap-pear as quite academic, but it is illustrative of how the various osmotic transport modes couple. To simplify, I consider neutral solutes and explore the coupled osmosis and diffusio-osmosis within the interac-tion potential (mechanical) perspective. We consider ac-cordingly the fluid+solute transport across a nanochan-nel, with size L along x (spanning [ −L/ 2; L/ 2]), in which the solute is subjected to a potential taking the form 

U(x, z ) = U∞(x) + U0(x, z ), (50) where U(x, z ) is non zero only between −L/ 2 and L/ 2, 

U∞(x) describes the global energy barrier associated with the membrane, and U0(x, z ) describes the specific interaction with the membrane pore surface, and vanishes far from the pore surfaces. Under a global concentration difference in the reser-voirs, a complex density profile will be built inside the nanopore. Assuming that the relaxation in the diffuse layer (along the z direction) is fast, one may accordingly obtain the solute density profile csol (x, y ) in terms of the central density c∞(x) at the nanopore center, as 

μ[csol (x, z )] + U(x, z ) = μ[c∞(x)] + U∞(x) (51) 11 where μ[c] = kB T log[ c v 0] is the chemical potential of the solute specie ( v0 an irrelevant microscopic volume) and the potential U0(x, z ) = U(x, z ) − U∞(x) is assumed to be vanishingly small at the pore center. Following the same line as for the diffusio-osmotic description, the pressure profile in the z direction then writes 

p(x, z ) − Π[ csol (x, z )] = p∞ − Π[ c∞(x)] . (52) with Π = kB T c sol the osmotic pressure. To obtain this expression, one makes use of the Gibbs-Duhem re-lationship between pressure and chemical potential as 

csol (−∂z U) = csol (∂z μ) = ∂z Π[ csol ] [25]. Accordingly the previous equations remain valid beyond the low density solute discussed here. The Stokes equation for the velocity along x can then be written 

η∂ 2 

> z

vx = − ∂x(Π[ c∞(x)] − Π[ csol (x, z )]) − csol (x, z )( −∂x U0)

− csol (x, z )( −∂x U∞). (53) This can be formally separated into a bulk, osmotic, flow and a surface, diffusio-osmotic, contribution. The os-motic velocity profile vosm (z) is defined as 

η∂ 2 

> z

vosm = −c∞(x)( −∂x U∞), (54) while the interfacial (diffusio-osmotic) contribution 

vDO x = vx − vosm verifies the equation 

η∂ 2 

> z

vDO x = − ∂x(Π[ c∞(x)] − Π[ csol (x, z )]) − csol (x, z )( −∂x U0)

− (csol (x, z ) − c∞(x))( −∂x U∞), (55) As done above, we can calculate the corresponding aver-aged flux Qosm in terms of the permeability khyd of the pore as 

Qosm = khyd 

η σO

∆Π 

L . (56) with σO = 1 − L

R L/ 2 

> −L/ 2

dx exp[+ β U∞(x)] 

−1

the bare osmosis rejection coefficient. On the other hand, rewriting the interfacially-driven contribution leads to the DO contribution which, after some manipulations, takes the form (for z ≥ λ, with λ

the size of the diffuse layer) 

vDO x (x, z ≥ λ) = KDO (∂xΠ[ c∞(x)] − c∞(x)( −∂x U∞)) .

(57) where the DO mobility is defined here as 

KDO = 1

η

Z ∞

> 0

dz ′ z′

 csol (x, z ′)

c∞(x) − 1



. (58) The corresponding flux can then be calculated as 

QDO = 1

A L

Z

dA

Z L/ 2

> −L/ 2

dx δv x(z) = KDO (1 −σO )× ∆Π 

L .

(59) Now, adding the two contributions to the flux, Qosm 

and QDO , one gets the total flux as 

Qw = Qosm + QDO 

= khyd 

η σO

∆Π 

L + KDO (1 − σO ) × ∆Π 

L . (60) Defining a diffusio-osmotic reflection coefficient as σDO = 

> ηK DO
> khyd

we then rewrite Eq. (60) as 

Qw = Lhyd (σDO + σO − σDO σO ) ∆Π , (61) where, as before, the permeance is defined Lhyd =

khyd /(ηL ). The flow across the membrane still obeys a general Kedem–Kachalsky formula as in Eq. (2)-(3), with Π the general osmotic force, but with a reflection coefficient which now contains the coupled effects of osmosis and diffusio-osmosis: 

σ = σO + σDO − σO σDO , (62) hence defined in terms of the combination of “osmotic” and “diffusio-osmotic” reflection coefficients. The expres-sion for the global reflection coefficient has interesting limits to consider. For example, for completely semi-permeable with σO = 1, the diffusio-osmotic contribu-tion, which behaves as σDO (1 − σO ), vanishes. Similarly one also obtains σ = 1 when σDO = 1. The global effect of the combination of osmotic and diffusio-osmotic flow is however non-trivial in general, especially since σDO can have a negative sign – which occurs when the solutes is depleted at the confining walls. This calculation relies on simplifying assumptions. But it illustrates that osmotic and diffusio-osmotic transport will be in general intertwinned. For large nanochannels, no solute rejection is expected so that σO → 0 and only the diffusio-osmotic transport remains. But for smaller nanochannels, where solute rejection and surface inter-faction both apply, osmosis is de facto a mix from bare osmosis and diffusio-osmosis.  

> 2. Combining various sources of rejection

The above calculation is quite formal but it points to the possibility of combining the various mechanism lead-ing to osmotic drivings, using the point of view of rejec-tion coefficients. In general one may write ∆Π = σk B T ∆c (63) where the rejection coefficient σ is expected to be a complex combination of all phenomena impeding solute transport: steric, electrostatic, surface adsorption, hy-drodynamics, etc. These aspects have been discussed exhaustively in the literature, see [51, 52] to cite a few, where the rejection is discussed in terms of the details of the solute-pore interactions. For example, a simple steric 12 exclusion modelling of the solute of size rs in a pore of size a would suggest that the steric rejection coefficient writes as [51]: 

σst = 1 − (1 − ε)22 (64) with ε = rs/a the ratio of solute to pore radii. Aler-natively, in the presence of surface charge ( −eΣ), there is an electrostatic/Donnan contribution to the rejection coefficient, which we will find as, see Eq.(121) 

σDonnan (Du ) = 

h

1 − p1 + Du 2

i

. (65) with Du = Σ /c sh, the Dukhin number with a pore of size h; see section VI. While the various physical mechanism underlying the rejection coefficient σ listed above would require a full microscopic description, one may propose a simple com-bination. First, it is interesting to remark that the ef-fective rejection coefficient in Eq.(62) can be also under-stood in terms of the solute permeability coefficient P ,defined in terms of the solute flux across the nanochan-nel as js = −D × P × ∇ csol . We anticipate from the discussion below that the permeability is intimately con-nected to the rejection coefficient σ0 entering the osmotic expression – cf Eqs.(13) and (81) – via 

P ∝ 1 − σ0 (66) Under the simplifying assumption of the models de-scribed in Sec. III and below, the proportionality fac-tor is one (although this may not be a general rule [51]) and P = 1 − σ0; see Eq.(13). Now, since P is related to the diffusion of the solute across the nanochannel, one may envisage P as a probability for the solute to cross the channel. Then if various mechanisms affect the so-lute permeability independently, say phenomenon 1 ( e.g. 

steric exclusion, ...) with rejection σ1 and phenomenon 2 with rejection σ2, it is expected that the overal perme-ability will be the product of the indivual permeabilities, similar to probabilities for independent variables. Here one expects accordingly 

Ptot = P1 × P2 = (1 − σ1)(1 − σ2) (67) Now writing that Ptot = 1 − σtot , Eq.(67) thus implies that 

σtot = σ1 + σ2 − σ1 · σ2. (68) This result matches the one obtained above for the com-bination of osmotic and diffusio-osmotic flows in Eq.(62). This should be considered merely a rule of thumb to combine the various underlying rejection mechanisms. But in general, a full description including all the mech-anism at play is required to account for the solute and osmotic transport in the nanochannel.  

> E. Experimental observations of diffusio-osmosis

Diffusio-osmosis and its consequences, in particular in nanochannels, have been reported in a number of ex-periments. For example, ionic currents generated under diffusio-osmotic drivings have been measured in many different configurations [11, 53, 54], while in various stud-ies consequences of DO transport were highlighted, such as negative net osmotic flow [55], DO effects inside an ion concentration polarization layer [56], or its role in the emerging mechano-sensitive behavior in nanochan-nels with charge patterns [41]. However, there are very few direct measurements of DO, i.e. of a flow induced by a solute gradient. One such measurements is reported in [14, 15], in which DO transport along nanochannels is evidenced using fluores-cence measurements. The experiments, whose results are highlighted in Fig.3, studied the flow in nanochannels submitted to a difference of concentration of a solute – polymers, salts, mixtures – at the two ends. The height of the nanochannel is ∼ 150nm, so that the nanochannel is not semi-permeable: there is no bare osmotic pres-sure under the concentration gradient. The flow induced by the concentration gradient can only be explained by surface-driven diffusio-osmosis. Getting into the measurement, the DO flow is induced by a solute concentration difference at the two ends of the channel: cL at x = 0 and cR at x = L. The flow probed by a fluorescent dye with minute concentration (so that it does not influence DO velocity). The concen-tration profile of the dye, say cf , results from the balance between dye diffusion and DO-induced convection, which writes 

vDO 

∂c f

∂x = D ∂2cf

∂x 2 (69) (note that the surface-induced DO flow is merely plug-like across the section of the 150nm channel). Accord-ingly, cf thus take the characteristic shape 

cf (x) = cL + ( cRf − cLf ) × eP e DO xL − 1

eP e DO − 1 (70) where cR/L f are the dye concentration at the two ends of the channel (right and left) and the DO Peclet number is defined as Pe DO = vDO LD (71) which can be positive or negative depending on the di-rection of the DO velocity. As shown on Fig.3, experimental results for the dye concentration are perfectly reproduced by the prediction in Eq.(70). Furthermore the flow under a salt gradient is seen to be directed towards the lowest salt concentra-tion, as expected for DO flow, and in contrast to bare osmosis. These experiments have furthermore confirmed the linear dependence of the DO velocity in ∆ log cs for 13 cR − cL > 0 cR − cL < 0                 

> FIG. 3. Experimental demonstration of DO flow, from Ref. [14]: Nanochannels (height 163 nm, width w= 5 μm, and length L= 150 μm) bridge between two microchannels. in which solutions of different solute concentrationsfixing the so-lute gradient along nanochannels. (b),(c) Steady state fluores-cent probe intensity profiles along nanochannels for different solute (NaI) concentration gradient (b) The solute concentra-tion contrast obeys cR−cL>0 (1 and 30 mM), while in (c)
> cR−cL<0 (30 and 1 mM). Solid line (red): fit according to diffusion-convection equations (1); all profiles are seen to strongly depart from the linear diffusive-only theoretical pro-file. Adapted from Ref. [14] with permission from American Physical Society (APS), Copyright (2014).

salts as a solute. In contrast, for a neutral solute (PEG polymer), the DO velocity is proportional to ∆ csol , as 

vDO = KDO kB T (−∆csol )/L , and the flow is towards the highest concentration, hence reversed from the salt gra-dient case. This originates in the excluded volume of the polymer close to the surface, hence corresponding to a re-pulsive situation for which the DO mobility is negative, with KDO = −R2 

> g

/η with Rg the radius of gyration of the polymer. For more complex mixtures, e.g. ethanol in wa-ter, the transport was found to be reversed as compared to what a naive adsorbing prediction would suggest [15]. This originates in subtle dynamical effects of the solute close to the surface, as discussed earlier. We shall discuss further experimental consequences of diffusio-osmotic transport in Sec. VIII.  

> IV. A GLOBAL FORCE BALANCE IN OSMOTIC TRANSPORT ACROSS NANOCHANNELS

In this section, we dig further into the mechanical cou-plings between entropic forces and mechanical drivings. We derive a useful relationship, which connects the ap-parent osmotic pressure – defined as the “push” on the fluid under an (electro-) chemical gradient – and the so-lute flux. This takes the form of an integral expression, which we will use in various applications, see next sec-tions. We consider a nanochannel (or an assembly of), as-suming that the lateral dimensions of the nanopores are far smaller than their lengths, say L, and we accord-ingly simplifies the problem to that of a 1D geometry. A solute gradient is applied between the two sides of the nanochannel. Our goal is to show that an integral relation exists be-tween the apparent osmotic pressure across the channel and the solute flux js (per unit surface) across the chan-nel. ∆Π = kB T



∆csol + js × LD



(72) with ∆ csol the solute concentration difference. This equa-tion assumes a vanishing Peclet limit, P e = vw L/D ≪ 1. A corrected expression taking into account finite Peclet number effects will be also discussed. The derivation is quite similar in spirit for neutral and charged solutes. We will focus on neutral solutes to sim-plify the discussion, but the same results holds for ion transport, see Ref. [28]. The interaction of the solute with the pore, associated with its selectivity, is accounted for as a generic potential U(x) along the channel. At a global scale, the total water flux Q is expected to be proportional to the pressure drop 

Q = − A

L khyd × ∆[ p − Πapp ], (73) with khyd = Lhyd /A the hydrodynamic permeability of the channel, and ∆Π app the apparent osmotic pressure; 

A is the channel cross section. Typically khyd ≈ a2/η ,with a a length of order of the typical pore size (up to numerical prefactors) and η the fluid viscosity. At a local scale inside the nanochannel, the fluid velocity responds linearly to the local forces acting on the fluid, as high-lighted in the hydrodynamic (Stokes) equation, so that 

vw = khyd (−∇ p + csol (−∇ U)) , (74) with U the local potential acting on the solute. Here we propose a 1D approach and neglect the lateral struc-ture of the profiles across the nanochannel. For an elec-trolyte, the equivalent term would be the electric bulk force, nc(−∇ V ) with nc the charge density. The last term in Eq.(74) accounts for the force acting on the solute. Then, following the spirit of the mechan-ical approach for osmosis described in Sec. III.A, one 

defines the apparent osmotic pressure in terms of this force as: ∆Π app =

Z L

> 0

dx c sol (−∇ U) ≡ L × ⟨ csol (−∇ U)⟩ (75) An average over the nanochannel cross section is also made implicitly. Now, let us write the transport equation for the solute. We assume that it obeys the diffusion-convection equa-tion [33] in a 1D geometry, with the various quantities 14 averaged over the cross area. The solute flux writes as 

js = −D∇csol + μc sol (−∇ U) + μc sol vw, (76) with D the solute diffusion coefficient, μ = D/k B T the mobility and vw the averaged fluid velocity across the pore area. In a 1D geometry, mass conservation imposes that the flux Js is independent of x. The same applies for the mass flux, hence to the (averaged) velocity vw.

Peclet number: diffusion versus advection – Let us quantify the effect of advection on the solute transport. In Eq.(76), the relative effects of convection compared to diffusion is quantified by a P´ eclet number 

P e = vw L/D (77) Convection can be accordingly neglected for small P´ eclet number, P e = vw L/D ≪ 1. This condition does not ex-clude the existence of a flow, but this flow does not influ-ence the solute profile. Let’s put numbers. The velocity under a pressure drop ∆ Ptot (including or not the osmotic pressure) is vw = − a2 

> 8η
> ∆pL

for a tube of radius a, length 

L; η the viscosity of the fluid. I consider a nanochannel with radius below 10nm to fix ideas, say a = 2nm, and length L = 10 μm. Accordingly the velocity is found in the μm.s −1 range for a pressure drop ∆ Ptot = 1bar, and the Peclet number is P e ∼ 5.10 −2 hence small indeed. So nanofluidics is generally associated with small P´ eclet numbers. We note however that large Peclet can still arise in the presence of hydrodynamic slippage at the walls of the confining nanochannels since the permeability – hence the flow – is strongly increased by slippage. Such effects occur for example in carbon nanotubes or graphitic nanochannels [39, 57]. We come back below on this hypothesis, which can have important consequences on the transport, in particular the emer-gence of non-linear, mechano-sensitive effects [39, 57, 58]. 

Small Peclet regime: neglecting advection – Let us first consider the small P´ eclet limit and neglect the convec-tive contribution in Eq.(76). In the stationary state, the 1D flux is homogeneous in space and time, and 

js = −D∇csol + μc sol (−∇ U) = cst. This allows rewrit-ing the total force acting on the solute in terms of js and 

∇csol , as 

Z L

> 0

dx c sol (−∇ U) = Lμ js + Dμ

Z L

> 0

dx ∂ xcsol , (78) so that the apparent osmotic pressure in Eq. (75) now writes ∆Π app = kB T



∆csol + js × LD



, (79) where ∆ csol is the solute concentration difference. This integrated expression makes an explicit connec-tion between the osmotic pressure and the solute flux across the nanochannel. It has some interesting limiting regimes. For a semi-permeable membrane, the solute flux vanishes, js = 0, and the previous equation reduces to ∆Π app = kB T ∆csol , i.e. matches the van ’t Hoff expres-sion. For a fully permeable channel, js = −D ∆csol /L 

and the osmotic vanishes: ∆Π app = 0, as expected. In general the nanochannel is only partly permselective and ∆Π app takes a non-vanishing value depending on the so-lute flux . If one writes js = −P × D∆csol /L with P asolute permeability coefficient across the porous material, then ∆Π = σk B T ∆csol (80) with the reflection coefficient 

σ = 1 − P (81) as previously obtained. 

Regime of small but non-vanishing Peclet – 

This result extends to finite P´ eclet, although at the expense of some further approximation, and therefore a somewhat reduced generality. From the hydrodynamic equation, Eq.(74), one may still write 

vw = khyd ×



− ∆pL + ⟨csol (−∇ U)⟩



(82) and the averaged “membrane force” ⟨c (−∇ U)⟩ is now 

⟨csol (−∇ U)⟩ = 1

L

Z L

> 0

dx c sol (−∇ U) (83) = 1

L × kB T



∆csol + LD × js − LD ⟨csol vw⟩



where the second line follows from the diffusion-convection equation in Eq. (76); vw = Q/ A.Now, at finite Peclet, the right-hand side of Eq.(83) involves convective terms proportional to the fluid veloc-ity vw. In general, one should calculate explicitly the solute profile csol (x) in order to estimate this contribu-tion. However these terms essentially renormalize the fluid permeability. Indeed, following [24], one may write generally js = −D × P ∆csol  

> L

+ α v w, with P the diffusive permeability and α a transport coefficient gathering all convective contribtions to js (see for example the result for js in Eq.(122) in the thick diffuse layer regime). This term α v w renormalizes the global flux, and modifies ac-cordingly the permeabilty of the channel. Eq.(82) is then rewritten as 

vw = − ˜khyd 

L [∆ p − kB T (1 − P )∆ csol ] (84) with ˜khyd = khyd   

> 1+ khyd
> kB TD(⟨csol ⟩− α)

a renormalized perme-ability; P is the solute permeability. 

Apparent osmotic pressure – Altogether we conclude that the apparent osmotic pressure takes the expression ∆Π app = kB T



∆csol + jn.c.s × LD



, (85) 15 with jn.c.s = js − cin vw is the non-convective part of the solute flux; cin = ⟨csol ⟩ the average solute concentration inside the pore. The terminology of the “apparent” osmotic pressure points to the fact that ∆Π app will be the quantity mea-sured in an experiment where one measures the fluid flow under a solute/salinity gradient, according to Eq.(73). The “apparent” osmotic pressure is in general a com-bination of various contributions, osmotic, diffusio- and electro- osmotic, etc. which are difficult to disentangle. In the following sections, we will explicitly discuss these mixed contributions to osmosis. However what is mea-sured experimentally is their overall (mechanical) contri-bution to the fluid flow. Hence, as a “push” on the fluid under a solute gradient, it desserves the terminology of an osmotic force. We will illustrate several examples of the use of the integral relation in Eq. (85) in the sections below. It is particularly useful to obtain the osmotic pressure in com-plex geometries, as well in situations where non-linear osmotic transport occurs. Indeed one may note that the integral relationship does not assume linear transport. Hence it can be used to explore non-linear osmotic and diffusio-/electro-osmotic effects, as we will discuss in the context of the osmotic diode in Sec. VIII.  

> V. LOCAL ELECTROKINETIC AND OSMOTIC TRANSPORT IN NANOCHANNELS: THE CAPILLARY PORE MODEL

Let us focus on salts as a solute. Osmotic drivings – be it bare osmosis or DO – are part of a larger electrokinetic scheme, where transport occurs under the coupled driv-ings of mechanical (pressure) forces, electric forces and electro-chemical gradients. The profiles of the salt/solute concentration, pressure and electric potential are inti-mately coupled, often in a very non-linear way. The global transport output, as summarized in the ma-trix L in Eq.(1), thus results from the combination of all these transport mechanisms. These couplings offer a considerable wealth of behaviors, resulting in both linear and non-linear transport, hence making transport inside nanochannel inherently complex and rich. The case stud-ies in Sec. VIII will examplify a few examples.  

> A. PNP+Stokes framework

The usual starting point to describe the local transport in the nanochannel (or a collection of) is the Poisson-Nernst-Planck formalism, coupled to the Stokes equation, which, in the stationary state, writes as 

∇ · j± = 0 

j± = −D±



∇c± ± ekB T c±∇V



+ vwc± (86) 0 = −∇ p + η∆vw − e(c+ − c−)∇V (87) where for simplicity I assumed monovalent ions and 

D± = D (both hypothesis are easily relaxed). The time scale for the relaxation within the diffuse layer is in the range of λ2 

> D

/D ∼ns, so that the electric double layer can be usually assumed to relax to its (local) equilibrium. The transport equations thus reduce to the relaxation of the fields along the channels’ length. This description constitutes the core of the so-called capillary pore model, or Space-Charge Model, introduced by Osterle and his collaborators [59–61] and revisited recently in Ref. [62]. I recall here this description since it proves usefull to describe nanoscale transport, and in particular osmotic drivings. The description reduces to the linear relationship for the local fluxes, averaged over the cross-section of the channel, versus the local forces along the channel length, say x, in the form 

 ⟨vw⟩⟨js⟩ − cv ⟨vw⟩⟨ie⟩

 =

L11 L12 L13 

L21 L22 L23 

L31 L32 L33 

−∇ x[pv − Π[ cv ]] 

−∇ xμv

−∇ xϕv



(88) where pv is the local hydrodynamic pressure, Π[ cv ] = 

kB T c v the local osmotic pressure, μv = kB T log[ cv v0]the chemical potential, ϕv the axial potential along the channel length (defined below), and the fluxes are aver-aged over the cross-section of the channel. The index “v” stands for “virtual”, as I discuss below. Note that the introduction of the osmotic pressure in the driving force −∇ x[pv −Π[ cv ]] is merely a convention at this stage. For example, in the thin diffuse layer regime, the bare osmotic contribution is expected to cancel out in the fi-nal result for the water flux (keeping only the surface, diffusio-osmotic, contribution). This framework introduces the local matrix of trans-port, [ L], where each term Lij should be calculated on the basis of the PNP+Stokes equations. Complete ex-pressions for the Lij can be found in [60, 62] in terms of integrals of the PB electrostatic potential. For illustra-tion in this chapter, I will only mention the expression for the osmotic cross term, L12 = L21 which, in a circular pore geometry, takes the expression 

L21 = L12 = kB Tη cv

Z R

> 0

dr r 



1 −

 rR

2

cosh ψ(r)(89) where ψ(r) is the dimensionless PB electrostatic poten-tial. Expressions for the other terms can be quite cum-bersome. In the following sections, I will discuss in details the two limiting regimes of thick and thin Debye layers, where explicit expression can be obtained for all terms of the [ L] transport matrix. But let me first dig further into the capillary pore for-malism. 16  

> B. Main steps of the derivation

The derivation of these results is interesting per se and let me give the main lines of the derivation of such results. This followis the presentation in Ref.[62]. I will use the cylindrical pore geometry as in [62], but the analysis can be easily extended to any other. The underlying idea is to separate the variations along the channel length ( x) and in the radial direction ( r). Similarly to Eq.(50), this is done by separating the elec-tric potential as 

V (x, r ) = ϕv (x) + ˜ψ(x, r ) (90) where, as explained in Refs. [60, 62], the radial poten-tial ˜ψ(x, r ) is obtained from an equilibrium PB model, and ϕv (x) accounts for axial gradients in potential along the length of the pore. For convenience I introduce the dimensionless radial potential ψ = e ˜ψkB T .A key difficulty is that in full generality, the poten-tial in the middle of the nanochannel does not vanish, and there is partial or total overlap of the electric dou-ble layers. Accordingly there is no “bulk region” in the channel far from the boundaries, in particular for the concentration. To circumvent this difficulty, the trick is to introduce a virtual reservoir which is in equilibrium with any slice in the pore [62]. In particular the lat-eral Boltzmann distribution for the ion concentrations verifies c±(x, r ) = cv (x)exp[ ∓ψ(x, r )] and the Poisson-Boltzmann equation writes ∆ψ = 8 πℓ B cv (x) sinh ψ(x, r ). (91) where ∆ is the Laplacian, which in the cylindrical nanopore takes the expression ∆ ψ ≡ 1

> r∂∂r



r ∂ψ (x,r )

> ∂r



.The local Debye length is defined as λD [cv (x)] =(8 πℓ B cv (x)) −1/2. At equilibrium, i.e. when all driv-ing forces are zero, the virtual concentration cv iden-tifies with that of the reservoir since in PB cv =

v−10 exp[ βμ res ] ≡ cres (v0 an irrelevant molecular volume). When driven out-of-equilibrium, for example when the concentrations in the two reservoirs differ, a profile of virtual concentration builds up. Similar considerations apply for the pressure profile. Due to the conditions of local equilibrium in the cross section of the channel, the hydrostatic pressure can be written as 

p(x, r ) = pv (x) + 2 kB T c v (x)(cosh ψ − 1) , (92) where the term pv (x) only depends on x and is coined the virtual pressure. This is exactly the same conclusion as for Eq.(19). The salt flux js(x, t ) = j+(x, r ) + j−(x, r ) and current density ie = j+(x, r ) − j−(x, r ) along x are found to re-duce to simple expressions in terms of the perpendicular electrostatic field [62]: 

js(x, r ) = 2 cv cosh ψ(r) ux(r) − DkB T 2cv cosh ψ(r) ∂μ v 

> ∂x

(x)+ eD kB T 2cv sinh ψ(r) ∂ϕ v 

> ∂x

(x), (93) 

ie(x, r ) = −2cv sinh ψ(r) ux(r) + DkB T 2cv sinh ψ(r) ∂μ v 

> ∂x

(x)

− eD kB T 2cv cosh ψ(r) ∂ϕ v 

> ∂x

(x). (94) On the other hand, the velocity field vx(r) is obtained in terms of the force fields −∇ x[pv − Π[ cv ]], −∇ xμv ,

−∇ xϕv by integrating the Stokes equation across the dif-fuse layer, in a very similar way as developped in Sec. III. Here the Stokes equation is rewritten is a compact form as [62]: 

η ∆r vx(r) = − ∂[pv − Π[ cv ]] 

∂x + 2 cv cosh ψ(r) ∂μ v

∂x 

−2ec v sinh ψ(r) ∂ϕ v

∂x . (95) with ∆ r = 1

> r∂∂r

 r ∂∂r 

 the cylindrical Laplace operator. Once integrated, the averaged flux, current and flow are calculated in terms of the driving forces and one de-duces the expressions for the various terms Lij of the local transport matrix.  

> C. Global transport

Going from the local transport matrix in Eq.(88) to the global transport is by no mean an obvious journey. The local transport equations in Eq.(88) should be solved to-gether with proper boundary conditions at the nanochan-nels ends. Typically in the capillary pore model, one assumes that the potential at the nanochannels ends is that the virtual potential ϕv matches the potential in the reservoirs and the virtual pressure matches the hy-drostatic pressure in the reservoirs. Note however that alternative boundary conditions apply for “real” fields different from the “virtual” ones defined there: we refer in particular to the description of the thick layer regime introducing the Donnan potential in Sec. VI. The results of the model are exhaustive, since they embrace de facto all electro-kinetic transport phenom-ena: electro-osmosis, diffusio-osmosis, etc. But they are 

per se difficult to exploit. First the expressions for the transport coefficient are quite opaque and can only be calculated numerically in the last steps for some of the terms Lij . However analytical expressions for the Lij ’s can be obtained in the thin and thick layers regimes, see Sec. VI and VII. When linearized, the resolution of the local trans-port equation leads to a linear global relationship, as in-troduced in the transport matrix introduced in Eq.(1); see for example a solved example for the thick diffuse layer regime in Eq. (106). However, locally linear transport does not imply global linear transport and non-linear global transport can emerge; see e.g. Sec. 17 VIII.C&D. Non-linearities result usually from the cou-plings of the various electrolyte transport mechanisms: flushing, charge and concentration polarization, etc. For example, inhomogeneous surface charge patterns on the surface of the nanochannel are know to yield ionic diodes of the Schokley type [63], and even “osmotic diodes” as predicted in [28] and measured recently in compos-ite membranes [64]. Similarly mechano-sensitive effects in the form of pressure dependent transport properties were measured in nanochannels [39, 58]. The latter are usually observed in the presence of hydrodynamic slip-page on the nanocapillary surface, leading to high Peclet number (strong flush) and associated consequences. As a final comment, we mention that the capillary pore model has been thoroughly compared to experimental data in the work by Westermann-Clark and Anderson [61]. The authors used track-etched mica membranes whose pores were uniform capillaries in the range 34-265˚ A radius (and long pore lengths greater than 7 μm ). They compared successfully their measurement of the various electrokinetic transport to the prediction of the capillary pore model, hence validating its foundations.  

> VI. OVERLAPPING DOUBLE LAYERS : MIXED OSMOSIS ACROSS NANOCHANNELS

The regime of thick diffuse layers corresponds to the situation where the diffuse layers over each surface over-lap, i.e. the pore size is smaller than (twice) the Debye length. This limit is experimentally relevant for small nanochannels (and/or small salt concentrations) and it provides a relevant guide into the understanding of com-plex experimental results. It is also an interesting regime where one can perform calculations explicitly, therefore allowing us to dig into the subtle couplings between the various EK phenomena, and in particular the emergence of entropic forces. In particular, it allows calculating analytically the global fluxes – as summarized in the global transport matrix in Eq.(1) – starting from the local relationships – as introduced for example in the capillary pore model in Eq.(88).  

> A. The simplified PNP transport framework (without flow)

We first discuss a simplified (but useful) approach of transport in nanochannel illustrating how the coupled transport emerge [33]. This is the opportunity to intro-duce the Donnan potential, a key quantity for ion equilib-rium and transport across nanochannels. The calculation illustrates the basic phenomena at the origin of the cou-pling between the various electrokinetic transport and I will thus enter the calculations with some details in the next paragraphs. Also, as a first discussion and for the sake of simplicity, I will focus here on {electric + chemical } drivings, in a strongly confined 1D nanochannel, omitting for now the mechanical drivings (and convection), which we will dis-cuss in the next section. The channel has a slit shape with height h, width w and length L. In the strongly confined nanochannel, we will further neglect the variations of the ionic profiles in the transverse direction (perpendicular to the channel length) and thus reduce a 1D geometry. 

Equilibrium – In a charged nanochannel, an electric potential profile builds up at equilibrium due to the con-dition of electroneutrality, which imposes that the posi-tive and negative ion concentration in the nanochannel should differ by the surface charge contribution: 

c+ − c− = 2Σ 

h (96) for a negative surface charge density −eΣ on the walls. Accordingly, a potential builds up inside the channel at equilibrium, obeying that the ion chemical potentials equal that of the reservoir: 

μ± = kB T log c± ± eV D = kB T log cs, (97) with VD the Donnan potential and cs the salt concentra-tion in the reservoir ( cs = cres + = cres  

> −

). The ion concen-trations inside the channel thus obey the two equations: 

c+ × c− = c2

> s

, and c+ − c− = 2Σ  

> h

. Hence 

c±[cs] = cs

hp 1 + Du 2 ± Du 

i

(98) 

VD [cs] = − kB Te log 

hp 1 + Du 2 + Du 

i

(99) with the Dukhin number defined as 

Du = Σ

csh (100) 

Transport equations – Let us now impose a different salt concentration ∆ cs and electric potential ∆ V in the reservoirs between the two ends of the nanochannel. In line with the equilibrium calculation above, there is a Donnan discontinuity of the electrostatic potential and salt concentration when entering the pore from both sides, due to the surface charge Σ on the pore walls. Salt concentration and potential drops occur at the en-trance and exit of nanochannel, Eqs.(98)-(99) for the cor-responding salt concentration and voltage at the bound-aries. In 1D, the transport equations reduce to 

∂xj± = 0 where the ion fluxes take the expressions 

j± = −D±



∂xc± ± ekB T c±(−∂xV )



(101) This is complemented by the assumption of local elec-troneutrality, c+ − c− = 2Σ /h .18 Let’s introduce the ion flux and current densities (per unit surface), js = Js/A = ( j+ + j−) and ie = Ie/e A =(j+ − j−). One obtains 

js = −D∂ xc + DkB T

2Σ 

h e (−∂xV ) (102) 

ie = DkB T c e (−∂xV ) (103) where c = c+ + c− is the total (local) ion concentration; for simplicity we assumed D+ = D− = D.Conservation of ions imposes that both the flux js and the current ie are spatially homogeneous over the channel length. To first order in ∆ cs and ∆ V , the concentration and electric potential profiles are linear inside the chan-nel, so that ∂xc ≃ [∆ c]in /L and ∂xV = [∆ V ]in /L , defined in terms of the field difference between the two ends in-side the nanochannel. A simple calculation yields [∆ c]in = 1

√1 + Du 2 2∆ cs, (104) and [∆ V ]in = ∆ V + kB TeDu 

√1 + Du 2

∆cs

cs

. (105) Inserting in the flux equations, Eqs.(102)-(103), one gets finally global transport matrix as 

Ie

Js



= A

L

 K μK

μK μeff 



×

 −∆V

−kB T ∆ [log cs]



(106) with A the cross section of the channel ( Ie and Js the integrated current and ion flux). The expressions for the coefficients of the transport matrix are given as 

K = 2 μe 2cs

p1 + Du 2,μeff = 2 μc s

p1 + Du 2,μK = 2 eμ c s × Du (107) Note that due to Onsager (time-reversal) symmetry, the non-diagonal coefficients of the matrix are equal. This result highlights how the Donnan potential modifies the transport inside the nanochannel, with Du dependent transport accounting for the surface charge. Some inter-esting outcomes already emerge: for example, it predicts that the diffusion permeability is P =

p

1 + Du 2 – with a counter-ion increased transport and a co-ion hindered transport –; it also predicts that an electric current is induced under the chemical gradient, with 

Iosm  

> e

= A

L eD 2Σ 

h ∆ [log cs] (108) This is the signature of an osmotic ion current and we will come back extensively on this effect below, see Sec. VIII.D.   

> B. The capillary pore with uniform potential reduces to the PNP-S model
> 1. Transport and boundary conditions

In the limit of overlapping EDL, the equations for the capillary pore reduce to simple and transparent ex-pressions which identify with the Poisson-Nernst-Planck-Stokes (PNP-S) equations in Eq.(76) supplemented by a local electroneutrality assumption [62]: 

vw = R2

8η



−∂xph + 2eΣ

R (−∂xV )



, (109) 

js = −D∂ xc + DkB T e 2Σ 

R (−∂xV ) + c × vw, (110) 

ie = e DkB T c × (−∂xV ) + 2Σ 

R × vw, (111) where vw is the averaged flow velocity along the chan-nel, js = Js/A the total ion flux (per unit surface) and 

ie = Ie/(eA) the ionic current density (per unit surface); 

σ = −eΣ is the surface charge on the channel. For sim-plicity I assumed Σ to be homogeneous and discarded a ∂Σ/∂x term. In these equations, c = c+ + c− is the total ion concentration. In line with the capillary pore model discussed above, the geometry is assumed here to be that of a cylindrical nanopore. But the calculations can be easily extended to any pore geometry. A no-slip boundary condition is assumed here, a condi-tion that can be relaxed by introducing a finite slip length on the channel surface, enhancing the permeability by a prefactor 1 + 4vR (of a cylindrical geometry). Such finite slippage effect have been observed in carbon nanotubes [57, 65] and 2D slits and can lead to strong flushing effect under flow with important consequences on the overall electrokinetic response [39, 41, 58]. As a side note, Eq.(109) does not contain any explicit contribution from the osmotic pressure, i.e. a term pro-portionnal to ∂xΠ[ c], with Π[ c] = kB T c . This absence is a priori expected from a direct analysis of the Stokes equation for the water transport. But this is in fact by no means obvious when starting from Eqs.(95). It can however be verified that this (osmotic) term indeed can-cels out from the velocity equation in the thick EDL limit [62], and the flow velocity reduces to Eq.(109). However, as we discuss extensively below, in spite of this absence in the local transport equation (109), there is an overall osmotic pressure which builds across the channel, associ-ated with the behavior at the boundaries of the channel. A further remark is that ions can interact with the confinement via other mechanisms than the electrostatic interactions under scrutiny here (say, dielectric, steric, etc., see section III.D.2). Such supplementary mecha-nisms may contribute to the transport equation via local interactions, leading to specific osmotic terms, so that an osmotic contribution may in fine appear in Eq.(109, associated with the corresponding rejection mechanism. 19 At the boundary of the channels, one has to write the Donnan equilibrium relating the various parameters (concentration, etc.) inside the channel to their values in the reservoirs. As discussed in the previous section, the Donnan conditions write for the total ion concentration 

c = c+ + c− and potential V as 

cin =

q  2Σ 

> R

2 + c2ext = 2 cs

√1 + Du 2 , (112) 

Vin − Vext = − kB Te log √1 + Du 2 + Du  (113) with cs the salt concentration. We further add a condi-tion for the hydrostatic pressure ph,

phin = ph 

> ext

+ kB T (cin − cext ) , (114) Here the subscript “in” refers to a position just within the membrane, and “ext” a position just outside the mem-brane, in the (left or right) reservoir; cext = [ c+ +c−]ext =2cs is the total ion concentration in the reservoirs. These conditions account for the discontinuity in the various fields (in reality a quick transition) which occurs at the nanochannel entrance due to the presence of the surface charge inside the nanochannel. These equations natu-rally introduce the Dukhin number [33], which we define here as 

Du = Σ

R c s

(115) It is interesting to dig somewhat into the condition for the hydrostatic pressure in Eq.(114). Extending on the idea of a local equilibrium, this condition stems from the force balance at the entrance: the difference of electric potential at the interface associated with the Donnan po-tential should be compensated by a pressure and/or salt concentration difference. To obtain it, one may integrate the Navier-Stokes equation along x across a discontinuity at the channel’s entrance (say at x = 0) to obtain that 0 = 

Z 0+

> 0−

dx −∂xph + nc(−∂xV ) (116) where nc = e(n+ − n−) is the local charge density. The other terms in the equation vanishes because of equilib-rium. Similarly integrating the total ion flux, which is also vanishing at equilibrium, leads to 0 = 

Z 0+

> 0−

dx 



−D∂ xc + DkB T × nc(−∂xV )



(117) The second equation shows that the electric driv-ing associated with the interface electric field is compensated by the concentration difference: 

R 0+ 

> 0−

dx 

h DkB T × nc(−∂xV )

i

= kB T (cin − cext ). This result directly echoes the global force balance discussed in Sec. IV. Gathering the results, we thus deduce the boundary condition for the pressure difference as 

phin − phext = kB T (cin − cext ), as written in Eq.(114).  

> 2. Apparent osmotic pressure

Let us focus on a situation where a salt concentra-tion difference is applied across the channel, i.e. cR 

> ext

=

cs + ∆ cs, cL 

> ext

= cs (R and L stands for the right and left reservoirs). The concentration gradient in the reser-voirs yields a concentration difference inside the channel, but also an electric potential difference and a hydrostatic pressure difference, according to Eqs.(112-114). Furthermore, for small driving forces, the inner profiles for the concentration, pressure and electric potential will be essentially linear functions of position. Accordingly, in the capillary pore or PNP-S equations in Eqs.(109-111), the fluxes and corresponding gradients are defined in terms of the quantities calculated at the extremeties, but inside the channel: 

∂xc = [ cRin − cLin ]/L, ∂xph = kB T (cRin − cR

> ext

) − (cLin − cR

> ext

) /L, ∂xV = [ V Rin − V Lin ]/L, (118) with L the length of the channel; cR/L in corresponds to the total ion concentration in the reservoirs. Remind that these are twice the corresponding salt concentration 

cR/L s .As a consequence of Eq.(109), the difference of con-centration in the reservoirs leads to both an osmotic flow gradient and an electro-osmotic flow under the induced (Donnan) electric field. Gathering results for the inner gradients, one thus deduces the expression for the aver-age (osmotic) flow velocity as 

vw = R2

8η × 2

h

1 − p1 + Du 2

i

kB T ∆cs (119) with ∆ cs = cR 

> ext

− cL 

> ext

defined in terms of the (reference) salt concentration in the reservoirs. Defining the apparent osmotic pressure from Qw =

πR 2vw = Lw∆Π app , with Lw = πR 4/8η, one deduces the apparent osmotic pressure ∆Π app , as ∆Π app = 2 

h

1 − p1 + Du 2

i

kB T ∆cs (120) The apparent pressure ∆Π app is of entropic origin, as highlighted by the kB T prefactor. But in a very coun-terintuitive way, it is predicted to be of opposite sign as the standard van ’t Hoff prediction ! For example, for ∆c = cR 

> ext

−cL 

> ext

> 0, water will flow in the negative direc-tion, i.e. towards the smallest salt concentration. This is reverse to the standard expectation for the osmotic pressure, but similar to diffusio-osmotic flows with salts. This behavior thus highlights that the apparent osmotic pressure originates in the surface contribution (even in the present thick diffuse layer regime). It is therefore at-tributed to diffusio-osmosis, rather than rooted in bare osmosis. 20 Now, one can introduce the rejection (or Staverman) coefficient as Qw = Lw σ(Du ) × 2kB T ∆cs, so that 

σ(Du ) = 

h

1 − p1 + Du 2

i

. (121) It is therefore negative. Note however that this counter-intuitive negative rejection is not in contradiction with the second principle, and the overall entropy production is indeed positive, as discussed in [2]. As a general prop-erty, the L transport matrix in Eq.(88) is indeed definite positive as shown in [62]. We finally remind, in line with the discussion in Sec. III.D, that the global rejection coefficient is expected to involve contributions from various selectivity mecha-nisms, such as steric or dielectric rejection, acting on the transported salt across the nanochannel, see Eq.(68). Ac-cordingly the negative rejection coefficient is expected to be partly compensated by other contributions. On the experimental side, negative osmotic water flow has been for example reported in the experiments by Lokesh et al. [55], investigating water flows across func-tionalized carbon nanotubes (with ∼ 2.2nm diameter) under salinity gradients. Negative fluxes were observed at low salt concentation, consistent with the rejection co-efficient increasing (negatively) at low Dukhin number.   

> C. Alternative routes
> 1. The integral relation

As an alternative approach, we may consider the inte-gral approach from equation in Eq.(79), which expresses the apparent osmotic pressure in terms of the ionic flux 

js. In the present overlapping regime of the capillary pore model, the ionic flux js can be readily computed from from Eq.(110) and the Donnan expressions in Eqs.(112)-(113), to obtain 

js = − 2DL

p1 + Du 2



1 + αO × (p1 + Du 2 − 1) 



× ∆cs

(122) The first term is identical to the PNP result for μef f in Eq.(107), while the second term corresponds to the con-vective contribution to the flux under salinity gradients, introducing a dimensionless number αO

αO = 

> R2
> 8η

2kB T c s

D ∼ csR2σ (123) with σ the ion diameter defined from the Stokes-Einstein relationship D = kB T / 3πησ .This dimensionless number αO can be interepreted in terms of an osmotic Peclet number. The corresponding term in js is of osmotic origin and corresponds to the flush of concentration under an osmotically driven ve-locity. Interestingly the direction of the αO term in js

suggest a flush from the high to the low concentration, hence this convective contribution to the ion flux is rather interpreted in terms of a diffusio-osmotic contribution (in agreement with the negative rejection coefficient in this regime). Typically, for an electrolyte confined in a nanochannel, with salt concentrations in the range cs ∼ 10 −3 − 10 0 M, 

R = 1nm, σ ∼ 3˚ A, one obtains αO ∼ 10 −4 − 10 −1,so the convective term would remain small compared to the diffusion one. However that in the presence of hy-drodynamic surface slippage on the nanochannel walls (such as for carbon nanotubes), the permeability R2/8η

is increased by a term proportional to 1 + 4 b/R , with b

a slip length. Hence the corresponding Peclet number may then largely exceeds unity. Convection cannot be neglected in such cases. As discussed in Sec. IV, the apparent osmotic pressure can be deduced from the (non-convective) part of the ionic flux, see Eq.(85). This corresponds to the result in Eq.(122) in the absence of the term proportional to αO .Using ∆Π app = kB T  2∆ cs + jsn.c. × LD

, we deduce the same result as above, i.e. 

∆Π app = 2 

h

1 − p1 + Du 2

i

kB T ∆cs (124)  

> 2. Apparent osmotic pressure from the Onsager symmetry

From the previous calculation, we obtained that the water flow under a salt concentration gradient rewrites 

Qw = Lw × (−σ(Du )cs) × − 2kB T ∆log cs (125) with the negative of the “rejection” coefficient given by 

−σ(Du ) = √1 + Du 2 − 1 and cs is the bulk reservoir concentration. This result can also be infered from the symmetric transport phenomenon according to Onsager symmetry: the excess ion flux under an (hydrostatic) pressure drop. In the latter case, the concentration and electric poten-tial are accordingly homogeneous inside the channel, and their values related to their external values thanks for Donnan potential. The hydrostatic pressure drops in-duces a flow which will flush the inner concentration of the nanopore. Accordingly, the ion flux reduces to js = cin ×u = cin × 

> R2
> 8η

× −∆PL and the flux in excess to the bulk concentration contribution, jex writes 

jex = js − cext vw = ( cin − 2cs) × R2

8η × −∆PL (126) Using the value for the total salt concentration inside the nanochannels using the Donnan expression in Eq.(112), one therefore obtains cin − cext = 2 cs × √1 + Du 2 − 1

so that 

jex = Lw2cs ×

hp 1 + Du 2 − 1

i

× (−∆P ) (127) 21 Now, according to Onsager symmetry and Eq.(125), the excess flux is expected to write jex = Lw[−σ(Du )×2cs]×

(−∆P ), one recovers that σ(Du ) = 1 −√1 + Du 2, match-ing the previously obtained “osmotic” flow in Eq.(125).  

> D. Osmotic ionic currents with thick layers

We calculate here the ionic currents induced under a salt concentration gradient in the reservoirs. From the previous PNP-S/Capillary pore expression in Eq.(111), one has ie = j+ − j− = 2Σ  

> R

vw − e DkB T cin ×  ∂V ∂x 



> in

. Using the Donnan equilibrium expressions, Eqs.(112)-(113), we find that 

−e DkB T cin ×

 ∂V ∂x 



> in

= −eD × Du × (cR 

> ext

− cL

> ext

) (128) with cR 

> ext

− cL 

> ext

= 2∆ cs and Du = Σ 

> Rc s

defined in terms of the (reference) reservoir concentration. On the other hand, the convective contribution can be calculated using the previous result for the (diffusio-osmotic) fluid veloc-ity, in Eq.(119), vw = R2 

> 8η

× 1 − √1 + Du 2 2kB T ∆cs.Altogether 

ie = 2 DkB T × Du β (Du ) × cs

[−∆kB T log cs]

L (129) where β(Du ) = 1 + αO

 √1 + Du 2 − 1, with αO =  

> kBTDR2
> 8η

2cs introduced above; αO fixes the order of mag-nitude of an osmotic Peclet number, see above. The sec-ond term thus corrects the PNP results in Eq.(107) by the corresponding convective term.  

> VII. THIN DOUBLE LAYERS : DIFFUSIO-OSMOSIS OF ELECTROLYTES ACROSS NANOCHANNELS

The thin double layer regime corresponds to the sit-uation where the thickness of the diffuse layer, here the electric double layer (EDL) is smaller than the pore size, 

λ ≪ h. As reminded in the introduction, this is in some sense the canonical situation for diffusio-osmosis which is a surface driven phenomenon. The most interesting aspect is that diffusio-osmosis extends the very notion of entropically driven transport to non-selective channels, 

i.e. porous materials which are permeable for the solute (hence, not semi-permeable). We obtained the expressions for the DO velocity in the sections above, see in particular Sec. III, and we briefly recap the main results here. But beyond, I will write the various EK transport equations in the thin EDL limit, in the same spirit as for overlapping diffuse layers. This is essential at the global scale, where transport de facto 

combines the intertwinned effects of the various transport phenomena, diffusio-osmosis but also diffusion, electro-osmosis, flushing. We consider here a geometry of a slit of thickness h

but, up to geometrical factors, results apply equivalently to any other geometry.   

> A. Diffusio-osmotic transport, a quick recap and consequences
> 1. Solvent DO velocity and ion fluxes

Let us assume that there is a local concentration gradi-ent along the nanochannel, c0(x), with the concentration 

c0(x) defined in the middle of the channel cross section (see below). Since λ ≪ h, the flow identifies with that on a flat surface which was discussed in Sec. III. Tak-ing a distance z perpendicular to the pore surface, the DO velocity profile is obtained by integrating Eq.(26), yielding 

vx(z) = 2 kB Tη (−∇ xcs) ×

Z z

> 0

dz ′ z′ [cosh ψ(z′) − 1] (130) with cs defined here as the salt concentration far from the surface. A no-slip boundary condition is assumed here, but this hypothesis is easily relaxed. The water (or solvent) velocity profile is plug-like in the nanochannel, 

i.e. flat beyond the thin EDL, with value 

vDO = DDO (−∇ x log cs) (131) where the coefficient DDO is defined in Eq.(30) in terms of the surface potential; DDO has the dimension of a diffusion coefficient and typically DDO ≈ kB T 

> 4πηℓ B

. As em-phasized above, there is no need for semi-permeability to induce a water (solvent) flow under salinity gradient. The surface-induced diffusio-osmosis can induce such osmotic drivings. For charged solutes, the sign of the transport is however reversed as compared to the bare osmosis: the solvent flows from the high to the low salt concentration. Finally, and as pointed out above, the symmetry of the Onsager matrix further suggests that the same mecha-nisms, hence the same mobility, leads to the emergence of an excess flux generated under a pressure gradient with : 

Js − c∞Q = A × DDO 

kB T (−∇ p) (132) with c∞ = 2 cs, similarly to Eq.(33).  

> 2. Diffusio-osmotic ionic currents

An interesting consequence of diffusio-osmosis is the emergence of diffusio-osmotic ionic currents induced by a gradient of salt concentration. Again, current in-duced by salinty gradients is usually expected for selec-tive nanochannels/membranes, such as cation- or anion-exchange membranes (CEM/AEM). However, diffusio-osmotic mechanisms allay this selectivity constraint: 22 channels with a pore size much larger than the molec-ular scale can exhibit ionic currents under salinity gra-dients [11]. In the transport matrix written in Eq.(88), this corresponds to the cross terms L32 = L23 .Let me first make a back-of-the-enveloppe calculation to estimate the order of magnitude of the effect. Under a concentration gradient ∇cs, a DO velocity is generated, which in turn will carry the ions within the EDL. Hence the DO ionic current is expected to scale as 

IDO ≈ P(−eΣ) × vDO (133) with P the perimeter of the channel ( P = 2 A/h for a slit of height h or P = 2 πR for a nanotube with radius R); 

vDO = DDO × (−∇ log cs) is the DO velocity as obtained above. Hence the DO current is expected to behave like 

IDO ≈ P(−eΣ) DDO × ∇ log cs (134) Note that this expression is actually similar to the (PNP) thick diffuse layer expression in Eq.(107) or Eq.(129), al-though obtained under very different conditions. It is however interesting to develop the full calculation of the DO ionic current (see SI of [11]). The diffusio-osmotic current is defined as 

IDO = P

Z ∞

> 0

dz e (c+ − c−) vx(z) (135) with vx the DO velocity profile, as obtained previously in Eq.(26). Within the PB framework, the charge density profile, nc = e(c+ − c−) = 2 e c s sinh ψ. This leads after some manipulations to 

IDO = A × μK (−kB T ∇ log cs) (136) where the corresponding mobility μK takes the expres-sion 

μK = 2 e Σ

h × 12πη ℓ B



1 − ℓGC 

λD

sinh −1

 λD

ℓGC 

 

(137) with ℓGC = [2 πΣ ℓB ]−1 the Gouy-Chapmann length and 

λD the Debye length. Note that we discarded a term ∂xΣ, assuming here a homogeneous charge along the channel. Finally, the diffusional contribution adds a supplemen-tary term Idiff  

> DO

= G × Ediff , with G the nanochannel conductance. The full expression of the mobility μK in Eq.(137) in-deed reduces to the back-of-the-enveloppe estimate in the high charge regime, i.e. ℓGC ≪ λD , for which the mobil-ity scales as 

μK ∝

large Σ

Σ. (138) This corresponds to the regime where the PB equation is strongly non-linear. But in the low charge regime, i.e. 

ℓGC ≫ λD , one has 1 − ℓGC  

> λD

sinh −1 h λD

> ℓGC

i

∝ Σ2, so that the mobility scales as 

μK ∝ 

> Σ→0

Σ3. (139) a       

> 110 100 1000
> Concentration ratio C max /C min 00.5 11.5
> Osmotic Current I osm  (nA)  y=0.165*ln(x) y=0.016*ln(x) y=0.07*ln(x)
> 00.25 0.5
> Surface Charge (C/m 2)
> 00.2 Kosm  (nA)  y=0.165*ln(x)
> 10 100 1000
> Concentration ratio C max /C min 10 100 1000
> Produced Osmotic Power (W.m -2 )
> y=exp(2.7+0.1*ln(x))

# b

FIG. 4. From Ref. [11]: Osmotic streaming current ver-sus concentration difference for a BNNT with radius and length {R, L } = {40nm , 1250nm } and pH 5.5 (yellow), 9.5 (purple) and 11 (red). Dashed lines are linear fits IDO =

Kosm × log( Cmax /C min ). Inset, osmotic mobility versus sur-face charge. Surface charge is obtained from independent conductance measurements. Adapted from Refs. [11] with permission from Nature Publishing, Copyright 2013. 

The mobility μK is thus expected to be vanishingly small for small surface charges Σ. In other words, the DO ionic currents under salinity gradients are expected to emerge only for highly charged surfaces, i.e. in the non-linear PB regime. Standard surfaces, such as glass or silica surfaces, ex-hibit surface charges in the tens of mC/m 2 and the non-linear regime, defined as λD > ℓ GC , is only attained for salt concentrations below ∼ 5mM on such surfaces. Ac-cordingly the mobility μK will be vanishingly small on such surfaces for most conditions and this certainly ex-plains why DO ionic currents have not been reported on such “standard” materials. On the other hand, for a large surface charge of, say, ∼ 0.1C/m 2, the non-linear regime is reached up to salt concentrations in the molar range ( λD > ℓ GC for 

cs < 0.7M). Such large surface charges are more of the exception in terms of materials, but such values were in-deed measured in specific materials such as boron-nitride nanotubes (BNNT) [11], TiO 2 surface [54] or activated carbon [13]. As a confirmation, strong DO ionic currents were indeed measured on all these surfaces. As shown in Fig.4, the experiments in Ref.[11] using BNNT fully confirmed the prediction of Eq.(137): not only an ionic current is measured for non-selective nanotubes (with ra-dius 40 nm in Fig.4, but the current is found proportional to ∆ log cs and the mobility is found to be proportional to the surface charge Σ (as independently infered from conductance measurements), with a correct order of mag-nitude with the prediction of Kosm , see [11]. Similar re-sults were measured in manifold subsequent experiments [12, 13, 66]. Furthermore, in the experiments of Ref.[13], the mobility μK on actived carbon surfaces (associated with high surface charges) was measured to be more than two orders of magnitude larger than for pristine carbon, which exhibits far smaller surface charge, hence echoing directly the above discussion. We finally note that slippage effects leads to a strong 23 enhancement of the mobility μK , with an amplification effect scaling typically like 1 + b/λ D , with b the hydrody-namic slip length [13, 67]. However, large surface charges tend to reduce slippage via ionic friction.  

> B. Coupled transport in the thin layer regime

As I discussed previously for the capillary pore model in the thick diffuse layer regime, the richness of the electrokinetic transport stems not only from the indi-vidual transport mechanism but also from the coupling of the various phenomena at work: in particular – in the context of this chapter – the coupling of diffusio-osmosis with the other transport phenomena, diffusion, electro-osmosis and convection/flushing by liquid flow. The global gradients imposed at the boundaries of the nanochannel usually lead to inhomogeneous thermody-namic fields along the channel, e.g. inhomogeneous con-centration, pressure or electric potential fields. This cou-ples de facto the whole EK transport mechanisms. The equations for a collection of pores are those intro-duced for the capillary-pore model and I discuss it here in the thin diffuse layer regime. The model is written in full generality as a linear relationship between the lo-cal fluxes and forces, in Eq.(88) [59, 62] and one may calculate directly the corresponding formulae in the thin diffuse layer limit. But I come back here on the details of the mechanisms. These equations will be written here for a slit pore ge-ometry, but this can be generalized to alternative, e.g. 

cylindrical, or more complex geometries ( e.g. with vary-ing pore size or varying surface charge). In particular, such transport was also described by Poggioli et al. in the context of ionic diodes [68]; by Cramail et al. in the context of the geometry of Surface Force Apparatus measurements [69], evidencing couplings of electrokinetic effects; mechano-sensitive effects were evidenced by Liz´ ee 

et al. on charge patterns [41].  

> 1. 1D-PNP equations integrating the diffuse layer contribution

In the thin diffuse layer regime, there is a separation of length scales between the Electric Double Layer and the characteristic scales over which the geometry varies laterally ( e.g. pore length). One can therefore integrate over the EDL in order to separate explicity the scales and derive one-dimensional transport equations for the electrostatic potential, total ionic concentration, pres-sure. It echoes the approach developed in Sec. III.D for the coupling between osmosis and surface driven diffusio-osmosis, in Eq.(50). To simplify notation, we consider here a channel of height h, with λD ≪ h. The geometry does not really matter, as surface transport is not sensitive to boundary curvature in the thin diffuse layer limit. The approach proceeds by separating transport along the channel length from the equilibrium properties in the EDL. One may directly adapt the results from the cap-illary model and in particular the expression of the ion flux and current density in Eq.(94). A direct approach following the same lines was developed in Ref.[68], where, based on this formalism, it was shown that ionic diode effects could emerge even in the thin diffuse layer regime – a non-trivial prediction –.  

> 2. Non-convective contributions

Let me first ignore the convection effects (terms pro-portional to the fluid velocity), which we will estimate hereafter. Using Eq.(94), and identifying that cv = cs the value of the salt concentration outside the EDL, one get the cross-sectional integrals of the non-convective contri-butions to the solute flux and ionic density 

Jn.c. s

A = − DkB T 2cs⟨cosh ψ⟩ ∂μ s 

> ∂x

(x)+2 eD kB T cs⟨sinh ψ⟩ ∂V ∂x (x), (140) 

In.c. e

eA = DkB T 2cs⟨sinh ψ⟩ ∂μ s 

> ∂x

(x)

− eD kB T 2cs⟨cosh ψ⟩ ∂V ∂x (x). (141) where the superscript n.c. precise that only the non-convective contributions are calculated here. The po-tential V ≡ ϕv is the electric potential in the middle of the channel. This involves then cross-sectional averages of the ionic and charge distributions, ⟨c+ + c−⟩ = 2 cs⟨cosh ψ⟩ and 

⟨c+ − c−⟩ = −2cs⟨sinh ψ⟩. It is easy to show that due to charge electroneutrality ⟨c+ − c−⟩ = 2Σ  

> h

for the two interfaces. The excess concentration on a single interface can be calculated as 

F ≡ ⟨c+ + c− − 2cs⟩

2cs

= ⟨cosh ψ⟩ − 1= 4 λD

h

s λD

ℓGC 

2

+ 1 − 1

 (142) with again ℓGC the Gouy-Chapmann length. This term identifies to the surface contribution to the conductance. For low concentration/high surface charge, it behaves as 

F(Du ) ≈ Du , with Du = Σ 

> csh

the Dukhin number.  

> Jsol
> DA

= 2 [1 + F(Du )] ( −∇ xcs) + 2eDu c s

kB T (−∇ xV ), 

> Ie
> eD A

= 2 Du (−∇ xcs) + 2ec s

kB T × [1 + F(Du )] ( −∇ xV )(143) These equations identify with Eqs.(21-22) by Poggioli et al. [68] (up to a factor of 2 in the cross terms due to a 24 difference in geometry). Note that in these expressions the channel height h and/or the surface charge Σ may de-pend on x as well. Also, supplementary contributions are expected when the cation and anion diffusion coefficient are not equal.  

> 3. Convective effects in the thin diffuse layer regime

Now, one should add the convective contribution, which stem from the ion transport by the solvent flow. These are slightly more subtle to describe. This follows from the analysis developped in the previous sections, as well as for the capillary pore model. Gathering the pre-vious results, the Stokes equation for the velocity field 

vw(x, z ) along the channel writes here as 0 = η ∂2vw

∂z 2 −∇ x [ph + 2 kB T c s(x)(cosh ψ − 1)] 

−2ec s(x) sinh ψ (−∇ xV ) (144) where we used the expression for the pressure in Eq.(92), including the osmotic contribution, together with the electric driving force, e(c+ − c−)( −∇ xV ). The longitu-dinal electric potential is denoted as V here. Each of these terms has been studied in the previous sections, and one can integrate the flow profile to obtain the velocity vw(z) and deduce its cross-sectional average 

⟨vw⟩ = khyd 

η (−∇ xph) + DDO (−∇ x log cs) + μEO (−∇ xV )(145) The first term is the pressure-driven contribution with 

khyd the hydrodynamic permeability; the second term is the diffusio-osmotic contribution; and the third one is the electro-osmotic contribution. The expressions for the mobility have been given in the previous sections. Now in the presence of flow, the above results for the salt flux and ionic current in Eqs.(143) also have to be corrected by the corresponding convective contributions. The flow will flush the ionic concentrations in the EDL and this introduces supplementary terms in the expres-sions for the flux above 

Jconv sol = A ⟨(c+ + c−)( z)vw(z)⟩ (146) and 

Iconv  

> e

= eA ⟨(c+ − c−)( z)vw(z)⟩ (147) Similarly to Eq.(145), the flow profile can be written as the sum of the pressure-driven, diffusio-osmotically-driven, and electro-osmostically driven flow, vw(z) =

vhw(z) + vDO w (z) + vEO w (z) and each of this term will contribute to the convective flux. One may then calcu-lated the various terms in the above equations, Eqs.(146)-(147). However it is easier to invoke Onsager symmetry, since these terms originating in the water flow are expected to be identical to the pressure-induced excess flux for Jconv sol 

– see Eq.(33) –, and to the pressure-induced streaming current for Iconv  

> e

– with mobility μEO –; as well as to the ionic current under concentration drop for Iconv  

> e

– see Eq.(136) – and to the excess flux under the electric field – with the mobility μK , so that the additional convective terms write  

> Jconv
> sol
> A

−2cs⟨vw⟩ = DDO 

kB T (−∇ ph) + μK (−∇ xV ) 

> Iconv
> e
> A

= μEO (−∇ ph) + μK (−∇ xkB T log cs) (148) These terms add to the previous expressions for the solute flux and electric current, as obtained in Eq.(143). The expressions for each mobility, DDO , μK , μEO have been obtained in the previous sections.  

> 4. Combining all elements...

Gathering results in Eqs.(143), (145) & (148) we have obtained the complete expression of the local transport matrix. Differences of pressure/concentration/voltage are applied at the two ends of the channel will in-duce pressure/concentration/voltage profiles inside the nanochannel, whose equations obeys the conservation laws above, ∂xJsol = 0 and ∂xIe = 0. This is comple-mented with boundary condition at the channel ends. In the limit of thin EDL, the boundary condition correspond to the continuity of cs and V at the nanochannel borders. The resolution of the local transport equation is by no mean obvious because of the non-linear coupling occur-ing between concentration and electric field. Also when the local Dukhin number varies along the channel, e.g. 

under a variation of channel height or surface charge, the solution may lead to a non-linear global response of the diode type [68]. In the next section, I discuss various working cases, examplifying such intertwinned transport mechanism.  

> VIII. WORKING CASES: WHEN DIFFUSIO-OSMOSIS EMERGES IN TRANSPORT ACROSS NANOCHANNELS

We explore here various situations, inspired by ex-periments, where diffusio-osmotic transport couples to other transport mechanisms to induce non-trivial emerg-ing properties: enhanced diffusion, mechano-sensitive conductance and osmotic diodes.  

> A. Example 1: Enhanced diffusion in a nanochannel

This example is inspired by the experiments in Ref. [55], “ Osmotic Transport across Surface Functionalized Carbon Nanotube Membrane ” by Lokesh et al. . Authors 25 have studied various transport phenomena across func-tionalized carbon nanotubes (with ∼ 2.2nm diameter) under salinity gradients. We previously discussed the negative water fluxes measured by the authors at low salt concentation, which are consistent with the negative rejection coefficient associated with Donnan rejection. They also report an enhanced diffusion of salt across the nanopore membrane at low salt concentration, which we discuss here.  

> 1. Simple estimates

Fick diffusion is associated with a flux of salt pro-portional to the salt concentration gradient, as JFick  

> s

=

−D 2∆ cs 

> L

(remembering that the total ion concentration is twice the salt concentration). But observations in Ref. [55] show an enhanced salt diffusion at low concentration, see Fig.5. It is easy to reconcile this observation with the effect of diffusio-osmosis. According to the various de-scriptions above, a DO flow will be induced under the concentration gradient obeying 

vDO = DDO × −∆ log cs

L (149) where the DO mobility has the dimension of a diffusion coefficient. For salt as a solute, the flow will be in the direction towards the lowest salt concentration. The salt flux is accordingly 

Js = −D ∆cs

L + vDO 2cs (150) which using Eq.(23) rewrites as 

Js = −2( D + DDO ) ∆cs

L (151) In other words the DO contribution will appear as an augmented diffusion for the salt, Deff = D + DDO , in agreement with the experimental results in Fig.5. Now one could go further and make some estimates of the DO contribution. In Ref. [55], the authors uses the result in Eq.(30), DDO = kB T 

> 2πηℓ B

× log (1 − γ2)−1

with fixed surface charge, supplemented by the diffusion field contribution in Eq.(32) for disymmetric salts. This indeed predicts an increasing effective diffusion as the salt concentration decreases. However a large surface charge on the surface walls would be required in the expression to obtain a (semi-)quantitative agreement. Actually the nanotube have a small diameter (2.2 nm) and the results for thick EDL should rather apply in the present experimental configuration. In Eq.(122), the ionic flux is given in terms of the Dukhin number, com-plemented by the convective contribution 

js = − 2DL

p1 + Du 2



1 + αO × (p1 + Du 2 − 1) 



× ∆cs

(152) and we remind that αO = R28η 2kB T c s 

> D

∼ csR2σ. The first contribution in Eq.(152) is the standard diffusion modu-lated by the increased salt concentration inside the tube in the presence of a surface charge. According to Eq.(152), the ionic flux is expected to strongly increase at large Dukhin number, i.e. low con-centration. However, assuming a surface charge in the tens of mC/m 2 range – a reasonable value for carbon sur-faces [13] –, and for a pore radius of 1nm, the Dukin num-ber Du = Σ /c sR exceeds unity only below concentrations of order c⋆ ∼ 100mM. Hence a mild increase is expected below c⋆. This does not really match the result in Fig.5, where a strong increase is observed around cs ∼ 0.4M .The DO contribution to the flow, expressed in the convec-tive term proportional to αO , which we estimated above to be rather small with αO ∼ O(10 −4 − 10 −1). However, as we pointed out previously, slippage effects are expected to strongly boost DO convection. In partic-ular, αO , which is proportional to the CNT permeability, will be increased by a factor 1+4 bR with b the slip length. With a radius of 1nm, even moderate slip lengths in the tens of nanometer range will boost the DO contribution by several orders of magnitude. In order to go beyond and get quantitative estimates, it would be necessary to infer more specifically the surface charge inside the CNT, as well as slippage effects, and the dependence of these parameters on salt concentration. However the previous argument suggests that the increase of the ionic trans-port results from a combination of Donnan partition, DO convection, possibly boosted by hydrodynamic slip. It would be interesting to reiterate exhaustive mea-surements in such CNT membranes in order to quantify the various transport parameters, diffusion, DO mobil-lity, slip length, etc., as well as the surface charge, its concentration dependence, etc.  

> 2. More insights into the inner transport

The above approach gives the main trends for the effect of DO on diffusive transport. However it misses some subtleties of the inner transport. This is what I briefly discuss here. The diffusio-osmotic flow is expected to flush the con-centration profiles, hence affecting the concentration gra-dient along the nanochannel, which will depart from the linear dependence (diffusive-like). Accordingly the DO velocity (which is pluglike across the nanochannel sec-tion) may depend therefore on x. This does not respect mass conservation (it is not divergence free) and a sup-plementary pressure-driven flow will be built to compen-sate the DO flow inhomogeneities. Such coupling has been discussed recently in Ref. [70], as well as in Ref. [71, 72], where the heterogeneity of the surface poten-tial ( e.g. resulting from its dependence on the local salt concentration) makes the description of transport partic-ularly difficult and subtle.. 26 

> FIG. 5. From Ref. [55]: enhanced diffusion across CNT mem-branes (b) the concentration dependence of the normalized reverse salt flux by draw solution concentration (fitting line is for visual guidance) and (c) net osmotic water permeance under the same concentration gradient (300 mM) generated by four different symmetric salts over salt-specific diffusio-osmotic factor: Adapted from Ref. [55] with permission from American Chemical Society (ACS), Copyright 2018.

Let me write the corresponding equations. The equa-tion for the water flux writes 

Qw

A = vw = −DDO ×∂x log c+ khyd 

η (−∂xp) = cste (153) with vw the water velocity (averaged over the cross sec-tion with constant area A), khyd the hydrodynamic per-meability of the nanochannel and η the fluid viscosity. This is complemented by the diffusion-convection equation for the total ion concentration, c = c+ + c−:

Js

A = −D∂ xc + vw c = cste (154) Neglecting the dependence of DDO on salt concentra-tion, Eq.(153) integrates as 

−DDO log c(x) − khyd 

η p(x) = vw x − DDO log c(0) (155) where the boundary conditions for the total ion concen-trations are c(0) = 2 cs and c(L) = 2( cs + ∆ cs), and 

p(0) = p(L) = 0. One deduces 

vw = − DDO 

L log 

 cs + ∆ cs

cs



(156) which is the same result as from the simple estimate. On the other hand, Eq.(154) is integrated to obtain the ion flux as 

Js

A = 2 DLcs(1 − ePe DO ) + ∆ cs

1 − ePe DO × Pe DO (157) with Pe DO = vwLD (158) the Peclet number defined in terms of the DO velocity in Eq.(156). The total ion concentration profile is deduced from Eq.(154) as 

c(x) = 2 cs + 2∆ cs × eP e DO xL − 1

eP e DO − 1 (159) The induced pressure profile p(x) is directly deduced from Eq.(155). This shows that while the global estimate for the DO velocity in Eq.(23) is captured by the simple estimate, the underlying DO transport leads to strong variations of the concentration profile.  

> 3. Beyond: consequences on the conductance

The detailed response under a voltage drop ∆ V follows the same type of analysis. We leave the full analysis to the reader. To my knowledge it has not been exhaustively performed. I rather explore here the effect of DO on the conductance, which is the linear response to ∆ V :

I = GR(−∆V )In a simple analysis, the conductance can indeed be calculated in terms of the charge carriers inside the nanochannel. This depends on the detailed concentra-tion profile inside the nanochannel. Assuming for sim-plicity that the system can be described as a resistances in series, and neglecting surface charges for illustration, one predicts a renormalized conductance behaving as 

GR = 2 hw e2DkBT

hZ L

> 0

dx c(x)

i−1

(160) Using the ion concentration profile in Eq.(159) predicts 

GR = G0

α

1 + α ×

 c0

> c1

α

− c1

> c0

 c0

> c1

α

− 1(161) with c1 = cs + ∆ cs, c0 = cs; α = DDO /D and G0 =2hw e2DkBT cs the bulk conductance. When the concentra-tion ratio c1 ≫ c0, then GR ≃ G0 × DDO /(DDO + D). But in general a rather complex dependence of the con-ductance on the salt gradient is expected. The result in Eq.(160) predicts that the conductance is strongly affected by the DO effects, via the convective flush. To my knowledge, the conductance under salin-ity gradients was not investigated exhautively experimen-tally. It would be interesting to revisit this behavior. In our own experiments in Ref.[11], this quantity was sys-tematically measured but not analyzed. Another interesting aspect is the effect of slippage on DO. Slippage effects are expected to boost considerably the diffusio-osmotic mobility, as: DDO = Dno −slip  

> DO

×

1 + bλD



(see Sec. III.C). Accordingly for slip length even in the tens of nanometer range, the enhancement 27 factor can reach hundreds, which will considerably in-crease the effect of the DO flush on the conductance. Now, the above analysis should be anyhow revisited to include surface charge contributions. Also while we studied the concentration profile and solute fluxes, the approach should be extended to the analysis of local ionic current and electric potential profile. The analysis is more involved and could possibly lead to ion polariza-tion effects which are interesting to investigate. 

B. Example 2: Mechano-sensitive transport in nanochannels 

This example is inspired by the experiments of Ref.[41] and their analysis, “ Architecting mechanosensi-tive nanofluidic transport in graphite nanoslits ”, by Liz´ ee 

et al. .A number of recent experiments in nanofluidics have reported mechano-sensitive effects, i.e. that pressure could modulate ionic transport in one way or the other [39, 58, 73–77]. Such effects are intrinsically non-linear: non-linear in the global response coupling mechanical driving (pressure) and ionic response; but then non-linear in the underlying mechanisms, which will intertwin vari-ous transport phenomena, as those discussed above and in particular diffusio-osmosis. As an illustration, I will discuss the foundations of such a mechanism in nanofluidic transport. A recent observation made in our lab demonstrated a pressure-dependence of the conductance of 2D nanochannels with built-in charge patterns [41]. The geometry is shown in Fig.6: a pressure drop (positive or negative) is applied to a nanochannel with height of a few nanometers. The nanofabrication process allows to activate or not the sur-face charge at the entrance of the channel, in the cor-responding reservoir (or inlet). If activated, the surface charge of the reservoir’s surface is very large, much larger than the charge on the channel surface. The observation is that the contrast of charge, associated with the activa-tion pattern, leads to a strong pressure-dependent con-ductance, while barely any effect is measured on pristine, non-activated surface; see Fig.6. 

1. Charge contrast as a source of mechano-sensitivity 

The origin of the phenomenon is the charge discon-tinuity at the entrance of the nanochannel, which is at the origin of a cascade of transport couplings. In a few words, the ion in the EDL close to the activated surface are flushed towards (or away from) the nanochannel but entering the nanochannels these charges face a disconti-nuity of surface conductance. This leads to an accumula-tion (or depletion) of ions at the entrance, which in fine 

changes the concentration inside the nanochannel, hence the conductance. But this phenomenon would be neg-ligeable without the boost of diffusio-osmosis, as we will ΔVAPlasma-Activated inlet c0 Pristine     

> channel walls cinlet > c 0Bottom
> crystal Top
> crystal O2plasma
> during fabrication Si SiN
> ΔP > 0 Pressure drop ΔP (mbar) Activated inlet Pristine inlet
> ΔG/G 0(%)

FIG. 6. From Ref. [41]: Sketch of the nanofluidic experi-ment (left panel): a pressure drop is applied to the nanofluidic channel and the conductance is recorded. A pressure depen-dent conductance ∆ G/G (∆ P ) is measured (right panel). Astrong mehano-sensitive response ∆ G(∆ P ) is measured for nanochannels for which the inlet surface has been activated by plasma treatement. This generates a surface charge pat-tern which is at the origin of the pressure dependence of the conductance.. Adapted from Ref. [41]. 

see below. Let me give here a minimal description for this com-bination of mechanisms. A more exhaustive description can be found in Ref.[41]. The starting point is the de-scription of transport in the thin EDL limit, which I pre-sented in Sec. VII. First, in the reservoir, the flow will flush the salt, including the excess ions present inside the EDL. Neglecting diffusion in this region, one may ap-proximate roughly the salt flux as Jsol ≈ ⟨ c+ + c−⟩vw A

and assume for simplicity that A ∼ Ach the nanochan-nel cross area, with the idea that the entrance of the nanochannel will be the limiting region for transport. Now, we showed in Sec. VII that the averaged concen-tration writes ⟨c+ + c−⟩ ≃ 2cs(1 + FR), with FR defined in Eq.(142) in terms of the activated surface charge Σ act 

(with a factor 1 /2 for FR due to the fact that there is only one bottom surface). One deduces the ion flux orig-inating from the flush of salt in the reservoir 

Jsol ≈ 2cs(1 + FR) vw A. (162) Now, in the nanochannel (say, x > 0), assuming a thin diffuse layer regime, one writes a similar diffusion-convection equation for salt transport 

Jsol ≈ 2AD(1 + Fch )



∂xc(x) − P e c(x)

L



. (163) with the P´ eclet number P e = vwL/D and Fch is defined in terms of the channel surface charge. It is easy to ob-tain the general form of the solution of this differential equation. For low Peclet number, the expression for the salt concentration profile simplifies to 

c(x) = 2 cs



1 + P e x − LL



− Jsol (x − L)

AD(1 + F[Du ch ]) (164) where we used that Jsol is of the order of Pe and neglected higher order terms. Flux conservation and continuity of the concentration at the nanochannel entrance leads to ∆ccs

= c(0) − 2cs

2cs

= Γ × P e (165) 28 where the coefficient Γ has the expression Γ ≈ FR − Fch 

1 + Fch 

(166) This expression is approximate but it captures the main ingredients of the mechanism (see Ref.[41] for an ex-tended version and comparison with the experiments). This indeed shows that the surface charge pattern and its discontinuity leads to an accumulation or depletion of salt at the entrance of the channel. This will modify the ion concentration profile inside the nanochannel, hence the conductance. The latter is defined in terms of the number of charge carriers in the nanochannels, so that 

G = 2 hw e2DkBT

"Z L

> 0

dx c(x) + 2Σ ch 

> h

#−1

(167) and after some manipulation, one predicts ∆GG0

= 1211 + Du ch 

× Γ × P e (168) with P e = vwL/D defined as Pe = vwLD = h2∆P

12 ηD 



1 + 6 bh



(169) where hydrodynamic slippage is accounted for. Altogether, this description therefore reproduces the mechanosensitive effect of the experiments, and in partic-ular its bipolar nature, where the conductance change is sensitive to the sign of the pressure drop. The full expres-sion (not shown here) also reproduces the non-linearities of the conductance in ∆ P as exhibited in the experi-ments. However, putting numbers, this expression is difficult to reconcile quantitatively with the experimental results, and/or only at the expense of unreasonable slippage ef-fects or excessive surface charge.  

> 2. The cherry on the cake: a huge diffusio-osmotic boost

The approach above however misses an important in-gredient. Indeed the created salinity gradient inside the nanochannel under flow is expected to induce a diffusio-osmotic velocity, vDO = −KDO × (cs(L) − cs(0)) with 

KDO = DDO /c s. In the presence of slippage with 

b ≫ λD , this yields vDO = − kB Tη λD b × (cs(L) − cs(0)). Now the concentration at the entrance varies due to the pressure itself, according to ∆ cs/c s = Γ LD vw. One there-fore gets vDO = kB Tη λD b × csΓ LD vw. Now, adding the bare and DO velocities, veff = vw + vDO , one deduces 

veff =



1 + cs

kB TηD λD b × Γ



× vw (170) We therefore obtain an strongly enhanced effective Peclet number, renormalized by the diffusio-osmotic transport: 

P e eff = P e ×



1 + cs

kB TηD λb × Γ



≫ P e (171) In other words, the DO transport strongly amplifies the flow effects on the salt concentration profile, which itself is the origin of the DO flow. Slippage plays a key role in this amplification loop. But it is only at the expense of the inclusion of all the coupled transport effects that a consistent qualitative and quantitative description of the transport can be achieved. This is an interesting lesson, which is at the core of the richness of nanofluidic transport.  

> C. Example 3: Beyond van ’t Hoff, osmotic diodes and its applications for desalination

This example is inspired by the theoretical work of Ref.[28] “ Nanofluidic Osmotic Diodes: Theory and Molecular Dynamics Simulations ” and the experiments of Ref.[64], “ Resonant osmotic diodes for voltage-induced water filtration across composite membranes ”. A seminal step in the short history of nanofluidics is the demonstration of ionic diodes [63, 78]. Based on an analogy to PN junctions in semi-conducting materials, nanochannels with patterned surface charges were shown to induce a non-linear current-voltage response, in a form very similar to the Schokley diode. The analogy is quite deep, in the sense that the transport equation for an-ions and cation in nanofluidic channels – the PNP equa-tions described above – is analogous to those for elec-trons and holes in semiconducting system, with the sur-face charge playing the role of the doping. Ionic diodes were shown in manifold conditions and various geome-tries: patterned nanofluidic systems, conical nanopores, nanopipettes, etc. Rectification occurs in asymmetrics nanochannel, as quantified by a gradient of the Dukhin number ∇

h Σ

> csg

i

. This shows incidently that Debye layer overlap is actually not a prerequise to obtain current rec-tification, as shown in [68]. Now, a key difference between semi-conducting sys-tems and electrolytes is that electrolytes are liquid which flow under stress, while semi-conducting systems are solid. One therefore expects that the rectification of the ionic current in asymmetric channels should extend to flow, and in particular osmotically driven flows. Interest-ingly, rectified osmosis with asymmetric water permeabil-ity under solute gradient reversal was actually reported in a number of biological cell systems, such as eyhtrocytes [79], granulocytes [80], epithelial cells [81], or COS-7 fi-broblasts [82]. A simple geometry to investigate the diode effect for osmotic flows is to consider a nanochannel with an asym-metric surface charge as sketched in Fig.7: the left side has a positive surface charge density eΣ while the right 29 side has a negative surface charge −αe Σ, with α > 0 a numerical coefficient and Σ a surface density. We impose a salt concentration cL on the left side and cR on the right side, as well as an additional voltage drop ∆ V = VR −VL.One defines the Dukhin number as Du 0 = Σ /hc s, with 

cs = 12 (cL + cR) the averaged salt concentration. Follow-ing Ref.[28], several assumptions allow developping a full analytical calculation: (i) the nanochannel is thin enough so that the thick diffuse layer calculations apply, see Sec. VI; (ii) convective effects are neglected, i.e. the P´ eclet number is small; (iii) the Dukhin number is assumed to be larger than unity (this approximation is not a prereq-uisite but simplifies calculations). The calculation then extends the simplified PNP description in Sec. VI.A to the composite geometry considered here. Care has to be taken of the boundary conditions at each charge discon-tinuity, at the two ends of the channel and at the middle interface: as discussed in Sec. VI.A, there is a disconti-nuity of ion concentrations and electric potential due to the Donnan potential contributions. We refer the reader to the supplementary materials of Ref.[28] for the complete calculation along these lines. This yields the final result for the solute flux under the concentration and voltage drop: 

js = DL



2 cL − cR

Du 0

− α − 1

α Du 0

cR

c0

h

cLe e∆VkB T − cR

i

(172) Now, in order to calculate the apparent osmotic pres-sure, we will make use of the integral relationship be-tween ∆Π app and the ionic flux js obtained in Eq.(79): ∆Π app = kB T  2∆ cs + js × LD

.This leads to the expression of the apparent osmotic pressure in the high surface charge regime, as ∆Π app = 2kB T



1 − 1

Du 0



(cR − cL)

−2kB T C



e e∆VkB T − cR

cL



(173) where C = cRcL(1 − α)/(αDu 0(cR + cL)) is a non-linear function of concentrations, and has the dimension of a concentration. This apparent osmotic pressure generates a water flow as 

Qw = A

L Lhyd ∆Π app [cR, c L, ∆V ] (174) In these expressions, the driving force is indeed pro-portional to kB T and one may conclude that it is there-fore of entropic entropic (it does not simply reduce to an electro-osmotic effect). Furthermore the flow is not nec-essarily directed towards the highest concentration, as for bare osmosis. The sign of the non-linear contribution to ∆Π app (or equivalently Qw) depends on the sign of the surface charge contrast ∝ (α − 1) (as well as on ∆ V ). This is a surface osmotic effect and reflects a non-linear diffusio-osmotic transport. The “osmotic” diode, which one may coin a van ’t Hoff diode, shows rectification both in the concentration drop                

> FIG. 7. Flow rectification with composite membranes: (a) Sketch of acomposite membranes with asymmetric nanopores; (b) Example of a realization using a mesoporous polycarbonate (PC) membrane on which a graphene oxide microporous membrane is deposited; (c) Flow under (DC) voltage drop showing voltage rectification; (d) A sinusoidal (AC) electric driving yields a rectified water flow: the aver-aged flow is non-vanishing even if the driving force averages to zero. From Ref. [64]: Adapted from Refs. [64] with per-mission from Springer-Nature, Copyright 2025.

and in the applied voltage drop. Such rectification ef-fects have been recently observed at the membrane scale in Ref.[64]. This work makes use of an asymmetric as-sembly ot two membranes which are welded together: one mesoporous layer with large pores (in the tens of nanometer range) and a surface charge, while the sec-ond microporous layer has small pores dedicated to in-duce rejection of a targeted solutes (its surface charge being different from the other side). In the experiments of Ref.[64], a porous polycarbonate membranes was used for the large pore side, while the selective part was of various types, such as graphene oxide, MoS 2, or reverse osmosis membranes (by Toray). In simple terms, water flow is driven within the mesoporous layer, while selec-tivity is achieved within the microporous layer. These asymmetric membranes do exhibit a rectified flux under a voltage driving, see the flux versus the applied voltage in Fig.7. Furthermore under a sinusoidal electric driving, a net water flux will be induced by the rectification. Fi-nally, an interesting way to quantify the performance of the electric is to measure how much pressure is equivalent to a given voltage for a targeted flux. This conversion fac-tor α, measured in bars per Volts per bar, is found in the experiments to reach as much as 15 bars per volt for ap-propriate materials ! Meaning that 2 applied volts being 30 equivalent to 30 bars. This development paves the way for the practical im-plementation of ionic diodes as a viable filtration technol-ogy. In this design, the “electric” driving mechanism sub-stitutes the conventional pressure-driven process, thereby eliminating the need for the high-pressure pumps typi-cally employed in most filtration systems, especially in reverse osmosis. Moreover, the flow rectification feature enables the use of a sinusoidal voltage drop, which sig-nificantly reduces polarization effects and generates a lo-calized, oscillating flush at the membrane surface – an effective means of mitigating fouling. This concept has since been scaled up by the spin-off company Ilion Wa-ter [83], which now manufactures reverse osmosis vessels based on this technology.  

> D. Example 4: The diffusio-osmotic perspective for osmotic energy harvesting

It is not my purpose here to develop an exhaustive dis-cussion of osmotic energy harvesting and I will only make a general introduction to the concept. Over the recent years, there has been a surge of exploration of osmotic transport across low-dimensional materials – boron-nitride and carbon nanotubes and, more recently, two-dimensional (2D) membranes such as graphene, hexago-nal boron nitride, transition-metal dichalcogenides, pris-tine and activated graphite, etc. –, which constitute new platforms for the study of osmotic energy conversion. The literature has become considerable and I refer the reader to exisiting reviews which have flourished recently, see in particular [45, 66, 84–87]. This discussion of this topics is however interesting in the context of this chapter since the introduction of diffusio-osmotic transport for osmotic energy harvesting has helped renewing the concept, which was somewhat in a technological dead-end. I discovered the question of blue energy in the context of our fundamental work “ Giant osmotic energy conver-sion measured in a single transmembrane boron nitride nanotube ” in Ref.[11], where we showed that diffusio-osmosis-based mechanisms could induce large power den-sities for some specific materials, while relaxing some of the usual constraints of osmotic harvesting. This work has been the start of a personal journey, from the lab to the creation of a company, Sweetch Energy [88], which has developped a scaled up osmotic generator based on the nanofluidic principles, now implemented in an indus-trial pilot plant.  

> 1. Osmotic energy, a quick recap

Osmotic, or “blue”, energy denotes the free energy that is released when solutions of different salinity mix, for example where rivers discharge into the sea. This mix-ing process is associated with a substantial entropy gain, corresponding to an ideal extractable energy of about 0.8 kWh per cubic metre of freshwater mixed with seawater. This is a quite old idea which goes back to a suggestion by Pattle in 1954 [89] and later by Normal and others in the 70’s [90]. The global potential for electricity generation is esti-mated in the range of a few thousands of TWh per year, depending on the assumptions and technologies used. Going more into the detailed potential based on the world hydrology, the installed capacity would be of order 250-300 GW with an extraction factor of 20% (similar to the total installed nuclear power worldwide). This is con-siderable and by no mean anecdotical. Key advantages of osmotic power are its non-intermittent character, it is dispatchable, widespread, and dense in terms of indus-trial facility per unit surface (a back of the enveloppe calculation for the required installation using equivalent numbers for existing desalination plants would suggest up to ∼ 10 2W installed per m 2 of ground, far above solar and wind power figures). Finally, keeping in mind that the cost of installation of 1GW of nuclear power is typ-ically in the 6 to 10 billions $ (CAPEX), it seems worth digging a bit more on osmotic energy and its potential. Classical osmotic power technologies rely on membrane-based separation processes operating between a high-salinity (seawater or brine) and a low-salinity (river or treated wastewater) reservoir. Two architec-tures have been predominantly explored at the pilot scale: pressure-retarded osmosis (PRO) and reverse electrodialysis (RED). In PRO, a water-permeable, salt-rejecting membrane converts the osmotic pressure difference (up to 30 bar at a seawater-river interface) into hydraulic work on a turbine. In RED, stacks of cation- and anion-selective membranes spatially separate counter-ion fluxes driven by the concentration gradient, directly generating an electrical current, yet practical power densities also remain typically below a few watts per square metre of membrane. Despite successful demonstration projects, including PRO and RED plants in Norway, Japan and the Netherlands, membrane modules using classical technologies still fall short of the ∼ 5W/m 2 threshold generally considered necessary for economic viability under realistic pretreatment and pumping costs. The origin of this low performance is easy to under-stand. For example in PRO, although the osmotic pres-sure at the seawater-freshwater interface is high, reach-ing about 30 bar, the semi-permeable membrane has an extremely low permeability because its pores are on the sub-nanometre scale to exclude ions. As a result, the vol-umetric flow rate remains very small, and since power is given by the product of flow rate and pressure drop, the resulting power output is correspondingly limited. This efficiency bottleneck is rooted in nanoscale transport phe-nomena inside the membranes, most notably the trade-off between selectivity and permeability imposed by molec-ular sieving and ion exchange. Nanofluidic principle, with the emergence of sometimes 31 exotic transport may help bypass these limitations. This has been actually the route followed by the company Sweetch Energy [88] which took inspiration from nanoflu-idic principles to develop efficient, cheap, large scale os-motic modules, bypassing the ∼ 5W/m 2 osmotic thresh-old.  

> 2. Diffusio-osmosis as an alternative lever for osmotic energy harvesting

The concept of diffusio-osmosis has changed the per-spective for osmotic energy conversion by showing that it does not require strict molecular selectivity as previ-ously conceived and can instead be driven by interfacially controlled mechanisms such as diffusio-osmosis. This di-rectly echoes (and clarifies) my statement in the introduc-tion: diffusio-osmotic transport extends the conditions of applicability of standard osmosis to less constrained conditions. As I exhaustively discussed in this chapter, diffusio-osmotic transport allows to express osmotic driv-ings in channels and membranes without the prerequisite of semi-permeability and high rejection, so that osmotic transport can occur even in non-selective pores. This is a considerable asset, with important consequences. Leaving the rhetoric aside, let me remind a few key rel-evant results. From the previous sections, see Sec.VII.C, electrical currents are generated under chemical gradients via diffusio-osmosis according to 

IDO = Kosm ∆ log cs, (175) where Kosm = πR 2 

> L

×μK kB T and μK is the corresponding mobility, see Eq.(137) for the thin diffuse layer limit and Eq.(129) for the thick diffuse layer. For large surface charge, the thin diffuse layer result is 

μK ≃ 2e Σ

R × 12πη ℓ B

(176) As discussed above, the thin diffuse layer result demon-strates the generation of ionic currents across non-selective nanochannels. As we discussed in Sec.VII.C., such DO ionic currents were measured in manifold experiments [11–13, 66]. In [11], both the dependence of the ionic current as ∇ log cs

and the linear dependence of μK with the surface charge Σ has been experimentally verified, see Fig.4. Also, as we discussed in the previous sections, the ex-pression for the mobility μK in Eq.(137) is recovered only for highly charged surfaces, while μK is vanishingly small for less electrified surfaces. The measurement of diffusio-osmotic currents across BN nanotubes in [11] was then a serendipitous observation since BN has since proved to be a highly charged materials, with the surface charge increasing for smaller radius BN nanotubes. The sur-face electrification of BN is singular by many aspects and make it an interesting topics to investigate [91–94]. Such studies does not restrict to osmotic energy har-vested from salinity gradients. It could be also represent an interesting lead to harvest waste heat and in particular the so-called low grade heat, with temperatures between 25 and 100 ◦C. This is a huge and untapped source, from power generation and several industrial sectors. The en-ergy waste was estimated in the range of 2500TWh per year for Europe only [95], to compare with the primary energy source of 13000 TWh per year. It is however challenging to valorize this reservoir. A proposal is to use liquid-based osmotic energy conversion in a closed loop. It relies on a liquid-liquid phase separation har-vested the low grade heat, and the mixture is then re-combined at low temperature in a osmotic energy con-verter to harvest the corresponding (entropic) free energy [85]. In [54], phase separating ionic liquids were used and the energy harvesting during recombination used diffusio-osmotic energy conversion on a titanium-dioxyde porous membrane. Powers densities in the range of ∼ 7W/m 2

were measured on TiO 2 membranes, making such ap-proaches promising at large scale.  

> 3. Scaling up nanofluidics

Exploiting such surface-driven transport in highly charged nanopores actually provides a route to circum-vent the conventional permeability–selectivity compro-mise and to boost osmotic power densities as compared with PRO and RED. Interestingly, while existing PRO and RED plant are highly optimized in terms of engi-neering, the core of the process, the membranes, still rely on pre-existing designs developped for desalination or other applications. This is the main contribution of nanofluidics, which – via exquisiste studies under super controlled conditions – allow identifying new prescriptors for the development of optimal membrane design dedi-cated to osmotic energy harvesting, in particular in terms of materials, porosity, surface chemistry. Such princi-ples allow circumventing the main challenges, in partic-ular charge polarization, but also electric resistance in the reservoirs (low salinity), inlet resistances, etc. This strongly allays the conclusions of [96]. Using such “nanofluidic-informed” principles to con-ceive new membranes and stack design, the individual osmotic module of the company Sweetch Energy (with ∼

20m 2 membrane) – this is the lego brick of an osmotic plant – has bypassed the ∼ 5W/m 2 osmotic “break-even”, allowing the company to install an industrial pilot plant on the Rhˆ one river [88]. Now, going beyond, there are many possible devel-opments still ahead and I will only cite a few (subjec-tively chosen) leads. At the laboratory scale, nanochan-nels have demonstrated record power densities ranging from kilowatts to megawatts per square metre of effec-tive active area, owing to the combination of molecular-scale thickness and extremely high surface charge den-sities. These results indicate that properly engineered nanoporous 2D membranes could, in principle, over-come the limitations of conventional polymer and ce-32 ramic membranes and make osmotic energy conversion competitive at scale. Boron-nitride emerged as a mate-rial of choice for osmotic energy harvesting [11, 97] and its performance have been scaled up at the membrane scale [53, 93, 98]. But scaling up BN and similar materi-als at the scale of hundred of thousands of square meter – which is the required scale for an osmotic plant – is quite hopeless, both technologically and financially. Beyond such materials, key direction of the recent research is to explore and screen various materials to optimize osmotic energy conversion, such as MOF, cellulose, silk-based ma-terials, MXenes, etc. [66, 99–101]. Some works have also tackled more fundamental aspects affecting osmotic harvesting process, such as the concentration and charge polarization, which strongly limitates the performance, see e.g. [102], the use of ionic diodes [86, 100, 103], or capacitive instead of faradic electrodes [104]. Realizing the potential of osmotic power, however, re-quires bridging a substantial gap between single-pore physics and membrane-scale devices. Challenges include scalable fabrication of cheap, large-area membranes with high pore density, preserving mechanical robustness and fouling resistance in complex feed waters, furthermore assembled in an osmotic cell designed to minimize the global electric resistance. This is a huge challenge, em-braced by very few actors. At the same time, advances in surface chemistry, controlled doping and heterostruc-ture design open possibilities for tailoring charge density, wetting and even nonlinear ionic transport, for example through ionic diode effects in asymmetric nanopores, to further enhance energy extraction. In this context, os-motic energy sits at the intersection of materials science, surface chemistry and nanofluidics. This is a domain where the emerging understanding of nanofluidic trans-port at the smallest scales can really make a splash for innovation.  

> IX. CONCLUSIONS AND PERSPECTIVES

This chapter has become excessively long and I ex-plored the principles of diffusio-osmosis in (far too much) detail. But in doing so, I was naturally led to a broader discussion of ion and fluid transport in nanochannels. Taken together, these electrokinetic transport mecha-nisms form a single, tightly coupled framework, within which the role of diffusio-osmosis turns out to be far more central than one might initially assume. I hope that this chapter will equip readers with the necessary tools to analyse the rich variety of exotic behaviours that emerge in nanofluidic systems. My hope is that the tools devel-oped here – from mechanical force balances to capillary-pore and PNP-Stokes descriptions, from thin to overlap-ping double layers, and from local mobilities to global Onsager matrices – will help readers dissect and inter-pret the growing zoo of ‘exotic’ behaviours observed in nanofluidics, in line with those that I briefly discussed: negative rejections, mechano-sensitive conductance, os-motic diodes, giant blue-energy currents, and others still to come. At the same time, the present chapter barely scratches the surface of what diffusio-osmosis could do when cou-pled to other ingredients. Many directions remain open and there are many topics that I barely discussed, in spite of their considerable interest: - diffusio-osmosis shows up whenever there is a gradient of a solute close to a surface. Obviously, the list of gradient sources is immense as discussed in the con-text of diffusio-phoresis in Ref.[105]. Gradients natu-rally occurs in chemistry – with chemical reactions at work –, membranes and filtration – with the occurence of fouling or concentration and charge polarization [106]– , in biology – with the ubiquituous gradients in cellu-lar compartments–, but also in geology –with reactive nanopores [107, 108] and the importance of ultra-slow phenomena on geological time scale–, etc. - in most of the chapter, I focused for simplicity on sym-metric salts, with no effects of the asymmetry of diffusiv-ity. This is a question of interest since diffusivity asym-metry will induce supplementary diffusion electric fields, inducing the dynamical equivalent to a ionic Hoffmeis-ter serie, and make the analysis and coupling even more subtle [6, 109]. - most of the descriptions reported in this chapter involve continuum description while the phenomena at stake oc-curs at nano- and even sub-nano- scales. Molecular ef-fects and deviations from continuum are expected to play a decisive role, which remain to fully rationalize. In par-ticular, even the molecular definition of the microscopic stress tensor raises fundamental questions [110, 111] and this is a topics which desserves further investigations. - transient effects and time-dependent osmosis, in line with the notion of frequency dependent osmotic pres-sure [27, 112] which remain to be generalized to diffusio-osmotic transport. - I skipped here a discussion on diffusio-phoretic trans-port since it is a priori barely related to nanochannels, the core of the present chapter. But the topics is con-siderable, both in terms of fundamentals and applica-tions [2]. It relates also to active matter, where chemical gradients can power artificial swimmers. Using gradi-ents as sources of energy also apply to the development of nano-engines, and diffusio-phoretic and -osmotic pro-cesses have been harnessed to power nanorods to rotate [113], for example mimicking biological rotary molecular engines such as ATP synthase. - the discussion on diffusio-osmosis immediately generalize to thermo-osmosis, whose level of subtlety even exceeds diffusio-osmotic mechanisms [17, 18] - finally, a topics of great interest is the mechanical de-formation of the solid surface under diffusio-osmosis. Diffusio-osmosis is related to osmotic pressure gradients 33 and de facto this induces forces, as discussed for phoresis in [114, 115] and explored recently for diffusio-osmotic transport [116, 117]. In Ref.[116], it was shown with finite-element calculations of the PNP equations that a deformable nanochannel may transition between a closed and open states on the basis of the diffusio-osmotic stress caused by the ions inside the channel. This is a fascinat-ing perspective. Beyond the academic appeal, these questions are not just intellectual curiosities. Diffusio-osmosis is already informing the design of high-efficiency blue-energy mem-branes, and voltage-driven filtration concepts, with first industrial-scale implementations now on the horizon. If the reader is convinced of the considerable potential of diffusio-osmosis in nanochannels, this chapter will have achieved its main goal. 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

I thank all my colleagues from the n-AQUA network for many interactions, as well as support from ERC project n-AQUA, grant agreement 101071937. I thank Daan Frenkel for nice discussions during the writing of this chapter. 

APPENDIX: REMINDER ON POISSON-BOLTZMANN (PB) SOLUTION 

The solution of the PB equation 

d2

dz 2 ψ = − 1

λ2

> D

sinh ψ (177) (with ψ = eV /k B T the dimensionless potential) can be obtained as 

ψ = −2 log 

 1 + γe −z/λ D

1 − γe −z/λ D



(178) where the coefficient γ is the solution of the equation 

γ2 + 2 ℓGC 

λD

γ − 1 = 0 (179) with ℓGC is the Gouy-Chapman length ( ℓGC ∼ 1/|Σ|). One has 

γ =

s

1 + 

 ℓGC 

λD

2

− ℓGC 

λD

(180) Further details on the PB solution can be found in [118] and [119]. 

[1] J. L. Anderson, Annual review of fluid mechanics , 1989, 

21 , 61–99. [2] S. Marbach and L. Bocquet, Chemical Society Reviews ,2019, 48 , 3102–3144. [3] S. Shim, Chemical Reviews , 2022, 122 , 6986–7009. [4] B. Derjaguin, G. Sidorenkov, E. Zubashchenko and E. Kiseleva, Progress in Surface Science , 1993, 43 , 138– 152. [5] P. Bacchin, K. Glavatskiy and V. Gerbaud, Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics , 2019, 21 , 10114–10124. [6] B. Ab´ ecassis, C. Cottin-Bizonne, C. Ybert, A. Ajdari and L. Bocquet, Nature materials , 2008, 7, 785. [7] B. Ab´ ecassis, C. Cottin-Bizonne, C. Ybert, A. Ajdari and L. Bocquet, New Journal of Physics , 2009, 11 ,075022. [8] J. Palacci, C. Cottin-Bizonne, C. Ybert and L. Bocquet, 

Soft Matter , 2012, 8, 980–994. [9] L. Bocquet, Nature materials , 2020, 19 , 254–256. [10] N. Kavokine, R. R. Netz and L. Bocquet, Annual Review of Fluid Mechanics , 2021, 53 , 377–410. [11] A. Siria, P. Poncharal, A.-L. Biance, R. Fulcrand, X. Blase, S. T. Purcell and L. Bocquet, Nature , 2013, 

494 , 455. [12] J. Feng, M. Graf, K. Liu, D. Ovchinnikov, D. Dumcenco, M. Heiranian, V. Nandigana, N. R. Aluru, A. Kis and A. Radenovic, Nature , 2016, 536 , 197. [13] T. Emmerich, K. S. Vasu, A. Nigu` es, A. Keerthi, B. Radha, A. Siria and L. Bocquet, Nature materials ,2022, 21 , 696–702. [14] C. Lee, C. Cottin-Bizonne, A.-L. Biance, P. Joseph, L. Bocquet and C. Ybert, Physical Review Letters , 2014, 

112 , 244501. [15] C. Lee, C. Cottin-Bizonne, R. Fulcrand, L. Joly and C. Ybert, The journal of physical chemistry letters ,2017, 8, 478–483. [16] S. R. De Groot and P. Mazur, Non-equilibrium thermo-dynamics , Courier Corporation, 2013. [17] C. Herrero, M. De San F´ eliciano, S. Merabia and L. Joly, 

Nanoscale , 2022, 14 , 626–631. [18] R. Ganti, Y. Liu and D. Frenkel, Physical review letters ,2017, 119 , 038002. [19] O. Kedem and A. Katchalsky, The Journal of general physiology , 1961, 45 , 143–179. [20] G. S. Manning and A. R. Kay, Journal of General Phys-34 

iology , 2023, 155 , e202313332. [21] K. S. Pitzer, The Journal of physical chemistry , 1973, 

77 , 268–277. [22] K. S. Pitzer and G. Mayorga, The Journal of Physical Chemistry , 1973, 77 , 2300–2308. [23] P. Debye, Recueil des Travaux Chimiques des Pays-Bas ,1923, 42 , 597–604. [24] G. S. Manning, The Journal of Chemical Physics , 1968, 

49 , 2668–2675. [25] S. Marbach, H. Yoshida and L. Bocquet, The Journal of Chemical Physics , 2017, 146 , 194701. [26] H. Yoshida, S. Marbach and L. Bocquet, The Journal of Chemical Physics , 2017, 146 , 194702. [27] S. Marbach, N. Kavokine and L. Bocquet, The Journal of Chemical Physics , 2020, 152 , 054704. [28] C. B. Picallo, S. Gravelle, L. Joly, E. Charlaix and L. Bocquet, Physical Review Letters , 2013, 111 , 244501. [29] D. Prieve, J. Anderson, J. Ebel and M. Lowell, Journal of Fluid Mechanics , 1984, 148 , 247–269. [30] B. J. Kirby and E. F. Hasselbrink Jr, Electrophoresis ,2004, 25 , 187–202. [31] D. M. Huang, C. Cottin-Bizonne, C. Ybert and L. Boc-quet, Physical review letters , 2007, 98 , 177801. [32] L. Joly, R. H. Meißner, M. Iannuzzi and G. Tocci, ACS nano , 2021, 15 , 15249–15258. [33] L. Bocquet and E. Charlaix, Chemical Society Reviews ,2010, 39 , 1073–1095. [34] N. R. Aluru, F. Aydin, M. Z. Bazant, D. Blankschtein, A. H. Brozena, J. P. de Souza, M. Elimelech, S. Faucher, J. T. Fourkas, V. B. Koman et al. , Chemical reviews ,2023, 123 , 2737–2831. [35] N. Kavokine, M.-L. Bocquet and L. Bocquet, Nature ,2022, 602 , 84–90. [36] A. Ajdari and L. Bocquet, Physical Review Letters ,2006, 96 , 186102. [37] L. Joly, C. Ybert, E. Trizac and L. Bocquet, The Jour-nal of chemical physics , 2006, 125 , 204716. [38] Y. Xie, L. Fu, T. Niehaus and L. Joly, Physical review letters , 2020, 125 , 014501. [39] T. Mouterde, A. Keerthi, A. Poggioli, S. A. Dar, A. Siria, A. K. Geim, L. Bocquet and B. Radha, Na-ture , 2019, 567 , 87–90. [40] E. S. Asmolov, E. F. Silkina and O. I. Vinogradova, 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.02915 , 2025. [41] M. Lizee, Z. Zhang, B. Coquinot, Q. Yang and L. Boc-quet, under review; arXiv preprint ArXiv: 2605.00661 ,2026. [42] C. Ybert, C. Barentin, C. Cottin-Bizonne, P. Joseph and L. Bocquet, Physics of fluids , 2007, 19 , 123601. [43] J. Ou, B. Perot and J. P. Rothstein, Physics of fluids ,2004, 16 , 4635–4643. [44] D. M. Huang, C. Cottin-Bizonne, C. Ybert and L. Boc-quet, Physical Review Letters , 2008, 101 , 064503. [45] M. Macha, S. Marion, V. V. Nandigana and A. Raden-ovic, Nature Reviews Materials , 2019, 4, 588–605. [46] D. J. Rankin, L. Bocquet and D. M. Huang, The Journal of chemical physics , 2019, 151 , 044705. [47] H. Baldock and D. M. Huang, Physics of Fluids , 2025, 

37 , 022032. [48] M. Bilichenko, M. Iannuzzi and G. Tocci, ACS nano ,2024, 18 , 24118–24127. [49] H. Yoshida, H. Mizuno, T. Kinjo, H. Washizu and J.-L. Barrat, The Journal of chemical physics , 2014, 140 ,214701. [50] G. Monet, M.-L. Bocquet and L. Bocquet, The Journal of Chemical Physics , 2023, 159 , 014501. [51] J. L. Anderson and D. M. Malone, Biophysical journal ,1974, 14 , 957–982. [52] A. Hill, Quarterly reviews of biophysics , 1979, 12 , 67– 99. [53] A. Pendse, S. Cetindag, P. Rehak, S. Behura, H. Gao, N. H. L. Nguyen, T. Wang, V. Berry, P. Kr´ al, J. Shan et al. , Advanced Functional Materials , 2021, 31 ,2009586. [54] M. Pascual, N. Chapuis, S. Abdelghani-Idrissi, M.-C. Jullien, A. Siria and L. Bocquet, Energy & Environ-mental Science , 2023, 16 , 4539–4548. [55] M. Lokesh, S. K. Youn and H. G. Park, Nano letters ,2018, 18 , 6679–6685. [56] I. Cho, W. Kim, J. Kim, H.-Y. Kim, H. Lee and S. J. Kim, Physical review letters , 2016, 116 , 254501. [57] E. Secchi, S. Marbach, A. Nigu` es, D. Stein, A. Siria and L. Bocquet, Nature , 2016, 537 , 210. [58] A. Marcotte, T. Mouterde, A. Nigu` es, A. Siria and L. Bocquet, Nature materials , 2020, 19 , 1057–1061. [59] R. J. Gross and J. Osterle, The Journal of chemical physics , 1968, 49 , 228–234. [60] J. Fair and J. Osterle, The Journal of Chemical Physics ,1971, 54 , 3307–3316. [61] G. Westermann-Clark and J. Anderson, Journal of the Electrochemical Society , 1983, 130 , 839. [62] P. Peters, R. Van Roij, M. Z. Bazant and P. Biesheuvel, 

Physical review E , 2016, 93 , 053108. [63] R. Karnik, C. Duan, K. Castelino, H. Daiguji and A. Majumdar, Nano letters , 2007, 7, 547–551. [64] S. Abdelghani-Idrissi, L. Ries, G. Monet, J. Perez-Carvajal, Z. Pilo, P. Sarnikowski, A. Siria and L. Boc-quet, Nature Materials , 2025, 1–7. [65] Z. Li and A. Noy, Chemical Society Reviews , 2025, xxx. [66] Z. Zhang, L. Wen and L. Jiang, Nature Reviews Mate-rials , 2021, 6, 622–639. [67] T. Mouterde and L. Bocquet, The European physical journal E , 2018, 41 , 148. [68] A. Poggioli, A. Siria and L. Bocquet, The journal of physical chemistry B , 2019, 123 , 1171–1185. [69] C. Cramail, R. Lhermerout and E. Charlaix, arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.23853 , 2025. [70] E. S. Asmolov, E. F. Silkina and O. I. Vinogradova, 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.05387 , 2025. [71] S. Lee, J. Lee and J. T. Ault, Colloids and Surfaces A: Physicochemical and Engineering Aspects , 2023, 659 ,130775. [72] J. T. Ault, S. Shin and H. A. Stone, Soft matter , 2019, 

15 , 1582–1596. [73] L. Jubin, A. Poggioli, A. Siria and L. Bocquet, Pro-ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 2018, 201721987. [74] A. Paul and N. Aluru, Physical Review E , 2024, 109 ,025105. [75] T. Emmerich, Y. Teng, N. Ronceray, E. Lopriore, R. Chiesa, A. Chernev, V. Artemov, M. Di Ventra, A. Kis and A. Radenovic, Nature Electronics , 2024, 7,271–278. [76] A. Ismail and B. Radha, Nature Electronics , 2024, 7,258–259. [77] A. Paul and N. Aluru, Journal of Applied Physics , 2024, 

136 , 124701. [78] L.-J. Cheng and L. J. Guo, Chemical Society Reviews ,35 

2010, 39 , 923–938. [79] R. E. Farmer and R. I. Macey, Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA)-Biomembranes , 1970, 196 , 53–65. [80] C. Toupin, M. Le Maguer and L. McGann, Cryobiology ,1989, 26 , 431–444. [81] O. Chara, P. Ford, V. Rivarola, M. Parisi and C. Ca-purro, The Journal of membrane biology , 2005, 207 ,143–150. [82] D. B. Peckys, F. Kleinhans and P. Mazur, PloS one ,2011, 6, e23643. [83] https://ilion-watertech.com/ .[84] J. W. Post, J. Veerman, H. V. Hamelers, G. J. Euverink, S. J. Metz, K. Nymeijer and C. J. Buisman, Journal of membrane science , 2007, 288 , 218–230. [85] B. E. Logan and M. Elimelech, Nature , 2012, 488 , 313. [86] A. Siria, M.-L. Bocquet and L. Bocquet, Nature Reviews Chemistry , 2017, 1, 0091. [87] M. N. Z. Abidin, M. M. Nasef and J. Veerman, Desali-nation , 2022, 537 , 115854. [88] https://www.sweetch.energy/ .[89] R. Pattle, Nature , 1954, 174 , 660–660. [90] R. S. Norman, Science , 1974, 186 , 350–352. [91] B. Grosjean, C. Pean, A. Siria, L. Bocquet, R. Vuilleu-mier and M.-L. Bocquet, The journal of physical chem-istry letters , 2016, 7, 4695–4700. [92] B. Grosjean, M.-L. Bocquet and R. Vuilleumier, Nature communications , 2019, 10 , 1656. [93] S. Cetindag, A. Pendse, R. J. Castellano, P. Rehak, M. Howard, K. Wang, J. Yi, R. F. Praino, P. Kral, L. Liu, S. Kim and J. W. Shan, 2023. [94] Y. Wang, H. Luo, X. R. Advincula, Z. Zhao, A. Es-fandiar, D. Wu, K. D. Fong, L. Gao, A. S. Hazrah, T. Taniguchi et al. , Journal of the American Chemical Society , 2025, 147 , 30107–30116. [95] M. Luberti, R. Gowans, P. Finn and G. Santori, Energy ,2022, 238 , 121967. [96] L. Wang, Z. Wang, S. K. Patel, S. Lin and M. Elimelech, 

ACS nano , 2021, 15 , 4093–4107. [97] Z. Li, A. T. Hall, Y. Wang, Y. Li, D. O. Byrne, L. R. Scammell, R. R. Whitney, F. I. Allen, J. Cumings and A. Noy, Science Advances , 2024, 10 , eado8081. [98] S. Casanova, S. Mistry, S. Mazinani, M. K. Borg, Y. J. Chew and D. Mattia, Nanoscale , 2020, 12 , 21138– 21145. [99] H. Jiang and Y. Su, 2D Materials , 2025, 12 , 032001. [100] R. Li, J. Jiang, Q. Liu, Z. Xie and J. Zhai, Nano Energy ,2018, 53 , 643–649. [101] W. Xin, Z. Zhang, X. Huang, Y. Hu, T. Zhou, C. Zhu, X.-Y. Kong, L. Jiang and L. Wen, Nature communica-tions , 2019, 10 , 3876. [102] S. Sripriya, C. Picard, V. Larrey, F. Fournel and E. Charlaix, Lab on a Chip , 2024, 24 , 5193–5202. [103] Z. Zhang, X.-Y. Kong, K. Xiao, Q. Liu, G. Xie, P. Li, J. Ma, Y. Tian, L. Wen and L. Jiang, Journal of the American Chemical Society , 2015, 137 , 14765–14772. [104] N. Chapuis and L. Bocquet, Sustainable Energy & Fuels ,2025, 9, 2087–2097. [105] D. Velegol, A. Garg, R. Guha, A. Kar and M. Kumar, 

Soft Matter , 2016, 12 , 4686–4703. [106] I. Cho, W. Kim, J. Kim, H.-Y. Kim, H. Lee and S. J. Kim, Physical review letters , 2016, 116 , 254501. [107] O. Pl¨ umper, A. Botan, C. Los, Y. Liu, A. Malthe-Sørenssen and B. Jamtveit, Nature geoscience , 2017, 10 ,685. [108] S. Roman and F. Rembert, Physical Review Fluids ,2025, 10 , L032501. [109] F. Henrique, P. J. Zuk and A. Gupta, Electrochimica Acta , 2022, 433 , 141220. [110] Y. Liu, R. Ganti and D. Frenkel, Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter , 2018, 30 , 205002. [111] Y. Liu, R. Ganti, H. G. Burton, X. Zhang, W. Wang and D. Frenkel, Physical review letters , 2017, 119 , 224502. [112] S. Marbach and L. Bocquet, The Journal of Chemical Physics , 2017, 147 , 154701. [113] X. Shi, A.-K. Pumm, J. Isensee, W. Zhao, D. Ver-schueren, A. Martin-Gonzalez, R. Golestanian, H. Dietz and C. Dekker, Nature Physics , 2022, 18 , 1105–1111. [114] S. Marbach, H. Yoshida and L. Bocquet, Journal of fluid mechanics , 2020, 892 , A6. [115] B. E. McKenzie, H. C. Chu, S. Garoff, R. D. Tilton and A. S. Khair, Journal of Fluid Mechanics , 2022, 949 ,A17. [116] D. J. Bonthuis and R. Golestanian, Physical Review Let-ters , 2014, 113 , 148101. [117] N. Maroundik, D. Ilssar and E. Boyko, Physical Review Fluids , 2025, 10 , 104203. [118] D. Andelman, in Handbook of biological physics , Else-vier, 1995, vol. 1, pp. 603–642. [119] C. Herrero and L. Joly, Physics of Fluids , 2024, 36 ,101801.