Title: CaTherine wheels from trees and Liouville quantum gravity

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.17170v1

Published Time: Tue, 21 Apr 2026 01:07:14 GMT

Number of Pages: 26

Markdown Content:
CATHERINE WHEELS FROM TREES AND LIOUVILLE QUANTUM GRAVITY 

DANNY CALEGARI AND EWAIN GWYNNE 

Abstract. A CaTherine wheel is a space-filling curve f : S1 → S2 such that for every closed interval J ⊂ S1, f (J) is homeomorphic to a closed disk and f (∂J ) is contained in ∂f (J). A CaTherine wheel gives rise to a pair of disjoint, dense topological trees in S2 which roughly speaking lie to the left and right of f . We give necessary and sufficient conditions for a topological tree in S2 to arise as one of these trees for some CaTherine wheel f . We apply this result to show that there is a unique CaTherine wheel corresponding to the geodesic tree rooted at ∞ for the γ-Liouville quantum gravity (LQG) metric, for γ ∈ (0 , 2) . In other words, we construct the space-filling curve which is the contour exploration of the LQG geodesic tree. 

Contents 

1. Introduction 21.1. CaTherine wheels 21.2. CaTherine wheels from half-zippers 21.3. A CaTherine wheel from the Liouville quantum gravity geodesic tree 41.4. CaTherine wheels in probability theory 62. CaTherine wheels from half-zippers 72.1. Half-zippers 82.2. Universal circle 92.3. CaTherine wheels 11 2.4. Zippers 15 3. Checking the axioms for the LQG geodesic tree 16 3.1. Preliminary results on confluence of geodesics 16 3.2. The LQG geodesic tree is a half-zipper 18 3.3. The LQG geodesic tree has short hair 21 3.4. Properties of the LQG CaTherine wheel 23 References 24 

Acknowledgments. We thank Manan Bhatia and Ino Loukidou for helpful discussions, and Manan Bhatia for helpful comments on an earlier version of this paper. D.C. was partially supported by NSF grant DMS-1928930 while in residence at SLMath during winter 2026. E.G. was partially supported by NSF grant DMS-2245832. 

Date : April 21, 2026.  

> 1
> arXiv:2604.17170v1 [math.PR] 18 Apr 2026 2DANNY CALEGARI AND EWAIN GWYNNE

1. Introduction 

1.1. CaTherine wheels. A CaTherine wheel is a surjective map f : S1 → S2 such that for every closed interval J ⊂ S1 the image f (J) is homeomorphic to a closed (2-dimensional) disk, and f (∂J ) is contained in ∂f (J). In other words, a CaTherine wheel is a space-filling loop in S2, viewed modulo changes of time parametrization, which maps each interval to a closed topological disk and never enters the interior of its past. The name derives from Cannon–Thurston, who famously constructed examples in the theory of hyperbolic 3-manifolds. In fact CaTherine wheels arise in many contexts throughout low-dimensional geometry and dynamics: in hyperbolic 3-manifold theory as Cannon– Thurston maps for 3-manifolds fibering over the circle [CT07] or admitting pseudo-Anosov flows without perfect fits [Fen12]; in holomorphic dynamics as Peano curves associated to certain expanding Thurston maps of the 2-sphere [Mey09] and more generally to certain so-called expanding origamis [CH]; and so on. Random CaTherine wheels arise frequently in probability theory, as we discuss in Section 1.4. A unified theory of CaTherine wheels is developed in [CL]. A CaTherine wheel gives rise to a canonical structure called a zipper , which consists of a pair Z± ⊂ S2 of disjoint, dense, topological R-trees. Every CaTherine wheel arises in an essentially unique way as a limit of a family ft : S1 → S2 of embedded Jordan curves in 

S2 (one calls such a family a pseudo-isotopy ), and one can think of Z± as the residue of the family of pairs of Jordan domains separated by ft(S1) as t → 1.It turns out ([CL], Theorem 3.14) that a CaTherine wheel can be recovered from its zipper Z±. But what if one forgets Z− (say) and retains only Z+? The first main theorem of this paper (Theorem 1.3) gives necessary and sufficient conditions for a subset Z ⊂ S2 to arise as Z+ for some CaTherine wheel f : S1 → S2, and shows that such an f , if it exists, is unique. Once we have proven this theorem, we will apply it to establish the existence of a CaTherine wheel whose half-zipper Z+ is the geodesic tree for the γ-Liouville quantum gravity metric for γ ∈ (0 , 2) (see Theorem 1.7). 1.2. CaTherine wheels from half-zippers. A half-zipper Z is a path-connected subset of S2 satisfying certain properties. It is the path-connectivity that is important, and therefore throughout this paper we make the following convention: unless we explicitly say to the contrary, when we refer to “components” we mean path components , and when we refer to a cut point in a path-connected set X we mean a point p in X for which 

X − p has at least two path components. Furthermore, when we discuss paths we usually mean embedded and unparameterized (though sometimes oriented) paths, again unless we explicitly say to the contrary. 

Definition 1.1 (half-zipper) . A subset Z ⊂ S2 is a half-zipper if it satisfies the following properties: (1) Z is dense in S2;(2) there is a unique embedded simple path in Z (modulo time parametrization) con-necting any two distinct points of Z, and every point of Z is a cut point of Z.The cut point condition means that for every p ∈ Z there are q, r ∈ Z so that the unique path in Z from q to r contains p in its interior. CATHERINE WHEELS FROM TREES AND LIOUVILLE QUANTUM GRAVITY 3

A half-zipper has short hair if, for any (equivalently, every) metric d0 on S2 which induces the standard topology, it satisfies: (3) for every ϵ > 0 there is a compact subset T of Z homeomorphic to a finite tree so that every (path) component of Z − T has d0-diameter < ϵ .

Remark 1.2 (Topological R-tree) . A remark about terminology. A half-zipper Z with short hair may be expressed as an increasing union of a countable sequence of finite trees Tn

(Lemma 2.2). Here by ‘finite tree’ we mean the underlying topological space of a finite tree in the sense of graph theory, i.e. a finite connected graph without cycles; trees in this sense are sometimes called simplicial trees or polygonal trees when there is ambiguity about the term. In the path topology (i.e. the topology on Z in which a set is open if its intersection with every Tn is open in Tn) the space Z is what is often called a topological R-tree ,or just topological tree to distinguish it from the more familiar simplicial trees like Tn.With its path topology, the inclusion map Z → S2 is continuous but not a homeomorphism onto its image. This fact is not used in the paper. We are now ready to state our first main theorem. 

Theorem 1.3 (Wheels from short hair) . Let Z be a half-zipper with short hair (Defini-tion 1.1). Then there is a unique CaTherine wheel f : S1 → S2 with zippers Z± for which 

Z = Z+.

The CaTherine wheel f of Theorem 1.3 can be thought of as the clockwise contour (depth-first) exploration of the tree Z. We also prove a converse to Theorem 1.3. 

Proposition 1.4 (CaTherine wheels short hair) . Let f : S1 → S2 be a CaTherine wheel with associated zipper Z± ⊂ S2. Then each of Z± has short hair. 

Theorem 1.3 and Proposition 1.4 are proven in Section 2 via a short topological argument based on results from [CL]. 

Remark 1.5 (Weaker notions of half-zipper) . The reader should take care not to confuse our notion of a half-zipper with the following superficially similar notion. Let eZ be a topological space with the property that there is a unique simple path between any two points of eZ

and every point of eZ is a cut point; and let ϕ : eZ → S2 is a continuous injection for which the image of eZ is dense. Then the set ϕ( eZ) is not in general a half-zipper. The reason is that ϕ( eZ) could contain a non-trivial loop: indeed, there could be a path σ : [0 , 1) → eZ

such that ϕ ◦ σ extends continuously to [0 , 1] with ϕ(σ(1)) = ϕ(σ(0)) . That is, ϕ ◦ σ “lands” at a point of ϕ( eZ) in the sense of Definition 2.3. The fact that sets ϕ( eZ) of the above type are not half-zippers is important to ensure that the CaTherine wheel f arising from a half-zipper as in Theorem 1.3 maps closed intervals to sets which are homeomorphic to closed disks (instead of to sets which have local cut points). See in particular Lemma 2.19. Some discussion about possible generalizations of the definitions of CaTherine wheels and zippers, where the wheel need not map closed intervals to closed disks, can be found in [CL, Section 5]. But, the theory of such generalizations is much less developed than the theory of CaTherine wheels. 4 DANNY CALEGARI AND EWAIN GWYNNE 

1.3. A CaTherine wheel from the Liouville quantum gravity geodesic tree. In this section, we explain an application of Theorem 1.3 where the half-zipper Z is taken to be the tree of Liouville quantum gravity geodesics rooted at ∞. We first need to explain what this means. We give the minimal amount of background necessary to understand the paper here, and provide references for more details. The whole-plane Gaussian free field (GFF) Φ is in some sense the most canonical notion of a random generalized function (distribution) on C. We will not need the precise definition of the Gaussian free field in this paper; we refer to [She07, BP24, WP21] for background on the GFF. For a parameter γ ∈ (0 , 2) , Liouville quantum gravity (LQG) is, heuristically speak-ing, the random geometry on C described by the Riemannian metric tensor (1.3.1) eγΦ(dx 2 + dy 2)

where dx 2 + dy 2 is the Euclidean metric tensor on C. The definition 1.3.1 does not make literal sense since Φ does not have well-defined pointwise values. But, one can make sense of various objects associated with (1.3.1) via regularization procedures. To do this, one replaces Φ in (1.3.1) by a family of continuous functions {Φε}ε> 0 which converge to Φ in the distributional sense as ε → 0, then takes an appropriate limit of objects associated with Φε. We emphasize that in general, the arguments to show that the limit exists are non-trivial and specific to the Gaussian free field. Particularly relevant for us is the “Riemannian distance function” D = D(γ)Φ associated with (1.3.1), called the γ-LQG metric , which is a random metric on C shown to exist in [DDDF20, GM21]. The metric D induces the Euclidean topology on C, but it has very different geometric properties. For example, the Hausdorff dimension of C with respect to 

D is strictly larger than two [GP22, DG20]. The LQG metric is uniquely characterized (as a function of Φ) by a list of natural axioms in [GM21], but we will not need these axioms here. See [DDG23] for a survey of results about the LQG metric. One can similarly define the “volume form” μ, called the γ-LQG area measure , which is a random measure on C obtained as a limit of regularized versions of eγΦ dx dy , where 

dx dy denotes Lebesgue measure [Kah85, RV11, DS11]. See [BP24] for an exposition of this measure. We will be interested in geodesics with respect to D. To talk about this, we need to review some concepts from metric geometry. For a path σ : [ a, b ] → C, its D-length is the number (1.3.2) sup 

> T
> #T

X

> i=1

D(σ(ti), σ (ti−1)) 

where the supremum is over all partitions T : a = t0 < · · · < t #T = b of [a, b ]. We say that 

σ is a D-geodesic if for all a ≤ t < s ≤ b, the D-length of σ|[t,s ] is equal to D(σ(t), σ (s)) .Almost surely, for each z, w ∈ C, there exists at least one D-geodesic from z to w. For a fixed z, w ∈ C, this D-geodesic is a.s. unique (see, e.g., [DDG23, Lemma 4.2]). Note that the geodesics considered in this paper are minimizing geodesics, not just local geodesics. In particular, geodesics are necessarily simple paths. One of the most important features of the LQG metric is confluence of geodesics ,which roughly speaking says the following (see Propositions 1.6 and 3.1 for some precise CATHERINE WHEELS FROM TREES AND LIOUVILLE QUANTUM GRAVITY 5γ = 0 .5γ = 1 .5z1z2z3z4z5z6

Figure 1. Left and middle: Simulations of LQG metric balls with two different values of γ and the same GFF instance, produced using code provided by J. Miller. Colors indicate the distance to the center point (black dot). The black curves are LQG geodesics from the center point to other points in the ball. Notice that these geodesics have a tree-like structure. 

Right: Points z1, . . . , z 6 ∈ C \ Z∞ which admit unique D-geodesics to ∞

(red). The points z1, . . . , z 6 are each hit once by the space-filling path g of Theorem 1.8, in order. Points on the geodesics are hit at least twice. The blue path gives a rough indication of the order in which g visits points of C.statements). For a typical point z ∈ C, any two D-geodesics started from z stay together for a non-trivial initial time interval before “branching off” toward their respective target points. Consequently, the D-geodesics started from z form a tree-like structure. Confluence of geodesics for the LQG metric was first proven in [GM20]. See Figure 1, left and middle, for simulations of LQG metric balls and geodesics. Our main theorem concerning the LQG metric gives the existence of a CaTherine wheel one of whose zippers is the tree of LQG geodesics to ∞. To state this precisely, we recall some background on LQG geodesics. Let w ∈ C. A D-geodesic from w to ∞ is a path 

σ : [0 , ∞) → C such that σ(0) = w and D(σ(t), σ (s)) = s − t for each 0 ≤ t < s < ∞. The following is a restatement of [GPS22, Proposition 4.4]. 

Proposition 1.6. Almost surely, for each z ∈ C there exists a D-geodesic from z to ∞.For each fixed z ∈ C, a.s. this D geodesic is unique (but there can be exceptional points for which is it not unique). Furthermore, for each r > 0, there exists an R > r with the following confluence property. If σ and σ′ are D-geodesics from points in the open Euclidean disk Br(0) to ∞, then σ − BR(0) = σ′ − BR(0) .

We define the D-geodesic tree rooted at ∞, denoted Z∞, to be the union of all of the D-geodesics to ∞, minus their starting points, i.e., (1.3.3) Z∞ := {σ(t) : σ is a D-geodesic from a point of C to ∞ and 0 < t < ∞} .

Proposition 1.6 immediately implies that Z∞ is dense in C and is path-connected. 

Theorem 1.7 (CaTherine wheel for LQG) . Let γ ∈ (0 , 2) and let D be the γ-LQG metric as above. View C as a subset of the Riemann sphere C ∪ {∞} . There exists a unique CaTherine wheel f : S1 → C ∪ {∞} whose right zipper satisfies Z+ = Z∞.6 DANNY CALEGARI AND EWAIN GWYNNE 

The CaTherine wheel f can be thought of as the contour exploration of the LQG geodesic tree. The following theorem makes this precise and also establishes some other properties of f which are reminiscent of properties of random space-filling curves seen elsewhere in probability. See Figure 1, right, for an illustration. 

Theorem 1.8 (Properties the LQG CaTherine wheel) . Let f be as in Theorem 1.7. (1) Almost surely, f −1(∞) consists of a single point, and there exists a continuous space-filling curve g : R → C which is a re-parametrization of f |S1−f −1(∞) such that 

g(0) = 0 and μ(g[a, b ]) = b − a for each a, b ∈ R with a < b , where μ is the LQG area measure. (2) Let z, w ∈ C \ Z∞ such that there is a unique D-geodesic from each of z and w to 

∞ (by Proposition 1.6, this is a.s. the case for a fixed z, w ∈ C). Then with g as above, each of z and w has a unique preimage under g. Moreover, z is hit before w

by g if and only if the D-geodesic from z to ∞ merges into the D-geodesic from w

to ∞ from the right side of the latter. 

We will prove Theorem 1.7 in Section 3 by checking the conditions of Theorem 1.3. To do this, we will cite some results from the existing LQG literature (mostly from [GPS22]) which give certain geometric properties for LQG geodesics. Then, we will deduce the conditions of Theorem 1.3 from these properties using purely topological arguments. Our proof can be read without any knowledge of LQG if one is willing to take some external results as black boxes. Theorem 1.8 will follow easily from some features of the construction of f (see in particular Lemmas 2.21 and 2.22). We state and prove Theorems 1.7 and 1.8 in the setting of the whole-plane GFF for convenience, but analogous statements should be true for other variants of the GFF, e.g., the variant corresponding to the unit-area LQG sphere (see [DMS21, Section 4.5] or [DKRV16, AHS17]). We expect that such variants can be deduced from Theorem 1.7 and the intermediate results in its proof via local absolute continuity arguments. We ex-pect that Theorem 1.7 is also true in the critical case γ = 2 , but we will not treat this case here since several of the results we need to cite have only been proven for γ ∈ (0 , 2) .Theorem 1.7 is an LQG metric analog of other theorems in the literature which construct a peano curve from one or more trees in the plane. Examples of such theorems include the construction of space-filling SLE κ for κ ∈ (4 , 8) in [MS17] and the construction of a peano curve for the geodesic tree in the directed landscape [BB23]. It may be possible to use Theorem 1.3 to construct CaTherine wheels (equivalently, peano curves) from geodesic trees in other random geometries, e.g., the Poisson roads metric [BCK24, Ken17] or the hypothetical directed versions of the LQG metric [BG25, Conjecture 2.2]. Theorem 1.7 is new when γ ∈ (0 , 2) − { p8/3}. But, in the special case when γ = p8/3,the CaTherine wheel corresponding to the LQG geodesic tree is already well-studied, at least in the unit-area LQG sphere case. This is because p8/3-LQG is equivalent to the Brownian map [MS20, MS21b]; see Section 1.4 for details. 1.4. CaTherine wheels in probability theory. As noted in Section 1.1, CaTherine wheels arise frequently in probability theory, although the term “CaTherine wheel” is not used in the probability literature. Instead, CaTherine wheels are usually referred to as peano curves (satisfying certain conditions). Zippers in probability theory are usually CATHERINE WHEELS FROM TREES AND LIOUVILLE QUANTUM GRAVITY 7

referred to instead as pairs of trees. To put our results in context, we will briefly survey the appearances of CaTherine wheels in probability. Perhaps the most well-studied CaTherine wheels in probability theory are Schramm-Loewner evolution (SLE κ) curves for κ ≥ 8 [Sch00]. Specifically, whole-plane SLE κ from 

∞ to ∞ is a CaTherine wheel (when viewed as a curve in the Riemann sphere) for κ ≥ 8.The associated zipper consists of the trees of SLE 16 /κ (2 − 16 /κ ) flow lines of a whole-plane Gaussian free field; see [MS17, Section 1.2.3] and [DMS21, Footnote 4]. Space-filling SLE κ

for κ ∈ (4 , 8) is not exactly a CaTherine wheel since the image of an interval under such a curve is not homeomorphic to a closed disk (rather, it has cut points). But, space-filling SLE κ for κ ∈ (4 , 8) has many similar features as CaTherine wheels, including an associated zipper-like pair of trees (c.f. Remark 1.5 and [CL, Section 5]). The seminal mating of trees 

theorem of Duplantier-Miller-Sheffield [DMS21] gives a description of the zipper associated with space-filling SLE κ for κ > 4 in terms of a pair of correlated Brownian motions. Another important random CaTherine wheel is the peano curve on the Brownian map . The Brownian map is a random metric space (X, D ) homeomorphic to S2 which arises as the Gromov-Hausdorff scaling limit of uniform triangulations, quadrangulations, etc. [Le 13, Mie13]. It can be constructed as a metric quotient of S1 under a certain equiv-alence relation defined in terms of the Brownian snake . The quotient map f : S1 → X is a CaTherine wheel. The associated zipper has a simple description in terms of the Brown-ian snake. In particular, one of the half-zippers is the geodesic tree on the Brownian map (rooted at a uniformly sampled marked point) and the other has the law of the continuum random tree. See [MS21a, Section 4] for explanations. It is shown in [MS20, MS21b] that 

C ∪ {∞} , equipped with the p8/3-LQG metric induced by the LQG sphere field, is iso-metric (as a metric space) to the Brownian map. Hence the CaTherine wheel associated with the Brownian map is the same as the CaTherine wheel in Theorem 1.7 for γ = p8/3,with the LQG sphere field in place of the whole-plane GFF. We do not have any reason to expect that the zippers in Theorem 1.7 for general γ ∈ (0 , 2) admit a simple description analogous to the Brownian snake description in the Brownian map setting. Yet another CaTherine wheel in probability is the peano curve for the geodesic tree in the 

directed landscape [BB23]. The construction of this curve is inspired by the construction of the Toth-Werner curve on the Brownian web [TW98], which is a space-filling curve built from a pair of trees but is not quite a CaTherine wheel. In all of the above settings, both halves of the zipper associated with the random CaTherine wheel (or the space-filling curve which is not quite a CaTherine wheel) are well-understood. An important novel feature of this paper is that we only have a priori information about one half of the associated zipper. 2. CaTherine wheels from half-zippers 

In this section we will prove Theorem 1.3 and Proposition 1.4 using results from [CL] and elementary topological arguments. 

Remark 2.1 . It is a fact that if X is a topological space homeomorphic to a finite graph, any embedding of X in S2 is tame; i.e. there is a homeomorphism of S2 to itself taking the image of X to a finite polygonal graph. See e.g. [New92]. Thus we may reason about compact paths in Z (and, if Z has short hair, noncompact paths) combinatorially. 8 DANNY CALEGARI AND EWAIN GWYNNE 

2.1. Half-zippers. We start off by establishing that a half-zipper with short hair (Defini-tion 1.1) automatically satisfies several other useful properties. 

Lemma 2.2 (Increasing union) . Suppose Z is a half-zipper with short hair. Then we may write Z as an increasing union Z := S 

> n

Tn where each Tn is a finite tree, and such that every component of Z − Tn has diameter < 1/n .Proof. Since every point of Z is a cut point, it contains no embedded loops. It follows that the union of any finite set of finite subtrees of Z is a finite subtree. Let T ′ 

> n

be a sequence of finite subtrees of Z as in the definition of the short hair property with ϵ = 1 /n and let 

Tn = ∪i≤nT ′

> n

. Then Tn is an increasing family. Let T∞ = ∪nTn. Then by construction every component of Z −T∞ has diameter 0 and therefore consists of at most one point. But any point of Z − T∞ could not be a cut point of Z, and therefore Z = T∞ as claimed. □

From now on, if Z is a half-zipper with short hair, we fix a sequence Tn of finite subtrees as in Lemma 2.2. 

Definition 2.3 (Landing ray) . A ray is a half-open interval in Z (i.e. a subspace homeo-morphic to [0 , 1) ). It is a proper ray if the inclusion [0 , 1) ⊂ Z is a proper embedding. A ray lands if it extends continuously to an embedding of [0 , 1] ; the image of 1 is called the 

landing point .A half-zipper has the strong landing property if every ray in Z lands, and if every point in S2 is the landing point of some ray in Z.

Lemma 2.4 (Limit rays) . Suppose Z is a half-zipper with short hair. Fix q ∈ Z and let 

pi ∈ Z be any sequence of points, and let ηi ⊂ Z be the unique embedded path in Z from 

q to pi. Suppose pi → p ∈ S2. Then after passing to a subsequence if necessary we may arrange that (1) for any fixed n the intersections ηi ∩ Tn converge as subsets to a limit σn ⊂ Tn;(2) the σn are an increasing nested sequence of (possibly degenerate) paths; and (3) the union σ := S 

> n

σn is either a ray which lands at p or the unique path in Z from 

q to p (which can only happen if p ∈ Z). Consequently, any half-zipper with short hair has the strong landing property. Proof. Since each Tn is finite it is compact, and therefore ηi ∩ Tn has a convergent subse-quence for each fixed n. Pass to a diagonal subsequence of the indices i, so that ηi ∩ Tn

converges for each fixed n to some σn. Each σn is a possibly degenerate path (i.e. for some 

n it might consist only of the initial point q), and since Tn ⊂ Tn+1 we necessarily have 

σn ⊂ σn+1 as an initial segment, so these paths form a nested family. Since the diameter of σ − σn is at most 1/n for any n either σ is a path that ends at p or a ray that lands at 

p. Note that if p ∈ S2 − Z then the union σ is necessarily a (proper) ray. Now let us show that Z has the strong landing property. First of all, because Z is dense, we have already constructed a landing ray that lands at any point p ∈ S2 − Z. Thus it remains to check that every ray lands. Let σ be a proper ray. Then if we define σn = σ ∩ Tn

we have σ = S 

> n

σn and the diameter of σ − σn is at most 1/n , and thus σ necessarily lands and we are done. □CATHERINE WHEELS FROM TREES AND LIOUVILLE QUANTUM GRAVITY 9

Definition 2.5 (Hairy) . A half-zipper is hairy if every embedded path I ⊂ Z has branch-ing on both sides; i.e., there are nontrivial oriented paths α, β ⊂ Z that begin on I and intersect I only at these initial points, and which lie respectively to the right and to the left of the oriented interval I in S2.

Lemma 2.6 (Short hair hairy) . Suppose Z is a half-zipper with short hair. Then Z is hairy. Proof. Suppose not, so that there is some interval I ⊂ Z with no branching on the right for some choice of orientation. Let pi ∈ Z be a sequence of points converging to the midpoint p

of I from the right. Let U be an open disk in S2 centered at p and bisected (topologically) by I (i.e. intersecting I in a single proper subinterval), and let V be the open half-disk component of U in S2 − I on the right of I. Then pi is contained in V for all sufficiently large i.By Lemma 2.4 there is a proper ray σ in Z starting at p which is a limit of the unique embedded paths from p to pi. Let Tn be as in Lemma 2.2. For fixed n and big i the endpoint of σn := σ ∩ Tn is joined by a path in Z of diameter at most 1/n to pi and is therefore (because I has no branching on the right) not on I, but lies in V . In particular the image of σ is a nontrivial closed embedded loop in Z, which is a contradiction. □

2.2. Universal circle. In this subsection we show that associated to any hairy half-zipper 

Z is a canonical circle S1 

> Z

which completes a natural circular order on the set of (topological) ends of Z.We follow the construction and the notation in [CL], § 3 and [CL24], § 2.5 closely, and refer to those papers for details and proofs. Let E denote the set of equivalence classes of proper (unparameterized) rays, where two proper rays are equivalent if they agree outside a compact subset. We remark that as a set, this is the same as the set of topological ends of Z in its path-topology in the sense of Freudenthal [Fre31], i.e. the inverse limit of π0(Z − Tn) for any cofinal sequence of compact path-connected subsets, for instance the set of trees Tn as in Lemma 2.4; however we will shortly give it a different topology than Freudenthal’s end topology. 

Definition 2.7 (Convex hull) . Let S be a subset of Z ⊔ E. If S is empty or consists of a single point of E, the convex hull of S is empty. Otherwise the convex hull is the smallest path-connected subset of Z containing S ∩ Z and containing rays representing every element of S ∩ E.The planar embedding and the orientation of S2 defines a circular order on E, by [CL24] Lemma 2.13. We topologize E with the order topology (this is quite different from the Freudenthal topology). Since Z is a countable union of finite trees, E is separable. Let E

define the order completion. This is circularly ordered, and is compact and separable in the order topology. The points of E − E are represented by geometric objects called ideal gaps . These are defined in [CL24], § 2.5 and we repeat the definition here. If eL, e R are distinct elements of E we denote by [eL, e R] the set of ends e ∈ E for which 

eL, e, e R is positively (i.e. anticlockwise) circularly ordered, together with eL, e R themselves. 

Lemma 2.8 (Nonempty intersection) . Suppose there is an infinite nested sequence 

· · · [eLi+1 , e Ri+1 ] ⊂ [eLi , e Ri ] ⊂ · · · 10 DANNY CALEGARI AND EWAIN GWYNNE 

whose intersection is empty. For each i let ηi ⊂ Z denote the convex hull of eLi and eRi

(this is a properly embedded line), oriented to run from eLi to eRi . Then there is some i so that the intersection X := ∩j≥iηj is either a point, or a compact, nonempty interval. 

This is [CL24], Lemma 2.15. 

Definition 2.9 (Ideal gap) . A sequence of proper lines ηi in Z which are the convex hulls of {eLi , e Ri } for a sequence of nested intervals [eLi , e Ri ] in E is said to be end nested .A point p ∈ Z together with an end nested sequence ηi as above for which T

> i

[eLi , e Ri ] is empty and for which p ∈ T 

> i

ηi is called an ideal gap . We define an equivalence relation on ideal gaps as follows. Let S and S′ be a pair of sequences of nested intervals in E

with empty intersection. We say S refines S′ if S′ is a subsequence of S. The relation of refinement is not an equivalence relation, but it generates an equivalence relation on sequences of nested intervals in E with empty intersection by S∼S′ if there is a finite sequence S = S0, S 1, · · · , S n = S′ so that for each i either Si refines Si+1 or Si+1 refines Si.Say that two ideal gaps are equivalent if their associated sequences of nested intervals are related by this equivalence relation. A point p as above is said to lie in the support of the equivalence class of the given ideal gap. The concept of an equivalence class of ideal gap is very similar to the concept of a prime end (see, e.g., [Pom92, Section 2] for the definition of a prime end); morally speaking an ideal gap would be a prime end associated to the “complementary region” S2 −Z if this were an open disk. One could make this analogy more precise by working directly with prime ends of the domains S2 − Tn and passing to a limit, but there seems to be no particular advantage to this. 

Lemma 2.10 (Order completion) . The union of E together with the equivalence classes of ideal gaps of Z admit a natural circular ordering which is equal to the order completion E.

This is [CL], Lemma 3.8. 

Lemma 2.11 (Ideal gaps are points) . Suppose Z is hairy. Then the support of each equivalence class of ideal gap is a single point. 

This is [CL], Lemma 3.11. 

Lemma 2.12 (Order completions are circles) . Suppose Z is hairy. Then the order com-pletion E is homeomorphic to a circle S1 

> Z

.

This is [CL], Lemma 3.12. Since every point of Z is a cut point, every point p ∈ Z is in the support of an ideal gap. Although it is not logically necessary, we explain this briefly for the benefit of the reader. For any p the complement Z − p has at least two components, and each of these components contains many proper rays. If A is a component of Z − p and EA is the set of ends corresponding to proper rays in A, then EA is dense in some interval of S1 

> Z

and for different components A, A ′ the subsets EA and EA′ are disjoint and pairwise unlinked in S1 

> Z

. Thus there is an induced circular order on the set of components of Z − p. An ideal gap supported at p is a (Dedekind) cut in this circularly ordered set. Since there CATHERINE WHEELS FROM TREES AND LIOUVILLE QUANTUM GRAVITY 11 

are at least two components of Z − p, there are at least two cuts in the circularly ordered set, and therefore p is contained in the support of at least two distinct ideal gaps (and, by Lemma 2.11, it is equal to the support of at least two distinct ideal gaps). Let’s introduce some terminology. If η is an oriented path in Z and p ∈ η, let A+, resp. 

A−, be the components of Z − p containing the part of η that is ahead of, resp. behind, p

in the orientation. Say that an ideal gap e supported at p lies on the positive side of η

(equivalently the right hand side) if the corresponding cut of the components of Z − p lies in the (oriented) interval [A−, A +] in the circular order on components of Z − p.2.3. CaTherine wheels. By Lemma 2.6 Z is hairy, and by Lemma 2.12 the order com-pletion E is homeomorphic to a circle S1 

> Z

. By Lemma 2.10 the points of S1 

> Z

correspond to ends of Z, and to ideal gaps. Define f : S1 

> Z

→ S2 as follows: if e ∈ S1 

> Z

is an end, define 

f (e) to be the landing point of any ray representing e; such a landing point exists, because 

Z has the strong landing property, by Lemma 2.4. If e ∈ S1 

> Z

is an ideal gap, define f (e) to be the support of e. This is a single point by Lemma 2.11. Thus f is well-defined, and, by the strong landing property, it is surjective. We claim that f is a CaTherine wheel. This is established in a sequence of steps. 

Lemma 2.13 (Continuous) . The map f : S1 

> Z

→ S2 is continuous. Proof. Let n ∈ N and let Tn be as in Lemma 2.2. If e ∈ S1 

> Z

is an end, and σ is a ray representing e, there is a point p on σ in the complement of Tn for any large n. The component of Z − p containing e therefore has diameter < 1/n , and pairs of rays in this end branching from either side of σ give intervals [eLi , e Ri ] nesting down to e. In particular, if U is any open neighborhood of f (e), then f −1(U ) contains the entire open interval 

(eLi , e Ri ) about e for all sufficiently large i. If e ∈ S1 

> Z

is an ideal gap with support p, we may similarly find a nested sequence of intervals [eLi , e Ri ] for which the convex hulls ηi of 

{eLi , e Ri } have intersection p. Again, fix a large n and consider the intersections of ηi with 

Tn. For sufficiently large i these intersections must have arbitrarily small diameter, or else T 

> i

ηi would contain an interval in Tn. But the diameter of each component of ηi − Tn is less than 1/n . It follows once more that if U is any open neighborhood of f (e), then f −1(U )

contains the entire open interval (eLi , e Ri ) about e for all sufficiently large i. This proves continuity of f . □

To show that f is a CaTherine wheel, it remains to prove the following. 

Lemma 2.14 (Disks) . Let J ⊂ S1 

> Z

be a closed interval. Then f (J) is a closed topological disk, and f (∂J ) is contained in ∂f (J).

The proof of Lemma 2.14 requires several lemmas. To start off, if J is a closed interval in S1 

> Z

then the orientation on S1 

> Z

determines an orientation on J. With respect to this orientation we denote the endpoints of J as J± so that J = [ J−, J +]. Now for every such closed interval J in S1 let ZJ be the convex hull in Z of the corresponding set of ends and supports of ideal gaps in J, and let ηJ ⊂ ZJ be the convex hull of the ends and supports of ideal gaps in ∂J , oriented to run from f (J−) to f (J+).

Lemma 2.15 (Separation) . The path ηJ separates Z − ZJ from ZJ − ηJ in Z.12 DANNY CALEGARI AND EWAIN GWYNNE  

> JJ+J−
> ηJ
> ZJ

Figure 2. J ⊂ S1 runs from J− to J+ in S1. The convex hull in Z of 

J± is ηJ (in red). The endpoint J+ (in blue) is an ideal gap supported at a point in Z whereas J− (in green) is an end. Thus ηJ is a half-open interval in Z that lands at f (J−), and separates ZJ − ηJ (in orange) from Z − ZJ in 

Z. However, the orientation on ηJ (indicated by the arrow) runs from f (J−)

to f (J+).

Proof. If p ∈ Z − ZJ then any path in Z from p to ηJ lies on the left (i.e. the negative) side of ηJ whereas if p ∈ ZJ − ηJ any path in Z from p to ηJ lies on the right (i.e. the positive) side of ηJ by definition. Thus if p ∈ Z − ZJ and q ∈ ZJ − ηJ the unique path in 

Z from p to q must intersect ηJ . See Figure 2. □

Lemma 2.16 (Closure of ZJ ). The closure ZJ is equal to f (J), and ZJ ∩ Z = ZJ .Proof. Evidently f (J) is closed. It contains ZJ because if p, q ∈ J have convex hull η in 

Z, and we orient η so that it runs from p to q where the oriented interval [p, q ] ⊂ S1 

> Z

is contained in J, then every ideal gap supported at any r ∈ η on the positive side of η is in 

J and therefore r ∈ f (J). Hence f (J) contains ZJ . Conversely, suppose r is in the interior of J. Then by the definition of the circular order, the convex hull of f (J−) and f (r) lies on the right of ηJ so that either f (r) is in ZJ or f (r) is a landing point of a ray in ZJ and therefore in either case f (r) ∈ ZJ . Hence f (J) is contained in ZJ .But now ZJ ∩ Z = f (J) ∩ Z = ZJ . □

Next we must discuss components of S2 − ZJ . We establish some properties. 

Lemma 2.17 (Boundary points) . Let U be a component of S2 − ZJ . Then ZJ ∩ U is nonempty, and is contained in ηJ .Proof. Pick q ∈ U ∩ Z. Since Z is path-connected, there is a path in Z from q to ZJ and this path must intersect U in a point of ZJ ∩ U because ZJ ∩ Z = ZJ by Lemma 2.16. Pick q ∈ U ∩ Z and a sequence pi ∈ U ∩ Z converging to any p ∈ ZJ ∩ U . By Lemma 2.4 the paths σi from q to pi converge after passing to a subsequence to σ that lands at p. By CATHERINE WHEELS FROM TREES AND LIOUVILLE QUANTUM GRAVITY 13 

Lemma 2.15 no σi can meet ZJ except in a subset of ηJ and therefore σ meets ZJ only in a subset of ηJ . In particular, p ∈ ηJ . □

Conversely to Lemma 2.17 we have the following: 

Lemma 2.18 (ηJ in boundary) . Suppose ηJ consists of more than one point. Then there is a unique connected component U of S2 − ZJ such that ηJ ⊂ U and U lies on the negative side of ηJ .Proof. We first observe that if there is such a component U then it is unique, since if p is an interior point of ηJ and pi ∈ S2 − ηJ converges to p from the left, pi must eventually be contained in U .The proof that such a component U exists is similar to that of Lemma 2.6. Let p ∈ ηJ

be an interior point, let W ⊂ S2 be a small open disk centered at p and bisected by ηJ and let V be the open half-disk component of W in S2 − ηJ on the left (i.e. the negative) side of ηJ . We claim that if W is small enough, V is contained in some component of S2 − ZJ .For otherwise, we can find pi ∈ ZJ ∩ V which converge to p from the left. Let σi be a sequence of paths in ZJ from p to pi. By Lemma 2.4 they converge to some σ. Since each 

σi is a path in ZJ it cannot exit ηJ to the left; in particular, if we choose a closed interval 

τ in S2 − V so that ηJ ∪ τ is a Jordan arc, each σi must intersect τ and therefore the same is true of σ. Thus as in the proof of Lemma 2.6 the image of σ is a nontrivial closed embedded loop in ZJ , which is a contradiction. □

Lemma 2.19 (No local cut points) . The set ZJ has no local cut points in ZJ .Proof. Suppose p ∈ ZJ is a local cut point of ZJ , so that there is a neighborhood U of p for which there are at least two components A, B of U ∩ (ZJ − p). Without loss of generality we may assume that A ∪ p contains a path in ZJ starting at p. We claim that the same is true of B. For, otherwise, if we choose pi ∈ B ∩ ZJ converging to p and let σi be the paths in ZJ from p to pi, then none of the σi are entirely contained in B ∪ p, and therefore by Lemma 2.4 they converge to a nontrivial loop in ZJ , which is a contradiction. See Figure 3. ppiσiAB

Figure 3. As pi → p the paths σi converge to a nontrivial loop in ZJ .We may therefore assume that there is a path η ⊂ ZJ containing p and separating η − p

into η− ⊂ A and η+ ⊂ B. Because p is a local cut point of ZJ there is a sequence of points 

pi ∈ Z − ZJ converging to p from either side of η and by Lemma 2.4 we may therefore 14 DANNY CALEGARI AND EWAIN GWYNNE 

produce rays r, r ′ in Z − ZJ landing on η from either side. We shall show that this gives a contradiction. In fact, any path η in ZJ may be extended to a proper line η′ in ZJ limiting to ends 

e± ∈ J, and we may orient η′ so that it runs from e− to e+ where the oriented interval 

[e−, e +] ⊂ J. For such an orientation, if α is any ray in Z − η′ landing on η′ from the right (i.e. positive) side, then any p ∈ α is the support of an ideal gap in [e−, e +], and therefore α ⊂ ZJ . Thus one of r, r ′ must actually lie in ZJ after all, and we obtain a contradiction. □

Lemma 2.20 (One complementary component) . The complement S2 − ZJ has exactly one component. Proof. Suppose there are at least two complementary components U and V . By Lemma 2.17 both ∂U and ∂V must intersect ηJ , and if ηJ has more than one point then by Lemma 2.18 we may assume without loss of generality that U contains all of ηJ and lies on the negative side of ηJ . But then in either case there must be some point p ∈ ηJ in ∂U ∩ ∂V . The set 

ZJ is locally connected, since it is the continuous image of the interval J; in particular, the point p is accessible from both U and V , and therefore there is a compact interval I with one endpoint in each of U and V and intersecting ZJ only at p. Consequently p ∈ ZJ is a local cut point of ZJ , contrary to Lemma 2.19. To see there is at least one complementary component, suppose not so that ZJ is dense in S2. Choose q ∈ ZJ and q′ ∈ Z − ZJ . There is a unique path τ in Z joining q to q′,and τ necessarily intersects Z − ZJ in a half-open segment. Now choose a sequence of points pi ∈ ZJ converging to q′. The paths σi from q to pi all lie in ZJ , and converge by Lemma 2.4 to σ ⊂ ZJ landing at q′; thus σ ∪ q′ is a path in Z from q to q′ which is different from τ , which is a contradiction. □

Proof of Lemma 2.14. We first show that f (J) has the topology of a closed disk. By Lemma 2.16, f (J) = ZJ , with ZJ as in the discussion just after Lemma 2.14. By Lemma 2.20, S2 − ZJ has one component U . Since ZJ = f (J), it is locally connected, so it suffices to show ZJ has no (global) cut points. But any (global) cut point of ZJ must lie in ZJ since ZJ is path-connected, and ZJ has no local cut points at all that are in ZJ

by Lemma 2.19. Finally, f (∂J ) is contained in the closure of ηJ , and ηJ is contained in U ∩ ZJ = ∂Z J by Lemma 2.17 and Lemma 2.18. □

Proof of Theorem 1.3. The map f : S1 

> Z

→ S2 that sends an ideal gap to its support and an end to the landing point of the associated ray in Z is continuous (Lemma 2.13) and for every closed interval J ⊂ S1 satisfies f (J) = ZJ (Lemma 2.16) where ZJ ⊂ Z is the convex hull in Z of J. Furthermore, each ZJ is a disk, and f (∂J ) is contained in ∂Z J

(Lemma 2.14). Thus f is a CaTherine wheel, and by construction, Z is Z+ where Z± is the zipper associated to f . Conversely if f : S1 → S2 is any CaTherine wheel with zipper 

Z± then for any J ⊂ S1 we can define η+ 

> J

⊂ Z+ to be the oriented convex hull of J±, and let Z+ 

> J

be the subset of Z+ on the positive side of η+ 

> J

and then f (J) = Z+ 

> J

; see e.g. [CL] § 1.5 especially Lemma 1.22. In particular, Z+ (as a set) determines f , so there is a unique 

f with Z = Z+. This concludes the proof of Theorem 1.3. □CATHERINE WHEELS FROM TREES AND LIOUVILLE QUANTUM GRAVITY 15 

We conclude this subsection with a proof of the converse to Theorem 1.3. 

Proof of Proposition 1.4. Any CaTherine wheel f extends canonically to F : S2 

> f

→ S2

where S2 

> f

= S1 ⊔ P ± for two open hemispheres P ±, and Z± = F (P ±). Each of P ± admits a metric for which it is isometric to an open Euclidean unit disk, with S1 as the unit circle, and so that for each p ∈ Z+ (say) the point preimage F −1(p) ∩ P + is a relatively closed contractible subset bounded by Euclidean straight line segments and/or round circular arcs perpendicular to the boundary circle. These point preimages form a monotone upper semi-continuous decomposition of P +; see [CL] § 1.4 especially Theorem 1.20 for all these assertions. For any fixed metric on S2, and for any ϵ > 0 there is a δ > 0 so that every subset of S2

> f

of diameter < δ has image of diameter < ϵ . Let X+ 

> δ

be the subset of P + consisting of the union of all decomposition elements of diameter ≥ δ, together with those for which some boundary arc is part of a circle of radius at least δ. Then the image F (X+ 

> δ

) is a finite tree, and the diameter of every component of Z+ − F (X+ 

> δ

) is < ϵ , as desired. See Figure 4. 

Figure 4. The decomposition of P +, the boundary arcs of radius ≥ δ, and the quotient tree. 

□

2.4. Zippers. We state and prove two lemmas about zippers that are used in § 3. 

Lemma 2.21 (Unique preimage) . Let f : S1 → S2 be a CaTherine wheel with zipper Z±.Let p ∈ S2 − Z+. Then f −1(p) consists of a single point if and only if there is a unique equivalence class of rays in Z+ that lands at p.Proof. If f : S1 → S2 is a CaTherine wheel with zipper Z±, then the set of points p ∈ S2

for which f −1(p) has more than one point is precisely Z− ∪ Z+; see [CL] Theorem 1.23. Thus for p ∈ S2 − Z+ we must show that p ∈ Z− if any only if there are at least two equivalence classes of rays in Z+ that land at p.If there are two inequivalent rays r, r ′ in Z+ that land at p then (after replacing each of 

r, r ′ by equivalent rays) the union η := r ∪ r′ ∪ p is a Jordan curve with η − p ⊂ Z+. Since 

Z− is dense in S2, it must intersect both components of S2 − η; since it is path-connected it must intersect η, and since it is disjoint from Z+, it follows that p ∈ Z−.Conversely suppose p ∈ Z−. Then (as explained in the paragraph following Lemma 2.12) 

p is in the support of at least two ideal gaps in S1

> −

, the circle which is the order completion of the space of ends of Z−. But we have seen in § 2.3 that S1 

> −

is canonically isomorphic to 16 DANNY CALEGARI AND EWAIN GWYNNE 

S1 (the domain of f ) and also thereby to S1+, the circle which is the order completion of the space of ends of Z+. It follows that p is associated to at least two distinct points e, e ′ ∈ S1+.Neither of these can be ideal gaps in S1+ or else their support (which is equal to p) would lie in Z+. Thus they must both correspond to ends of Z+, and there are inequivalent proper rays representing these ends that both land at p. □

Although the circles S1

> −

, S 1, S 1+ are all canonically isomorphic, the orientations on S1

and S1+ agree, whereas they both disagree with the orientation on S1

> −

. This is true by convention; i.e. this choice of orientation is part of the definition of Z±.

Lemma 2.22 (Circular order) . Let f : S1 → S2 be a CaTherine wheel with zipper Z±.For i = 0 , 1, 2 let pi ∈ S2 be three distinct points with unique preimages ei ∈ S1 under f .Let ri be equivalence classes of proper rays in Z+ that land at pi. Then the circular order on the ei in S1 agrees with the circular order on the ends of the ri in Z+.Proof. This is true by the definition of the circular order on the ends of Z+, and the natural (orientation-preserving) identification of S1+ with S1 (the domain of f ). □

3. Checking the axioms for the LQG geodesic tree 

In this section we will deduce Theorem 1.7 from Theorem 1.3. Throughout, we fix 

γ ∈ (0 , 2) and write D for the γ-LQG metric, as introduced just after (1.3.1). For t > 0

and z ∈ C, we define the open LQG metric ball (3.0.1) Bt(z) := {w ∈ C : D(z, w ) < t }.

We note that Bt(z) is compact [DFG +20, Proposition 3.8]. Moreover, the complement 

C − Bt(z) a.s. has infinitely many connected components [GPS22, Theorem 1.14]. For 

r > 0, we also define the Euclidean ball (3.0.2) Br(z) := {w ∈ C : |z − w| < r }.

3.1. Preliminary results on confluence of geodesics. Our proof that Z∞ of Theo-rem 1.7 satisfies the axioms in Theorem 1.3 is primarily based on existing results for LQG geodesics coming from [GPS22] (which in turn builds on [GM20]). The most important input is the following proposition, which is an easy consequence of results in [GPS22]. See Figure 5, left for an illustration of the proposition statement. 

Proposition 3.1 (Confluence across a D-annulus) . Let z ∈ C. Almost surely, for every choice of radii s > t > 0, there is a finite set of points X = Xt,s ⊂ ∂Bt(z) such that the following is true. Every D-geodesic from z to a point of C − Bs(z) passes through a point in X; and there is a unique D-geodesic from z to x for each x ∈ X.Proof. We first prove the proposition statement for a fixed deterministic pair of times 

s > t > 0. We claim that a.s. there are only finitely many connected components of 

C − Bt(z) which intersect C − Bs(z). Let us first note that each such connected component must also intersect ∂Bs(z), so it suffices to show that a.s. there are only finitely many connected components of C − Bt(z) which intersect ∂Bs(z). By [DFG +20, Lemma 3.8], the closed D-ball Bs(z) is D-compact. If U and V are connected components of C − Bt(z)CATHERINE WHEELS FROM TREES AND LIOUVILLE QUANTUM GRAVITY 17 zBt(z)Bs(z)0xBR(0) BR′ (0) 

Figure 5. Left: Illustration of the statement of Proposition 3.1. Points of X are shown in black and various representative D-geodesics from z to points of C − Bs(z) are shown in red. Right: Illustration of the statement of Lemma 3.2. which intersect ∂Bs(z), then any path from ∂Bs(z) ∩ U to ∂Bs(z) ∩ V must pass from 

∂Bs(z) to ∂Bt(z) and then from ∂Bt(z) to ∂Bs(z), so must have D-length at least 2( s − t).Hence D(U, V ) ≥ 2( s − t). Since ∂Bs(z) can be covered by finitely many D-balls of radius 

s−t, there can be at most finitely many connected components of C−Bt(z) which intersect 

∂Bs(z).For w ∈ C with D(z, w ) > t , define the filled metric ball Bw, • 

> t

(z) := C − U, where 

U = U(t, z, w ) is the connected component of C − Bt(z) which contains w. By the transla-tion invariance of the law of Φ, viewed modulo additive constant, we may apply [GPS22, Propositions 3.6 and 3.7] to filled metric balls centered at z (instead of at 0). These propo-sitions imply that a.s. for each w ∈ Q2 − { z} with D(z, w ) > s , there exists a finite set of points Xwt,s ⊂ ∂Bt(z) such that the following is true (we restrict to w ∈ Q2 since [GPS22, Proposition 3.7] holds a.s. for a fixed choice of w). Each D-geodesic from z to a point of 

C − Bw, • 

> s

(z) passes through a point of Xwt,s , and there is a unique D-geodesic from z to x

for each x ∈ Xwt,s .By the first paragraph, we can find a finite set W ⊂ C which includes one point of 

(C − Bs(z)) ∩ U for each connected component U of C − Bt(z) for which this intersection is non-empty. Then the proposition statement holds with X = S 

> w∈W

Xwt,s ⊂ ∂Bt(z).It remains to extend to a result which holds for all times s > t > 0 simultaneously. The proposition statement for deterministic s > t > 0 implies that the proposition statement a.s. holds simultaneously for every rational s > t > 0. Given an arbitrary s > t > 0, choose 

s′, t ′ ∈ Q such that s > s ′ > t ′ > t . Let X′ = Xt′,s ′ ⊂ ∂Bt′ (z) be as in the proposition statement. For x ∈ X′, let σx : [0 , t ′] → C be the (unique) D-geodesic from z to x. By the defining properties of X′, each D-geodesic σ from z to a point of C − Bt(z) (which is a subset of C − Bt′ (z)) passes through some x ∈ X′. Hence, it must coincide with σx

on [0 , t ′]. In particular, σ(t) = σx(t). Since the D-geodesic from z to x is unique, so is the D-geodesic from z to σx(t). Hence, the proposition statement holds with X = Xs,t =

{σx(t) : x ∈ X′}. □18 DANNY CALEGARI AND EWAIN GWYNNE 

We are primarily interested in the D-geodesic tree rooted at ∞, as defined in (1.3.3). But, for some lemmas it is more convenient to work with the D-geodesic tree rooted at 

z for z ∈ C, which is the set (3.1.1) Zz := {σ(t) : σ is a D-geodesic from z to some w ∈ C and 0 ≤ t < D (z, w )}.

We will now state some lemmas which allow us to transfer results between Zz and Z∞. We first need the following, which is essentially proven in [GPS22]. See Figure 5, right for an illustration. We recall from (3.0.2) that Br(·) denotes a Euclidean ball. 

Lemma 3.2 (Confluence across a Euclidean annulus) . Almost surely, for each R > 0,there exists R′ > R (random) and x ∈ BR′ (0) − BR(0) such that every D-geodesic from a point of BR(0) to a point of C − BR′ (0) passes through x. Moreover, if w ∈ C and there is a D-geodesic σ from w to a point of C − BR′ (0) which enters BR(0) , then necessarily 

w ∈ BR′ (0) .Proof. The first assertion is shown in the proof of [GPS22, Proposition 4.4]. Now let w ∈ C

and σ be as in the second assertion and suppose for contradiction that w / ∈ BR′ (0) . By the defining property of x, the segment of σ between w and the first time it enters BR(0) must visit x. But, again by the defining property of x, the segment of σ after the first time it enters BR(0) must also visit x. This is impossible since σ is a simple path. Hence w must be in BR′ (0) . □

Lemma 3.3 (Comparing Z∞ and Zz ). Almost surely, for each R > 0, there exists z ∈ Q2

such that Z∞ ∩ BR(0) = Zz ∩ BR(0) . In fact, we can arrange so that for every D-geodesic 

σ from a point w ∈ C to ∞ which intersects BR(0) , there exists a D-geodesic eσ from w to 

z such that σ(t) = eσ(t) for every t ≥ 0 such that σ(t) ∈ BR(0) .Proof. By the second assertion of Lemma 3.2, a.s. for each R > 0 there exists R1 > R such that if w ∈ C and there is a D-geodesic from w to a point of C − BR1 (0) which enters 

BR(0) , then necessarily w ∈ BR1 (0) . By the first assertion of Lemma 3.2 (with R1 in place of R), there exists R2 > R 1 and x ∈ BR2 (0) − BR1 (0) such that every D-geodesic from a point of BR1 (0) to a point of C − BR2 (0) passes through x.Let z ∈ Q2 − BR2 (0) . We claim that the lemma statement holds for this choice of z.Indeed, let w ∈ C and let σ be a D-geodesic from w to ∞ which intersects BR(0) . By the previous paragraph, w ∈ BR1 (0) . By the defining property of x, σ visits x. Furthermore, since z / ∈ BR2 (0) , every D-geodesic from w to z also visits x. From this, we get that the segment of σ between w and x is also a segment of a D-geodesic from w to z. Let eσ

be this geodesic from w to z. Then σ(t) = eσ(t) for each t ∈ [0 , D (w, x )] . The defining property of x implies that σ cannot re-visit BR(0) after hitting x, since otherwise σ would have to visit x a second time (which is impossible since geodesics are simple paths). Hence 

σ(t) = eσ(t) for each t ≥ 0 such that σ(t) ∈ BR(0) . This implies the second assertion in the lemma statement and also that Z∞ ∩ BR(0) ⊂ Zz ∩ BR(0) . A similar argument gives 

Zz ∩ BR(0) ⊂ Z∞ ∩ BR(0) . □

3.2. The LQG geodesic tree is a half-zipper. In this subsection, we will check that 

Z∞ is a half-zipper in the sense of Definition 1.1. We start with the following lemma for the LQG geodesic tree rooted at z ∈ C, as defined in (3.1.1). CATHERINE WHEELS FROM TREES AND LIOUVILLE QUANTUM GRAVITY 19 Bt(z)zσ(T )σ(t)Hσ

Figure 6. Illustration of the proof of Lemma 3.4. The geodesic σ is shown in red, and other D-geodesics are shown in orange. The set H of points which have a D-geodesic to z which passes through σ(t) is shown in light yellow. We show that each point of ∂H −{ σ(t)} has at least two distinct D-geodesics to z, one which passes through σ(t) and one which passes through a different point of ∂Bt(z). By Lemma 3.5, this implies that ∂H − { σ(t)} is disjoint from Zz .

Lemma 3.4 (Removing a point disconnects Zz ). Let z ∈ C. The following is true a.s. Let 

σ : [0 , T ] → C be a D-geodesic started from z and let t ∈ (0 , T ). Then Zz − { σ(t)} is not connected and σ[0 , t ) and σ(t, T ) lie in different connected components of Zz − { σ(t)}.

For the proof of Lemma 3.4, we need the following fact about Zz .

Lemma 3.5 (Unique geodesics in Zz and Z∞). Let z ∈ C. Almost surely, for each p ∈ Zz ,there is a unique D-geodesic from z to p. Furthermore, for each p ∈ Z∞, there is a unique 

D-geodesic from p to ∞.Proof. By the definition (3.1.1), each p ∈ Zz is hit by a D-geodesic started from z at a time other than its terminal time. The statement for Zz is therefore immediate from [GPS22, Lemma 3.9]. To get the statement for Z∞, let p ∈ Z∞ and let σ and σ′ be D-geodesics from p to ∞.By Proposition 1.6, there exists R > 0 such that σ − BR(0) = σ′ − BR(0) . Let z ∈ Q2 be as in Lemma 3.3 for this choice of R. Then p ∈ Zz , so the first part of the present lemma statement tells us that there is a unique D-geodesic from p to z. The second assertion of Lemma 3.3 (applied once to each of σ and σ′) then tells us that σ ∩ BR(0) = σ′ ∩ BR(0) ,so σ = σ′. □

Proof of Lemma 3.4. See Figure 6 for an illustration. Let H = Hσ(t) be the set of points 

w ∈ C such that there exists a D-geodesic from z to w which passes through σ(t) (neces-sarily at time t = D(z, σ (t)) ). Equivalently, (3.2.1) H = {w ∈ C : D(w, σ (t)) = D(w, z ) − t}.

By (3.2.1) and since D is continuous, the set H is closed. We claim that ∂H − { σ(t)} is disjoint from Zz . Assuming the claim, we have that 

(Zz − { σ(t)}) ∩ H and (Zz − { σ(t)}) − H are disjoint open subsets of Zz − { σ(t)}, the first set contains σ(t, T ), and the second set contains σ[0 , t ), so the lemma statement follows. 20 DANNY CALEGARI AND EWAIN GWYNNE 

It remains to prove the above claim. By Lemma 3.5, it suffices to show that for each 

w ∈ ∂H − { σ(t)}, there are at least two distinct D-geodesics from z to w. For this purpose, let w ∈ ∂H − { σ(t)}. Since H is closed, w ∈ H. There is a sequence of points wn ∈ C − H

such that wn → w. By (3.2.1), D(w, z ) − t = D(w, σ (t)) > 0. Since wn → w, we can find 

s ∈ (0 , T ) such that D(wn, z ) > s for each sufficiently large n ∈ N.Let X = Xt,s ⊂ ∂Bt(z) be the finite set as in Proposition 3.1, so every D-geodesic from 

z to a point of C − Bs(z) passes through a point of X. Since σ passes through σ(t), we have σ(t) ∈ X. For n ∈ N, let σwn be a D-geodesic from z to wn. Since wn /∈ H, for each sufficiently large n, the point σwn (t) is a point of X other than σ(t). Since X is finite, by possibly passing to a subsequence we can arrange so that there exists x ∈ X − { σ(t)} such that σwn (t) = x for every n ∈ N.By taking σwn to be identically equal to wn for times larger than D(z, w n), we can arrange so that the paths σwn are defined on the same time interval. Since each σwn is a 

DΦ-geodesic and D induces the Euclidean topology, the Arzéla-Ascoli theorem allows us to extract a subsequence of the paths σwn which converges uniformly to a D-geodesic σw

from z to w. We have σw(t) = x. But, since w ∈ H, there is also a D-geodesic from z to w

which passes through σ(t)̸ = x at time t. Hence, there are two distinct D-geodesics from 

z to w, so by Lemma 3.5 we have w / ∈ ∂H . □

Lemma 3.6 (Unique paths in Z∞). The following is true a.s. Let σ : [0 , ∞) → C be a 

D-geodesic from some point to ∞ and let t > 0. Then there is no path from any point of 

σ(0 , t ) to any point of σ(t, ∞) in Z∞ − { σ(t)}. In particular, every point of Z∞ is a cut point and there is a unique path in Z∞ between any two points of Z∞, modulo time change. Proof. We work on the probability-one event that the conclusion of Lemma 3.4 holds simultaneously for every z ∈ Q2, and the conclusion of Lemma 3.3 holds. Let η be a path in Z∞ from a point of σ(0 , t ) to a point of σ(t, ∞). Then the image of η (still denoted by η)is compact, so there exists R > 0 such that η ⊂ BR(0) . By Lemma 3.3, there exists z ∈ Q2

such that Z∞ ∩ BR(0) = Zz ∩ BR(0) . Moreover, there is a D-geodesic eσ : [0 , T ] → C from 

σ(0) to z such that eσ(t) = σ(t) for each t > 0 such that σ(t) ∈ BR(0) . Then η is a path in 

Z∞ ∩ BR(0) = Zz ∩ BR(0) from eσ(0 , t ) to eσ(t, T ). By Lemma 3.4 for z, the path η must pass through eσ(t) = σ(t). Hence, there is no path from σ(0 , t ) to σ(t, ∞) in Z∞ − { σ(t)},as required. By definition, every point of Z∞ is of the form σ(t) for some σ and t as in the lemma statement. Hence the first assertion of the lemma statement implies that every point of 

Z∞ is a cut point. Finally, we prove the uniqueness of paths. Let p, q ∈ Z∞ be distinct and let σp and σq be 

D-geodesics from p and q to ∞ (which are a.s. unique by Lemma 3.6). By Proposition 1.6, the paths σp and σq eventually meet and subsequently merge into each other, i.e., there exists τp, τ q ≥ 0 such that σp(τp + t) = σq(τq + t) for every t ≥ 0. Let τp and τq be the smallest times for which this is the case. We get a simple path σp,q in Z∞ from p to q by following σp|[0 ,τ p], then the reverse of σq|[0 ,τ q ].We will now argue that σp,q is the unique (modulo time change) simple path in Z∞

from p to q. Let t ∈ (0 , τ p). The first assertion of the lemma statement implies that p

and σp(τp) = σq(τq) are in different path-connected components of Z∞ − { σp(t)}. Since 

σq|[0 ,τ q ] is a path from q to σp(τp) which does not visit σp(t), also p and q are in different CATHERINE WHEELS FROM TREES AND LIOUVILLE QUANTUM GRAVITY 21 

path-connected components of Z∞ − { σ(t)}. Hence every path in Z∞ from p to q must visit σ(t). This holds for every t ∈ (0 , τ p), and the image of a path from p to q is closed, so any such path in Z∞ must visit each point of σp[0 , τ p]. The same proof also applies with 

q in place of p. Hence any path from p to q in Z∞ must contain the image of σp,q . If this path is simple, this implies that it is in fact a time change of σp,q . □

Lemma 3.7 (Z∞ is a half-zipper) . Z∞ is a half-zipper in the sense of Definition 1.1. Proof. It is immediate from the definition (1.3.3) that Z∞ is dense in C. By Lemma 3.6, there is a unique simple path in Z∞ between any two points of Z∞ (modulo time change) and every point of Z∞ is a cut point. □

3.3. The LQG geodesic tree has short hair. To prove Theorem 1.7, it remains to prove the “short hair” property for Z∞. As in Section 3.2, we start by proving a closely related result for the tree Zz of (3.1.1). 

Lemma 3.8 (Confluence in a D-ball) . Let z ∈ C. Almost surely, for each T > 0 and each δ > 0, there exists a finite set Y ⊂ BT (z) ∩ Zz such that the following is true. Each 

D-geodesic from a point w ∈ BT (z) to z visits some y ∈ Y at or before time δ.Proof. We work on the probability-one event of Proposition 3.1. Let N ∈ N and let 

0 = t0 < t 1 < · · · < t n−1 < t n = T be a partition of [0 , T ] such that 

max  

> n∈[1 ,N ]∩Z

(tn − tn−1) ≤ δ/ 2.

For each n = 2 , . . . , N , let Xn = Xtn−1,t n be as in Proposition 3.1 with (t, s ) = ( tn−1, t n).By the definition (3.1.1), every point which is hit by a geodesic started from z at a time other than its terminal time belongs to Zz . Hence the defining property of Xn from Propo-sition 3.1 continues to hold if we remove from Xn all of the points which are not in Zz . We may therefore assume without loss of generality that Xn ⊂ Zz .Let 

Y := {z} ∪ 

> N

[

> n=2

Xn ⊂ BT (z) ∩ Zz .

We check the condition in the lemma statement for this choice of Y. Let w ∈ BT (z) and choose n ∈ [1 , N ] ∩ Z such that D(z, w ) ∈ (tn−1, t n]. If n ≤ 2, then D(w, z ) ≤ t2 ≤ δ so the desired property holds with y = z. Now suppose that n ≥ 3. Since w ∈ C − Btn−1 (z), the definition of Xn−2 implies that each D-geodesic σ from w to z visits some x ∈ Xn−2. Since 

D(x, z ) = tn−2, the time at which σ visits x is D(z, w ) − tn−2 ≤ tn − tn−2 ≤ δ. □

We next transfer from a statement for Zz to a statement for Z∞ using Lemma 3.2. 

Lemma 3.9 (Confluence for D-geodesics to ∞). Almost surely, for every R > 0 and δ > 0,there is a finite set of points Y ⊂ Z∞ such that the following is true. Each D-geodesic from a point w ∈ C to ∞ which enters BR(0) visits some y ∈ Y at or before time δ.Proof. We start by choosing radii R2 > R 1 > R , a point z ∈ Q2, and a radius T > 0. By the second assertion of Lemma 3.2, there exists R1 > R such that every D-geodesic from a point of C to ∞ which enters BR(0) must start at a point of BR1 (0) . By [DFG +20, Lemma 3.8], there exists R2 > R 1 such that D(w, z ) > δ for every w ∈ BR2 (0) and z ∈ C − BR1 (0) .22 DANNY CALEGARI AND EWAIN GWYNNE BR(0) Tz

Figure 7. Illustration of the proof of Lemma 3.10. The finite set Y ⊂ C

of Lemma 3.9 is shown in black. The finite subtree T is shown in red. Some representative points of Hy for y ∈ Y are shown in orange. Some representative points of H∞ (which admit D-geodesics to ∞ which do not visit any y ∈ Y) are shown in brown. Let z ∈ Q2 be chosen so that the conclusion of Lemma 3.3 holds with R2 in place of R, so that in particular Z∞ ∩BR2 (0) = Zz ∩BR2 (0) . Let T > 0 be chosen so that BR2 (0) ⊂ BT (z)

(such a T exists since D induces the Euclidean topology on C). Almost surely, the conclusion of Lemma 3.8 holds simultaneously for every z ∈ Q2. Let 

eY ⊂ BT (z) ∩ Zz be the finite set of points as in Lemma 3.8 for z and T as in the first paragraph. Let Y := eY ∩ BR2 (0) . Then Y ⊂ Zz ∩ BR2 (0) ⊂ Z∞, where the inclusion is by our choice of z. We will check the condition in the lemma statement for this choice of Y.Let w ∈ C and let σ be a D-geodesic from w to ∞. Assume that σ enters BR(0) . Then our choice of R1 gives w ∈ BR1 (0) . By the second assertion of Lemma 3.3 and our choice of z, there is a D-geodesic eσ from w to z such that σ(t) = eσ(t) for each t ≥ 0 such that 

σ(t) ∈ BR2 (0) . By the defining property of eY from Lemma 3.8, the D-geodesic eσ visits some y ∈ eY before time δ. Since w ∈ BR1 (0) and by our choice of R2, eσ cannot exit BR2 (0) 

before time δ. Therefore, y ∈ BR2 (0) so y ∈ Y. Furthermore, σ and eσ agree up until eσ hits 

y, so σ also hits y before time δ. □

Lemma 3.10 (Z∞ has short hair) . Almost surely, Z∞ has short hair with respect to the spherical metric on C ∪ {∞} in the sense of Definition 1.1. Proof. See Figure 7 for an illustration. Fix ε > 0. We need to construct a compact set 

T ⊂ Z∞ with the topology of a finite tree such that every path-connected component of 

Z∞ \ T has spherical diameter at most ε.Let R > 0 be large enough so that the spherical diameter of C − BR(0) is at most ε/ 2.Since D induces the Euclidean topology, there exists δ > 0 such that for each z, w ∈ BR(0) 

with D(z, w ) ≤ δ, the spherical distance from z to w is at most ε/ 2.Let Y ⊂ Z∞ be the finite set of points as in Lemma 3.9 with the above choice of R and 

δ. For y ∈ Y, let σy be the D-geodesic from y to ∞ (which is unique by Lemma 3.5). Let z ∈ C − BR(0) be a point which lies on σy for every y ∈ Y (such a point exists by CATHERINE WHEELS FROM TREES AND LIOUVILLE QUANTUM GRAVITY 23 

Proposition 1.6). Let T be the union of the segment of σy from y to z, over all y ∈ Y. Then 

T is a compact subset Z∞ homeomorphic to a finite tree. It remains to check the diameter condition for the path-connected components of Z∞ −T .For y ∈ Y, let Hy be the set of p ∈ Z∞ − T such that the D-geodesic from p to ∞ passes through p (this D-geodesic is unique by Lemma 3.5). Also let H∞ be the set of p ∈ Z∞ − T

such that the D-geodesic from p to ∞ does not pass through any y ∈ Y.If p ∈ Hy and q ∈ Hy′ for some distinct y, y ′ ∈ Y, then there is a simple path in Z∞ from 

p to q which intersects T : this path follows a geodesic segment from p to y, then the unique simple path in T from y to y′, then a geodesic segment from y′ to q. A similar argument shows that the same is true if one of y or y′ is equal to ∞. By Lemma 3.6, this path is in fact the unique simple path Z∞ between p and q, so there is no path in Z∞ between p

and q which does not intersect T . Hence every path-connected component of Z∞ − T is contained in Hy for some y ∈ Y ∪ {∞} .By the defining property of Y from Lemma 3.9, for y ∈ Y each point of Hy ∩ BR(0) lies at 

D-distance at most δ from y. Hence the D-diameter of Hy ∩ BR(0) is at most δ, so (by our choice of δ) the spherical diameter of Hy ∩ BR(0) is at most ε/ 2. By our choice of R, the spherical diameter of C − BR(0) is at most ε/ 2, so by the triangle inequality the spherical diameter of Hy is at most ε (note that Hy ∪ { y} is connected by definition). Again using the property of Y from Lemma 3.9, we have H∞ ⊂ C − BR(0) . Hence our choice of R

implies that the spherical diameter of H∞ is at most ε. Therefore every path-connected component of Z∞ − T has spherical diameter at most ε, as required. □

Proof of Theorem 1.7. By Lemmas 3.7 and 3.10, Z∞ is a half-zipper with short hair (Defi-nition 1.1). Hence we can apply Theorem 1.3 (with Z∞ viewed as a subset of the Riemann sphere C ∪ {∞} ) to get the desired CaTherine wheel f : S1 → C ∪ {∞} . □

3.4. Properties of the LQG CaTherine wheel. In this subsection we will prove The-orem 1.8. We first need the following lemma, which is a straightforward consequence of Lemma 2.21. 

Lemma 3.11 (Unique preimages for LQG) . Let f : S1 → C ∪ {∞} be as in Theorem 1.7. For each w ∈ C \ Z∞ for which there is a unique D-geodesic from w to ∞, the set f −1(w)

consists of a single point. Moreover, f −1(∞) is a single point. Proof. Recall Definition 2.3 of a ray in Z∞ and its landing point. By Lemma 2.21, a point in (C ∪ {∞} ) \ Z∞ has a unique preimage under f if and only if it is the landing point of a unique equivalence class of rays in Z∞ (where rays are declared to be equivalent if they agree outside of a compact subset of Z∞). We will check that this holds for ∞ and for each w ∈ C \ Z∞ for which there is a unique D-geodesic from w to ∞.By iteratively applying Lemma 3.2, we obtain a sequence of points Z∞ ∋ xn → ∞ such that each D-geodesic from a point of C to ∞ passes through infinitely many of the xns. By the definition (1.3.3) of Z∞, this implies that every unbounded path in Z∞ passes through infinitely many of the xns. If η, eη : [0 , ∞) → Z∞ are simple paths in Z∞ going to ∞, then each of η and eη visit infinitely many of the xns. By Lemma 3.6, for each n, m ∈ N with n < m , there is a unique simple path in Z∞ from xn to xm, modulo time change. Hence the images of η and 24 DANNY CALEGARI AND EWAIN GWYNNE 

eη coincide outside of a compact set. Therefore η and eη belong to the same equivalence class of rays, so ∞ is the landing point of a unique equivalence class of rays. Now let w ∈ C \ Z∞ and assume that there is a unique D-geodesic σw from w to ∞.Then σw|(0 ,1] is a ray in Z∞ which lands at w (at time 0). We claim that any other ray in 

Z∞ is equivalent to this one. Indeed, consider an arbitrary ray whose landing point is w,represented by a simple path η : (0 , 1] → Z∞ which extends continuously to η : [0 , 1] → C

with η(0) = z. Since w / ∈ Z∞ the D-geodesic from η(1) to ∞ does not visit w, so since the range of this D-geodesic is closed it is disjoint from η[t, ∞) for some t > 0. By concatenating 

η with the D-geodesic from η(1) to ∞, then erasing any loops which the concatenated path makes, we therefore obtain a function eη : [0 , ∞) → C with eη(0 , ∞) ⊂ Z∞ and eη(t) → ∞ 

as t → ∞ which coincides with η for small enough times. Hence the rays eη|(0 ,T ] and η are equivalent for each T > 0.The path eη visits xn for each sufficiently large n. By Lemma 3.6, for each t > 0 and each sufficiently large n, the segment of eη from eη(t) until the first time it visits xn coincides (modulo time change) with the unique simple path in Z∞ from eη(t) to xn. Since this holds for every n, we get that eη|[t, ∞) agrees (modulo time change) with the D-geodesic from eη(t)

to ∞. Sending t → 0 shows that eη coincides (modulo time change) with a D-geodesic from 

w to ∞. Hence eη and σw agree modulo time change. In particular, for any T > 0, eη|(0 ,T ]

and σw|(0 ,1] are equivalent rays. □

Proof of Theorem 1.8. By Lemma 3.11, ∞ has a unique preimage under f . The LQG area measure μ assigns positive mass to every open set and zero mass to every point (see, e.g., [BP24, Theorem 2.1]). Identify S1 − f −1(∞) with the open interval (−1, 1) , so that 

f : ( −1, 1) → C. By re-parametrizing, we can assume that f (0) = 0 . Let ϕ : ( −1, 1) → R

be defined so that ϕ(0) = 0 , ϕ(t) = μ(f [0 , t ]) for t ∈ (0 , 1) , and ϕ(t) = −μ(f [t, 0]) for 

t ∈ (−1, 0) . By the definition of a CaTherine wheel, the sets f [a, b ] for −1 < a < b < 1

have non-empty interior, hence positive μ-mass. Hence ϕ is strictly increasing. Since f is continuous, for any t ∈ (−1, 1) , the intersection T 

> ε> 0

f [t − ε, t + ε] is a single point. Since 

μ assigns zero mass to each point, we have 

lim 

> ε→0

(ϕ(t + ε) − ϕ(t − ε)) = lim  

> ε→0

μ(f [t − ε, t + ε]) = 0 .

Hence ϕ is continuous, so ϕ is a homeomorphism. Thus, g := f ◦ ϕ is continuous. Lemma 3.11 implies that each point of C which has a unique D-geodesic to ∞ has a unique preimage under f , and hence also under g. The statement about the order in which z and w are hit by g follows directly from Lemma 2.22 applied with (p0, p 1, p 2) = (∞, z, w ). □

References         

> [AHS17] J. Aru, Y. Huang, and X. Sun. Two perspectives of the 2D unit area quantum sphere and their equivalence. Comm. Math. Phys. , 356(1):261–283, 2017, 1512.06190. MR 3694028 [BB23] R. Basu and M. Bhatia. A Peano curve from mated geodesic trees in the directed landscape.
> ArXiv e-prints , April 2023, 2304.03269. [BCK24] G. Blanc, N. Curien, and J. Kahn. Geodesics in planar Poisson roads random metric. ArXiv e-prints , July 2024, 2407.07887. [BG25] J. Borga and E. Gwynne. Directed distances in bipolar-oriented triangulations: exact exponents and scaling limits. ArXiv e-prints , October 2025, 2510.26123. CATHERINE WHEELS FROM TREES AND LIOUVILLE QUANTUM GRAVITY 25

[BP24] N. Berestycki and E. Powell. Gaussian free field and Liouville quantum gravity . Cam-bridge University Press, 2024, 2404.16642. To appear. [CH] D. Calegari and F. Herr. Expanding origamis. Preprint, in preparation. [CL] D. Calegari and T. Loukidou. CaTherine wheels. Preprint, in preparation. [CL24] D. Calegari and T. Loukidou. Zippers. Geom. Top. , to appear, 2024, 2411.15610. [CT07] J. W. Cannon and W. P. Thurston. Group invariant Peano curves. Geom. Topol. , 11:1315– 1355, 2007. [DDDF20] J. Ding, J. Dubédat, A. Dunlap, and H. Falconet. Tightness of Liouville first passage percolation for γ ∈ (0 , 2) . Publ. Math. Inst. Hautes Études Sci. , 132:353–403, 2020, 1904.08021. MR 4179836 [DDG23] J. Ding, J. Dubédat, and E. Gwynne. Introduction to the Liouville quantum gravity metric. In ICM—International Congress of Mathematicians. Vol. 6. Sections 12–14 , pages 4212–4244. EMS Press, Berlin, [2023] ©2023, 2109.01252. MR 4680401 [DFG +20] J. Dubédat, H. Falconet, E. Gwynne, J. Pfeffer, and X. Sun. Weak LQG metrics and Liou-ville first passage percolation. Probab. Theory Related Fields , 178(1-2):369–436, 2020, 1905.00380. MR 4146541 [DG20] J. Ding and E. Gwynne. The fractal dimension of Liouville quantum gravity: universality, monotonicity, and bounds. Communications in Mathematical Physics , 374:1877–1934, 2020, 1807.01072. [DKRV16] F. David, A. Kupiainen, R. Rhodes, and V. Vargas. Liouville quantum gravity on the Riemann sphere. Comm. Math. Phys. , 342(3):869–907, 2016, 1410.7318. MR 3465434 [DMS21] B. Duplantier, J. Miller, and S. Sheffield. Liouville quantum gravity as a mating of trees. 

Astérisque , (427):viii+257, 2021, 1409.7055. MR 4340069 [DS11] B. Duplantier and S. Sheffield. Liouville quantum gravity and KPZ. Invent. Math. ,185(2):333–393, 2011, 1206.0212. MR 2819163 (2012f:81251) [Fen12] S. Fenley. Ideal boundaries of pseudo-Anosov flows and uniform convergence groups with con-nections and applications to large scale geometry. Geom. Topol. , 16(1):1–110, 2012. [Fre31] H. Freudenthal. über die Enden topologischer Räume und Gruppen. Math. Z. , 33(1):692–713, 1931. MR 1545233 [GM20] E. Gwynne and J. Miller. Confluence of geodesics in Liouville quantum gravity for γ ∈ (0 , 2) .

Ann. Probab. , 48(4):1861–1901, 2020, 1905.00381. MR 4124527 [GM21] E. Gwynne and J. Miller. Existence and uniqueness of the Liouville quantum gravity metric for γ ∈ (0 , 2) . Invent. Math. , 223(1):213–333, 2021, 1905.00383. MR 4199443 [GP22] E. Gwynne and J. Pfeffer. KPZ formulas for the Liouville quantum gravity metric. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. , 375(12):8297–8324, 2022, 1905.11790. MR 4504639 [GPS22] E. Gwynne, J. Pfeffer, and S. Sheffield. Geodesics and metric ball boundaries in Liouville quantum gravity. Probab. Theory Related Fields , 182(3-4):905–954, 2022, 2010.07889. MR 4408506 [Kah85] J.-P. Kahane. Sur le chaos multiplicatif. Ann. Sci. Math. Québec , 9(2):105–150, 1985. MR 829798 (88h:60099a) [Ken17] W. S. Kendall. From random lines to metric spaces. Ann. Probab. , 45(1):469–517, 2017, 1403.1156. MR 3601654 [Le 13] J.-F. Le Gall. Uniqueness and universality of the Brownian map. Ann. Probab. , 41(4):2880– 2960, 2013, 1105.4842. MR 3112934 [Mey09] D. Meyer. Expanding Thurston maps as quotients. ArXiv e-prints , October 2009, 0910.2003. [Mie13] G. Miermont. The Brownian map is the scaling limit of uniform random plane quadrangulations. 

Acta Math. , 210(2):319–401, 2013, 1104.1606. MR 3070569 [MS17] J. Miller and S. Sheffield. Imaginary geometry IV: interior rays, whole-plane reversibility, and space-filling trees. Probab. Theory Related Fields , 169(3-4):729–869, 2017, 1302.4738. MR 3719057 [MS20] J. Miller and S. Sheffield. Liouville quantum gravity and the Brownian map I: the QLE (8 /3, 0) 

metric. Invent. Math. , 219(1):75–152, 2020, 1507.00719. MR 4050102 26 DANNY CALEGARI AND EWAIN GWYNNE 

[MS21a] J. Miller and S. Sheffield. An axiomatic characterization of the Brownian map. J. Éc. polytech. Math. , 8:609–731, 2021, 1506.03806. MR 4225028 [MS21b] J. Miller and S. Sheffield. Liouville quantum gravity and the Brownian map II: Geodesics and continuity of the embedding. Ann. Probab. , 49(6):2732–2829, 2021, 1605.03563. MR 4348679 [New92] M. H. A. Newman. Elements of the topology of plane sets of points. New York, NY: Dover Publications, reprint of the 2nd ed. edition, 1992. [Pom92] C. Pommerenke. Boundary behaviour of conformal maps , volume 299 of Grundlehren der Mathematischen Wissenschaften [Fundamental Principles of Mathematical Sci-ences] . Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1992. MR 1217706 (95b:30008) [RV11] R. Rhodes and V. Vargas. KPZ formula for log-infinitely divisible multifractal random measures. 

ESAIM Probab. Stat. , 15:358–371, 2011, 0807.1036. MR 2870520 [Sch00] O. Schramm. Scaling limits of loop-erased random walks and uniform spanning trees. Israel J. Math. , 118:221–288, 2000, math/9904022. MR 1776084 (2001m:60227) [She07] S. Sheffield. Gaussian free fields for mathematicians. Probab. Theory Related Fields , 139(3-4):521–541, 2007, math/0312099. MR 2322706 (2008d:60120) [TW98] B. Tóth and W. Werner. The true self-repelling motion. Probab. Theory Related Fields ,111(3):375–452, 1998. MR 1640799 [WP21] W. Werner and E. Powell. Lecture notes on the Gaussian free field , volume 28 of 

Cours Spécialisés [Specialized Courses] . Société Mathématique de France, Paris, 2021, 2004.04720. MR 4466634 

University of Chicago, Chicago, Ill 60637 USA 

Email address : dannyc@uchicago.edu 

University of Chicago, Chicago, Ill 60637 USA 

Email address : ewain@uchicago.edu