Title: The Climber's Grip -- Personalized Deep Learning Models for Fear and Muscle Activity in Climbing

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.26575v1

Published Time: Mon, 30 Mar 2026 01:21:56 GMT

Number of Pages: 44

Markdown Content:
# The Climber’s Grip - Personalized Deep Learning Models for Fear and Muscle Activity in Climbing 

# Matthias Boeker 1, Dana Swarbrick 2,3, Ulysse T.A. Côté-Allard 4,Marc T.P. Adam 5, Hugo L. Hammer 6, and Pål Halvorsen 1

Keywords: Fear, Climbing, Deep learning, Random Effects, Time series analysis 

Abstract 

Climbing is a multifaceted sport that combines physical demands and emotional and cognitive challenges. Ascent styles differ in fall distance with lead climbing involving larger falls than top rope climb-ing , which may result in different perceived risk and fear. In this study, we investigated the psychophysiological relationship between perceived fear and muscle activity in climbers using a combination of statistical modeling and deep learning techniques. We conducted an experiment with 19 climbers, collecting electromyography (EMG), electrocardiography (ECG) and arm motion data during lead and top rope climbing . Perceived fear ratings were collected for the different phases of the climb. Using a linear mixed-effects model, we analyzed the relationships between perceived fear and physiological measures. To capture the non-linear dynamics of this relationship, we extended our analysis to deep learning models and integrated random effects for a personalized modeling approach. Our results showed that random effects improved model performance of the mean squared error (MSE), mean absolute error (MAE) and root mean squared error (RMSE). The results showed that muscle fatigue correlates significantly with increased fear during lead climbing . This study highlights the potential of combining statistical and deep learning approaches for modeling the interplay between psychological and physiological states during climbing. 

1

> arXiv:2603.26575v1 [cs.LG] 27 Mar 2026

# 1 Introduction 

Climbing is a physically demanding sport in which climbers must carefully manage their physical exertion throughout an ascent. In addition to physical demands, climbing requires cognitive and emotional control [ 1]. There are different types of climbing ascent styles related to different safety rope proto-cols that differ in their psychophysiological demands, at least for intermediate climbers [ 1, 2, 3]. In this study, we investigated the ascent styles of top rope 

and lead climbing . In top rope climbing, the rope is anchored above the climber, which minimizes the fall distances and perceived risk. Conversely, in lead climbing , the climber must manage and secure the rope to points of protection along the route. Therefore, they are confronted with variable and often longer fall distances, which may elicit a higher level of fear [ 4, 5, 6]. While climbers widely acknowledge the interplay between the experience of fear and physical exertion, the relationship between fear and physiological responses, such as muscle activity and muscle fatigue, has not yet been rigorously investigated. To address this gap, we conducted an experiment to explore the relationship between self-reported fear and muscle activity among climbers. In this experiment, we tracked the physiological signals of 20 recreational climbers on a 19.3 m high indoor climbing wall. We measured the subjective experience of fear using self-reports and muscle activity through electromyography (EMG) of the forearm. The climbers engaged in both 

top rope and lead climbing in a within-subjects design. We investigated the impact of height and ascent styles on fear. Furthermore, we examined the relation between self-reported fear, muscle activity, and fatigue. A common statistical approach to test linear relationships in data collected from different participants is linear mixed effects modeling [ 7]. To account for individual differences in climbing experience, mental resilience, and physical capacity, we included participants as random effects to capture variability across individu-als. This approach enabled us to examine the psychophysiological influences of different climbing styles and physiological responses on subjective fear. In contrast to the traditional approach of linear mixed effects modeling, we also explored the application of more complex deep learning methods. These algorithms have the potential to recognize complex patterns within signals and to model non-linear relations. We model the physiological signals with a Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) deep learning algorithm. The GRU archi-tecture is able to capture temporal dependencies in sequential data. Unlike simpler models, GRU maintain an internal memory state that allows them to 2effectively learn patterns across time steps without suffering from vanishing gradient problems common in traditional recurrent networks [ 8]. We compare its performance with Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) and a linear model as benchmark. To account for individual differences between the participants, similar to the linear mixed effects model, we integrated random effects into the deep learning architectures, following Simchoni et al. [ 9]. In general, deep learning models are population-based, meaning that one model is trained on all individuals. Mixed effects deep learning architectures allow for a more personalized modeling approach [ 10 ]. The inclusion of random effects in deep learning has only recently been explored in the literature by Simchoni and Rosset and Kilian et al.[ 9, 11 , 12 ]. Our models showed that the inclusion of random effects to account for individual differences between climbers often improved model performance as measured with mean squared error (MSE), Mean absolute error (MAE) and root mean squared error (RMSE). In summary, the main contributions are as follows. 1. In Sport Psychology. (a) We conducted a within-subjects experiment and collected multi-modal data, including physiology with sensors, behavior with video recording, and subjective experience with questionnaires. (b) We demonstrated a significant relationship between the subjective experience of fear and muscle activity, highlighting the interplay between psychological and physiological responses. (c) Specifically, muscle fatigue was more strongly associated with perceived fear during lead climbing than top rope climbing. 2. Field of statistical machine learning. (a) We implemented and evaluated the integration of random effects in deep learning, enabling personalized modeling of our dataset. (b) We showed that by accounting for random effects between the climbers, model performances regarding MSE, MAE and RMSE generally improved. (c) We provide a PyTorch layer and a loss function for straightforward integration of random effects. 32 Background 

# 2.1 Muscle activity and fatigue 

Muscle activity refers to the physiological processes by which muscle fibers are stimulated to contract by motor neurons. A group of muscle fibers is stimulated by the nervous system through motor neurons that sit in the spinal cord [ 13 ]. This compound is referred to as a motor unit. The electrical signal sent from the terminal branch of the motor neuron axon propagates through the muscle fiber, causing its contraction. The summed electrical signal detected in the group of muscle fibers in the motor unit is referred to as motor unit action potential (MUAP). A repetitive sequence of MUAP is called a motor unit action potential train (MUAPT). The EMG signal measures the summation of the MUAPT from all the active motor units within the area covered by the electrodes [ 13 ]. The raw EMG signal is a complex electrical recording that represents the electrical activity generated by the muscle fibers during contraction. Due to its complexity and the presence of noise, the signal is pre-processed to better interpret and quantify muscle activity. The amplitude of the rectified EMG signal is related to the level of muscle activity, which can be measured using integrated EMG (iEMG) [14, 15]. Prolonged or intense muscle activity can lead to muscle fatigue. Muscle fatigue is a localized and complex physiological state characterized by a temporary decrease in the ability to perform physical tasks [ 14 , 16 ]. This condition can reduce the rate at which the motor neurons fire action potentials. This reduced firing rate indicates that MUAP within a MUAPT occurs less frequently. The reduced frequency leads to reduced stimulation of the muscle fibres, which reduces the muscle’s ability to generate and maintain a level of activity [ 17 ]. This condition is due to various changes within the muscle that affect metabolism, structure and energy supply and is primarily due to insufficient oxygen and nutrient supply [ 14 ]. Numerous physiological processes contribute to muscle fatigue, making it difficult to identify the exact causes [ 16 ]. Muscle contractions increase arterial blood pressure, which in turn reduces blood flow to active muscles. This reduction restricts oxygen supply and contributes to muscle fatigue. Reduced blood flow also hinders the removal of metabolic waste, which leads to the accumulation of lactic acid in the muscle tissue [ 18 ]. This accumulation often leads to a ‘burning’ sensation or feeling ‘pumped’ and the muscle appears swollen. In addition, increased acidity reduces the speed at which electrical signals travel through the muscle 4[ 14 ]. The most common measure of muscle fatigue is the decrease of mean frequency (MNF) of the EMG signal [ 14 , 19 ]. An increase in amplitude is also correlated with increased fatigue [ 20 ]. While individual motor units reduce their firing rate due to fatigue, increasing amplitude indicates that additional motor units are recruited to compensate for the loss of contractility [20, 21]. 

# 2.2 Fear during climbing 

Climbing is considered an adventure sport because of the exposure to height and risk of falling, both of which contribute to the sense of thrill and excite-ment. In climbing, the risk of injury from falling can be real or perceived. Generally, indoor climbing offers a safe, controlled environment free from risk as long as proper safety procedures are followed. Nonetheless, climbing can elicit fear of falling, fear of heights, and anxiety in climbers. Several previous studies have compared psychophysiological measures between lead and top rope climbing. Hodgson et al. found that lead climbing 

elicited higher cognitive and somatic stress compared to top rope climbing 

in intermediate climbers [ 1]. Draper, Fryer, and colleagues found that inter-mediate climbers reported that leading was more physically and mentally demanding than top roping [ 2]. However, when examining advanced and elite climbers, while they spent longer on a lead climb than a top-rope climb, there were no statistically significant differences on psychophysiological outcome measures [ 22 , 23 ]. Therefore, the experience level of the climbers is an impor-tant factor when considering psychophysiological responses during climbing. These expertise differences are likely related to how more experienced climbers will have been exposed to fewer unsafe lead falls and more safe experiences at heights. A recent review highlights the importance of not conflating between experience level and climbing ability when examining differences in climbing ascent style [3]. Height is another climbing variable that may impact fear. In a series of experiments, Pijpers et al. manipulated the height of identical traverses and measured inexperienced and beginner climbers’ psychophysiological responses [ 5, 6, 24 ]. Participants’ physiological responses exhibited significantly more muscle fatigue, higher blood lactate concentrations, and higher heart rates on the high route [ 5]. They also found behavioral differences, including that the higher traverse elicited longer climbing times, less smooth motion, more explosive movements, and slower, prolonged grasps [ 5, 6]. They also found that participants perceived and actual maximal reaching height was reduced 5in the higher traverse [ 24 ]. Therefore, another important variable to consider when examining fear and anxiety in climbing is height. There are many theories of emotion and affect that are useful when conceptualizing emotions like fear and anxiety. According to Ekman, fear is a basic emotion [ 25 ]. However, according to Russell et al.’s circumplex model of affect, fear is not an independent, atomic state but can be conceptualized on a scale of arousal and valence [ 26 ]. In Russell’s model, fear is characterized by negative valence and increased arousal [ 27 ]. While valence is a scale of pleasure–displeasure, arousal is the activation of the sympathetic autonomic nervous system (ANS) [ 26 ]. High arousal manifests itself in physiological reactions such as increased heart rate, sweat gland activation, blood flow to muscles, release of adrenaline into the bloodstream, and muscle tension [ 28 ]. The subjective experience of fear (high arousal, low valence) or excitement (high arousal, high valence) may be the result of the interpretation of these physiological responses, in combination with a state of valence [ 27 ]. In the literature, the term anxiety is often used interchangeably with the term fear. We have defined both terms to avoid confusion. Parts of the literature argue that anxiety and fear are the same phenomenon [ 29 ]. However, a difference can be defined in the objectives of the two terms. While fear is focused on a real, external, and known danger, anxiety is directed at an unknown threat. Both fear and anxiety cause sympathetic arousal that triggers physiological responses [ 29 , 30 ]. In climbing, risk and threats can be real or imagined, so it is challenging to know which term fits best in the climbing literature. We have chosen to use the term "fear" instead of "anxiety" because two of the subjective self-report outcome measures included this term, and only one included anxiety. However, we acknowledge that the field would benefit from a critical review of the usage of affective terminology. 

# 3 Methods 

First, we describe the climbing experiment and the collection and processing of the psychological and physiological measures. Then, we present methods for modeling random effects in deep learning and model evaluation. 63.1 Climbing Experiment 

This section describes the methodology of the data collection and processing for the climbing experiment. It is divided into subsections describing the experimental protocol, sensor setup, synchronization process between video and sensor data, and steps for pre-processing and extracting meaningful features from physiological signals. 

3.1.1 Participants 

We conducted a study with 20 recreational climbers, comprising eight women and twelve men, with an average age of 31 years ( ¯x = 7 .8, range: 23 −50 years). Participants were required to have a certification from the Norwegian Climbing Association indicating that they could lead belay safely. The participants had varying levels of climbing experience, with climbing experience ranging from 1.5 years to 24 years ( ¯x = 6 .6, s = 6 .84 years). The bouldering experience ranged from 0 to 20 years ( ¯x = 4 .3, s = 4 .62 years). Participants dedicated an average of 1.5 hours per week to lead climbing , one hour per week to top rope climbing , and one hour per week to bouldering. Notably, there was considerable variation in the time spent on these activities, with some participants spending more time bouldering and others focusing on 

lead climbing . The climbing abilities of the participants, in terms of their maximum redpoint grade, ranged from 6a to 7b for top rope climbing and 6a to 7a for lead climbing which are classified as intermediate to advanced [31], indicating that the cohort had a broad range of skill levels. 1 Participants with more climbing experience tended to have higher redpoint grades, which aligns with typical climbing progression patterns. Fifteen out of nineteen participants reported participating in other extreme sports. 

3.1.2 Experimental Protocol 

The experiment was a within-participants design in which each participant completed two trials during the experimental session. Participants were tasked with climbing the same route using both lead and top rope ascent styles. This was performed in a pseudorandomized order so that half of the participants 

> 1In climbing, the term redpoint grade refers to the highest difficulty level a climber can successfully ascend after prior attempts, in this work denoted by the French grading system. The number represents the difficulty level with higher numbers and letters indicating harder routes.

7completed the top rope condition first and the other half completed the lead condition first This protocol allowed each participant to rest between trials to minimize confounding factors such as accumulated fatigue and prior route knowledge from influencing the experimental conditions. Prior to the experiment, the participants were informed about the procedure, data collection methods, and their rights regarding personal information. The collection of personal data was approved by Sikt - Norwegian Agency for Shared Services in Education and Research, reference number 727897. The participants completed a 5-minute warm-up routine before the experimental protocol. The routine included specific exercises designed to target various muscle groups involved in climbing and to minimize the risk of injury. The warm-up protocol is described in the Appendix A.1. Participants were fitted with wearable physiological sensors. The trials were video-recorded and began and ended with a sensor synchronization protocol A.2. Before each ascent trial, a safety check was conducted in collaboration with the experimenter. During the lead climbing trials, the climbers clipped the rope into quickdraws along the route. For the top rope climbing trials, the rope was already secured to the top anchor of the route and participants were required to unclip the rope from the quickdraws as they ascended to match the challenge of clipping the rope in the lead ascent style. After the climb, the participants were lowered, and the sensor synchronization protocol was repeated. At the end of the experimental session, participants completed the post-experiment questionnaire where they reported their demographic information, previous climbing experience, and a short version of the State-Trait Anxiety Inventory, adapted for this study to assess climbing specific contexts. The adjusted STAI employed in the experiment is attached in the Appendix 4.1. The STAI is a well-established tool for measuring trait anxiety [ 32 ]. Elevated scores on the State-Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI) correlate with higher vulnerability to anxiety disorders and greater emotional reactivity to stress [33, 34]. 

3.1.3 Self-report Measures 

After each trial, participants completed the post-climb questionnaire as they reviewed the video recording of their ascent. The video was paused after each quarter of the route as defined by equidistant points on the wall. Each quarter had four corresponding questions, attached in the Appendix A.3. With assistance from the anxiety thermometer which has ten response options 8[ 35 ], participants reported their anxiety level, fear of falling due to fatigue, and fear of heights.Participants also reported their feeling of fatigue in the forearms (i.e., ’pump’) on a 10-point scale with response poles of ’Not pumped at all’ to ’Extremely pumped’. 

3.1.4 Physiological Measures 

The BioPoint ™ biosensor was used to collect physiological data during the climbing trials. This compact wearable device, roughly the size of a smart-watch, is equipped with several high-quality sensors, including Electrocardio-graphy (ECG), photoplethysmography (PPG), skin temperature, a six-axis Inertial Measurement Unit (IMU), and EMG. The device has 4 GB of in-ternal memory, making it well-suited for continuous data collection during the climbing experiment [ 36 ]. The climbers wore the BioPoint on their right forearm to measure their limb movement. We positioned the sensor on the participants’ flexor digitorum superficialis (FDS), approximately 34 of the way from the elbow to the wrist, toward the ulnar side. We confirmed placement by palpating the muscle while the participants flexed their fingers and applied pressure with the palm of their hand, which helped to accurately determine the muscle position for sensor placement [37]. 

3.1.5 Data Processing and Analysis 

The data collected from theEMG, IMU, and ECG signals were pre-processed to reduce noise and extract meaningful features. The EMG signal was sampled at a frequency of 2000 Hz. A 50 Hz notch filter was applied to remove electrical interference, followed by a bandpass filter with a range of 20 to 450 Hz and an order of 4 [ 38 , 39 ]. For the IMU, which was sampled at 50 Hz, a bandpass filter with a bandwidth of 0.1 to 25 Hz was applied [ 37 ]. The ECG signal was processed with a bandpass filter from 1 Hz to 30 Hz at a sampling rate of 500 Hz. To derive meaningful features from these signals, we used a rolling window approach. For the EMG signal, the sliding window was configured to a size of 1000 time points, with an overlap of 500 time points. Similarly, the ECG signal used a sliding window of 250 time points, with an overlap of 125 time points. Each window, sliding across the signal, was used to calculate several time-dependent features. These included the MNF, and iEMG for EMG, which are commonly used to measure muscle fatigue and muscle activity. The MNF is a well-established measure of muscle fatigue 9[19, 40], and iEMG measures muscle activation based on the neuronal input to the muscle [ 41 ]. For the ECG signal, we extracted both the heart rate and heart rate variability. Heart rate was calculated based on the intervals between successive R-peaks detected in the ECG waveform, while heart rate variability was assessed using the root mean square of successive differences (RMSSD) between heartbeats [ 42 ]. For the IMU, we specifically analyzed the wrist’s acceleration in the horizontal x-direction. The acceleration was averaged over defined time windows to reduce noise and improve the reliability of the measurements. 

# 3.2 Modeling 

The methodology section is divided into two parts. First, we introduce the adaption of random effects in deep learning and describe how they are integrated into the architecture and what changes were made to the loss function to accommodate them. We conclude with a description of the model evaluation methods used in this study. 

3.2.1 Random effects in deep learning 

One of the advantages of machine learning is its minimal requirement for statistical assumptions. However, every model assumes that the data points are independent and identical distributed (i.i.d.), which means that the data points are drawn independently from the same distribution [ 43 ]. This assumption is violated when data are clustered or temporally correlated. A violation of this assumption can lead to biased estimates and false inferences [12]. Fortunately, machine learning offers several mechanisms to handle such scenarios. For instance, network architectures such as Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) or GRU are explicitly designed to model serial dependencies between observations. These models capture the temporal structure of the data, ensuring that predictions consider the order and dependencies between data points, thus handling violations of the i.i.d. assumption in time-series data. For clustered data, in which observations within clusters are correlated, a common approach in machine learning is to encode clusters as categorical features. These categorical features can be transformed using methods such as one-hot coding or entity embedding [ 44 , 45 ]. Unlike embeddings, which 10 learn dense representations for each cluster, the random effects model clusters membership as a random variable, allowing the model to capture within-cluster correlation. This approach is particularly useful for hierarchical data or repeated measures data, where observations within the same cluster are not independent. The concept of random effects allows us to account for the correlated data 

X when modeling the dependent variable Y . Accordingly, yj is assumed to be a multivariate normal variable yj ∼ N (μj , V (ψ)) , where the mean μj has a size (nj × 1) and a covariance matrix V (θ) has a size (nj × nj ). nj is the number of observations per cluster j [ 7]. J is the number of clusters. We assume that bj is drawn from b a multivariate normal distribution N (0 , D).

D is (j × j) positive semi-definite covariance matrix [ 9]. We can translate linear mixed effects models into a non-linear setting, by allowing fixed and random effects to be non-linear. In doing so, we followed the approach of Simchoni et al. [ 11 ]. ¨ In Equation 1, we generalize the equations to represent the data without explicitly indexing the clusters j. This means that X refers to the overall design matrix for fixed effects, Z represents the design matrix for random effects across all observations, and b and ϵ denote the vectors of random effects and noise, respectively. 

y = f (X, θ) + Zb + ϵ (1) In Equation 1, f (X, θ) and g(Z) are potentially complex functions that can be substituted with a neural network architecture. For simplicity and interpretability, we chose g as the identity function, so that g(Z) = Z. When integrating random effects, we need to optimize the neural network parameters 

θ and the random effect vector b. Since b ∼ N (0 , D ), we optimize for the variance-covariance parameters in D. For example, in the case of a random intercept, we optimize for σbI. Instead of minimizing a loss function such as MSE, we minimize the negative log likelihood given in Equation 2, where 

V (ψ) = ZD (ψ)Z′ + σ2 

> e

I [11]. 

N LL (f, θ, D |y) = 12(y − f (X, θ )) ′V (ψ)−1(y − f (X, θ )) + 12 log |V (ψ)| + n

2 log 2 π

(2) The covariance of the random effects takes the general structure described in 11 Equation 3. 

D(ψ) = 



σ2 

> b1

Ij · · · ρ1,J −1σb1 σbJ−1 Ij

ρ1,2σb1 σb2 Ij σ2 

> b2

Ij ρ2,J −1σb2 σbJ−1 Ij

· · · · · · · · · 

ρ1,J −1σb1 σbJ−1 Ij · · · σ2 

> bJ−1

Ij

 (3) Depending on the covariance structure of the random effects in V (ψ) the inversion can be computationally expensive. However, for the common random intercept and random slope models, we can decompose V (ψ) into the sum of block diagonal matrices. This decomposition simplifies the inversion process. In the random intercept model, the covariance matrix becomes the diagonal matrix σ2 

> b1

Ij , whose inversion is the element-wise inversion of the diagonal elements, resulting in 1

> σ2
> b1

Ij . In the case of the random slopes model, D(ψ) is given by the matrix in Equation 4, which can be inverted block-wise. 

 σ2 

> b0

ρ0,1σb0 σb1

ρ0,1σb0 σb1 σ2

> b1



(4) 

3.2.2 Deep learning model and training specifications 

The machine learning experiments evaluate the performance of a GRU to compare benchmark models for predicting the sum of the perceived fear scores using time series data and demographic data. We included MNF, heart rate (HR) and acceleration of the arm as time series features. Age and gender were included as demographic variables. Recurrent architectures such as GRU are well suited to model temporal dependencies within physiological signals that simpler models potentially cannot capture. We chose GRU because it has fewer parameters than the well-known Long short-term memory (LSTM). However, both architectures share the important additive update mechanism, which helps them remember features for long sequences and creates shortcut paths that mitigate vanishing gradient problems [8]. We evaluated the performance of the GRU and compared it to a linear model and a MLP. Each model processed fixed time windows of 30 sequential measurements. Our architectures were designed with a multi-branch approach. One branch processes time series data while another handles participant metadata, before merging for final prediction. All physiological signals were collected synchronously from an integrated sensor unit. After preprocessing 12 and feature extraction as described in Section 3.1.5, we created fixed-length windows of 30 sequential measurements for model input. Each input window contained the standardized features from EMG, ECG, and IMU sensors, creating a multivariate time series representation of dimensions sequence length and number of features. These windows were generated using a sliding window approach with no overlap between consecutive windows. For each window, we derived a single target value by taking the sum of the perceived fear scores. The linear model directly averages time series features and applies a single linear transformation. The MLP processes time series data through a dense layer with ReLU activation, averaging across time points, before merging with metadata features processed through a separate dense layer. The merged representation passes through another dense layer with ReLU activation and dropout of 50% . The GRU model processes time series data through a single GRU layer. This captures the entire sequence information in a compact representation. The model then combines this with participant metadata for the final prediction. This concatenated representation is then processed through a linear layer with ReLU activation and subsequently passed through a dense layer that also employs ReLU activation and a dropout rate of 50% 

before making the final prediction. In addition, each model was compared to its counterpart with random effects that account for subject-specific variability. These models include a custom RandomEffectLayer that adds participant-specific intercepts to the outputs, while standard models focused exclusively on fixed effects. Training was performed using Adam optimization with early stopping to prevent overfitting. The learning rate was lr = 0 .0001 with an L2 regulariza-tion of λ = 0 .0001 . All deep learning architectures include a dropout rate of 

50% for overfitting prevention. We used MSE loss for standard models, while random effect models were trained with negative log-likelihood loss. We split the participant’s ascent trials in a 70% training, 15% validation, and 15% test distribution. Our approach acknowledges that participants completed multiple climbing routes in different styles. Rather than separating participants entirely between sets, we randomly added one ascent style for every climber in the training set. Then we assigned their remaining climbs and split these between training, validation, and test sets to achieve our 70% , 15% ,

15% split. Each experiment was repeated ten times with different random weight initializations, with averages and standard deviations calculated across runs. The models were trained using a batch size of 64 for up to 100 epochs. 13 4 Results 

The result section is structured into three parts. In Section 4.1, we present a statistical analysis using a linear mixed-effects model that provides inter-pretable insight into the relations between physiological signals, the ascent style and height, and self-reported fear. We then explore the application of deep learning techniques and their integration with random effects to improve the model performance in Section 4.2. Finally, we evaluated these deep learning models using advanced metrics that go beyond traditional regression analysis and provide a more sophisticated understanding of the data. 

# 4.1 Statistical Analysis 

Before conducting, statistical modeling, we describe the collected data to gain a general understanding of the characteristics and relations. Figure 4 shows the results of the four self-report measures described in Section 3.1.3 over the intervals with their standard errors. The self-report measures increase with increased height and that the trajectories are steeper in lead than top rope climbing . The figure also indicates a similar linear increase for all the four perceived measurements. Figure 1 illustrates the pairwise repeated measures correlation matrix as a heat map. It displays the correlation coefficients along with p-values corrected for multiple comparisons using the false discovery rate approach. Participants 3 and 6 were removed from the correlation because of noisy ECG signals. First, we observed strong correlations among the perceived measurements, especially fear-related scores. The correlation matrix also revealed a positive linear relationship between increasing perceived fear and muscle activity measured by iEMG. A decreasing MNF as a measure of increasing muscle fatigue, is also correlated with perceived fear and perceived fatigue (i.e., "Pumped"). These findings suggest that muscle activity and fatigue have a linear relationship with perceived fear. 14 Figure 1: The correlation matrix illustrates pairwise repeated-measures cor-relation coefficients and false discovery rate corrected p-values between the subjective and physiological variables. Each cell in the heatmap represents the correlation coefficient and significance of that specific pair. Only significant correlations are visualized. * p < .05, ** p < .01, * p < .001.. As described in Section 3.1.3, the questionnaire measurement response scales ranged from one to ten. Given the high correlation among the three fear scores—general anxiety, fear of falling due to fatigue, and fear of heights—we explored the possibility of aggregating them into a single score. Aggregat-ing these scores provides a more reliable representation of the underlying construct and approximates a continuous scale, compared to treating each score individually. Therefore, we conducted both Cronbach’s alpha and prin-15 cipal component analysis to assess whether the scores measured the same underlying construct [ 46 ]. The analysis revealed good internal consistency with a Cronbach’s alpha of 0.92. Moreover, principal component analysis confirmed that the scores loaded onto a single component, explaining 87% of the variance. Building on this analysis, we aggregated these scores to make a total fear score. We used linear mixed-effects models to analyze the effects of climbing style, interval distance, climbing experience in years, muscle activity and fatigue on the total score of perceived fear. We fitted two different mixed-effects models with the total score as the outcome measure and MNF and iEMG as predictors. Both models included style (lead = 1, top rope = 0) and 

interval (four levels) as categorical fixed effects. Additionally, we included an interaction term between the muscle activity predictors, iEMG or MNF, and Style to assess whether the relationship between muscle activity and the total score varies depending on the climbing style. A random intercept was included for each participant to account for individual differences. The intercept in both models represents the predicted total score for top rope climbing in the first interval when iEMG or MNF is equal to zero. The results are summarized in Table 1. Participant 20 was excluded from the linear mixed effects model due to faulty EMG signal measurement. For the MNF model, climbing style significantly impacted self-reported fear, with higher levels reported for lead climbing ( estimate = 13 .650 , p < . 001 )compared to top rope climbing ( intercept = 5 .236 , p = .043 ). Later intervals (3 and 4) exhibited a significant positive effect on self-reported fear, with Interval 3 ( Estimate = 3 .481 , p < . 001 ) and Interval 4 ( Estimate = 3 .516 , p < . 001 )showing increased self-reported fear relative to Interval 1. This indicates that perceived fear intensifies as the climber ascends, which is possibly related to increasing height or fatigue. The significant interaction term between MNF and lead climbing ( estimate = −0.089 , p = .019 ) suggests that muscle fatigue was more strongly associated with self-reported fear during lead climbing than 

top rope climbing . This relation is visualized in Figure 2, which shows the relation between MNF and self-reported fear. For the iEMG model, climbing style had a significant effect, with higher perceived fear of lead climbing ( estimate = 7 .229 , p < . 001 ) compared to 

top rope climbing ( intercept = 4 .969 , p < . 001 ). Later intervals (3 and 4) also showed significant increases in self-reported fear, with Interval 3 (Estimate = 3 .716 , p < . 001 ) and Interval 4 ( Estimate = 4 .693 , p < . 001 )reflecting higher perceived fear as the climb progressed. The main effect 16 Figure 2: The relationship between MNF and self-reported fear, conditioned by climbing ascent style. The figure illustrates a steeper negative slope for lead climbing compared to top rope climbing, indicating a stronger association between MNF and fear in lead climbing. 17 Figure 3: The figure shows the relationship between iEMG and self-reported fear across two climbing styles. Although lead climbing shows a slightly steeper increase in self-reported fear with iEMG compared to top rope climbing, the interaction term was not statistically significant. of iEMG ( p = .110 ) and the interaction between iEMG and climbing style (p = .512 ) were not statistically significant, indicating that muscle activity as measured by iEMG does not explain self-reported fear, nor does its relationship with fear differ by climbing style. Similar to Figure 2, Figure 3 visualizes the interaction between the relation between iEMG and self-reported fear. 

# 4.2 Model Comparison 

The results from the linear mixed models showed a significant relationship between perceived fear, muscle activity, and muscle fatigue. However, we also investigated the potential of deep learning models and how personalized deep learning models performed when random effects are considered. The perfor-mance of all models, both with and without random effects, was compared using MSE, MAE, and RMSE. The results are summarized in Table 2. The 18 Figure 4: The figure compares the four subjective scores measured at each interval and for lead and top rope climbing , displayed as line plots with standard error bars. We observe that participant consistently reported higher scores during lead climbing 

than top rope climbing .

19 Table 1: Summary of linear mixed model analyses of the effect of muscle activity on fear. The table shows the estimates, standard errors, and p-values for the regression models. Significant parameters ( α < . 05 ) are annotated with a single asterisk (*). 

Model Fixed Effect Estimate Std. Error p-value 

MNF MNF -0.0008 0.033 .980 Intercept 5.236 2.595 .046 * Lead 13.650 2.822 <.001 * Interval2 1.054 0.620 .092 Interval3 3.516 0.649 <.001 * Interval4 4.628 0.686 <.001 * experience -0.074 0.092 .434 MNF:style1 -0.089 0.037 .019 * IEMG IEMG 0.636 0.380 .097 Intercept 4.969 0.944 <.001 * Lead 7.229 0.953 <.001 * Interval2 1.161 0.604 .057 Interval3 3.716 0.605 <.001 * Interval4 4.693 0.631 <.001 * experience -0.063 0.088 .485 IEMG:style1 0.283 0.430 .512 values are given as mean ± standard deviation across ten different random initializations to provide an overview of the model performance and variability between experiments. The models were evaluated on the completely held-out test set (15% of the data), unlike the analysis in Section 4.1, which was performed on the entire dataset. The training and validation loss curves for the deep learning models across training epochs are added to the Appendix A.6. The consistent decrease in validation loss without significant divergence from training loss indicates proper convergence without overfitting. The GRU with random effects achieved the lowest RMSE ( 2.49 ± 0.27 )as well as the lowest MAE ( 1.42 ± 0.18 ) and MSE ( 6.25 ± 1.39 ), indicat-ing superior predictive performance. All random effects models consistently outperformed their standard counterparts across all three metrics, demon-20 strating the importance of accounting for participant-specific variability in physiological response modeling. To contextualize these error metrics within the scale of our target vari-able, we included summary statistics of the fear scores alongside performance metrics in Table 3. The target value has a standard deviation of 4.37 and interquartile range of 6 (Q3-Q1). The random effects GRU model achieves a RMSE/SD ratio of 0.57 indicates that prediction errors represent approxi-mately 57% of the natural variability in the data. Similarly, the RMSE/IQR ratio of 0.42 demonstrates that errors are less than half the interquartile range. These normalized metrics show that our best model achieves meaning-ful predictive accuracy despite the inherent variability in fear responses during climbing. The consistently superior performance of models incorporating random effects highlights the importance of accounting for participant-specific variability when modeling physiological responses to climbing-induced fear, particularly with limited sample sizes. This approach effectively captures both shared patterns across participants and individual differences in fear response profiles. Metric GRUNN GRUNNRE Linear LinearRE NN NNRE MSE 11 .19 ± 0.99 6.25 ± 1.39 27 .04 ± 0.46 19 .24 ± 4.08 11 .52 ± 1.07 8.96 ± 2.42 

MAE 1.91 ± 0.11 1.42 ± 0.18 4.23 ± 0.01 2.94 ± 0.4 2.09 ± 0.08 1.78 ± 0.21 

RMSE 3.34 ± 0.15 2.49 ± 0.27 5.2 ± 0.04 4.37 ± 0.47 3.39 ± 0.16 2.97 ± 0.39 

Table 2: Comparison of prediction performance between random effect models and the standard models across different error metrics. The results show a consistent improvement in all three evaluation metrics for the random effects compared to the standard models. 

# 5 Discussion 

In this study, we investigated the relation between muscle activity, muscle fatigue, and self-reported fear during different climbing ascent types and heights. We measured the physiological responses and self-reported fear in 20 climbers during both top rope and lead climbing . Using a linear mixed-effects model, we identified a significant relation between muscle fatigue and self-reported fear. Recognizing the complexity of these psychophysiological responses, we also used deep learning techniques extended with random effects 21 Metric GRUNNRE NNRE LinearRE RMSE 2.49 2.97 4.37 RMSE/SD Ratio 0.57 0.68 1.0 RMSE/IQR Ratio 0.42 0.50 0.73 Median SD Q1 Q3 7 4.37 5 11 Table 3: Model Performance Comparison for Total Fear Score Prediction. The table presents RMSE values and the RMSE/ standard deviation ratio as well as the RMSE/ interquartile range ratios) for our three random effects models, alongside summary statistics of the target variable. to better capture the non-linear dynamics of the interplay of these measures, following the approach proposed by Simchoni et al. [11]. Notably, the results in Section 4.1 indicate that muscle fatigue has a sig-nificant interaction effect with climbing style, suggesting that the relationship between fatigue and self-reported fear is more pronounced in lead climbing 

than in top rope climbing . This implies that climbers experienced more fear as muscle fatigue increased during lead climbing as compared to top rope climbing . This may be related to how falling distances are longer in lead climbing and falls are more likely if muscles are fatigued. Moreover, the results showed that height intervals and lead climbing led to significantly increased self-reported fear. These results are consistent with the findings of Hodgson et al. in which different rope safety protocols influenced fear [ 1]. However, the linear mixed effects model failed to find a significant relation between muscle activity during lead climbing and self-reported fear. This suggests that muscle activity, as captured by iEMG, does not directly correspond to self-reported fear responses. Instead, the cumulative effect of muscle fatigue, as captured by the MNF, better explains self-reported fear in the more de-manding context of lead climbing . These results contribute to the literature on intermediate climbers that shows that lead climbing evokes more fear and activates physiological markers of the ANS, due to perceived danger and an increased risk of falling. This activation manifests as a physiological response measurable with EMG and contributes to a stronger experience of fear. The results in Section 4.2 show that models with random effects perform better than those without random effects. We observed an improvement in most models and feature combinations. Our findings replicated the results of 22 Simchoni et al. as we successfully showcased the integration of random effects into deep learning to improve personalized modeling [ 9]. This advance is particularly crucial in the field of psychophysiology research, where datasets are usually characterized by numerous repeated measurements per participant but a limited number of study participants in total. Consequently, accounting for inter-individual variability is essential to ensure model robustness and prevent biased generalization. By incorporating random effects, our approach provided a more accurate representation of individual differences, thereby improving the generalizability and reliability of the models. Furthermore, our results highlight the need to develop methods that strike a balance between personalization and generalization, which is crucial for applying models in diverse populations. The GRU architecture achieved the best results because it is inherently well suited to capture the temporal dynamics of physiological signals. Unlike MLP or linear models, GRU are designed to retain information across time steps, allowing them to model how earlier physiological states influence later emotional responses - a key feature of fear responses in climbing. By incorporating random effects into the GRU, the model gains the ability to learn not only from general patterns in the data, but also from participant-specific trends. Our study has limitations regarding the investigation of the relationship between muscle activity and psychological state. These limitations reveal potential future research directions for more in-depth analysis of the psy-chophysiology of climbing. Extending the experiment to include a real-time measurement of portable neural measurement equipment (e.g., fNIRS) during climbing could provide a deeper insight into the participant’s central nervous system (CNS) activity. Self-reports after climbing, such as perceived fear, only provide an approximation of the emotional states. They are subject to memory bias and cannot fully capture the dynamic nature of the psychological states during climbing. Consequently, it is not possible with these reports to determine exactly when fear is experienced in relation to muscle activity. Future work could aim to have climbers report their fear experience in real-time to allow for more nuanced time-series analyses. Regarding the random effects in deep learning, future work should aim to integrate random effects for classification task of neural networks. The current approach integrates the random effects into the negative log likelihood function of a regression 2. Especially multi-class classification problems or Poisson distributed dependent variables, to improve the extent to which they can be personalized [ 11 , 47 , 48 ]. 23 6 Code Availability A Appendix 

# A.1 Warm-up Protocol 

The warm-up lasted approximately 5 minutes and consisted of tendon gliding to mobilize the fingers and hands, fist squeezes to warm up the forearms, 20 jumping jacks to activate the full body, arm circles to mobilize the shoulders, 10 repetitions of bird dogs to prepare the core, and 10 dynamic leg swings to prepare the lower body. 

# A.2 Sensor Synchronization 

To synchronize the sensors and video recordings, the participants stood in front of the video camera as they listened to an audio recording containing instructions. Participants were instructed to tap on the sensors in time to two different beep trains ,consisting of three beeps to provide the tempo and three beeps to which they tapped along. This was presented at two different tempi to ensure accurate alignment between the video and sensor signals. 24 A.3 Post-climb Questionnaire 

> 25

Figure 5: Participants responded to the post-climb questionnaire as they watched the video recording of the climb that they just completed to report their i) anxiety level, ii) fear of falling attributable to fatigue, iii) fear of heights, and iv) fatigue in their forearms 26 A.4 Post-experiment Questionnaire 

> 27

28 29 30 31 32 33 A.5 Validation of linear mixed model assumptions 

color In addition to the statistical analysis, we provide diagnostics for the linear mixed model to validate its assumptions. First, we evaluated whether the residuals were normally distributed or not. Figure 6 shows the Q-Q diagram, which visually evaluates the normal distribution. The residuals appear to follow the normal distribution within the first standard deviation. Therefore, the residuals represented a normal distribution. 34 Figure 6: The Q-Q diagram shows how well the residuals of the linear mixed model correspond to a normal distribution. Points that are close to the reference line indicate that the residuals follow a normal distribution. We see that the residuals are mostly aligned with the reference line, which proves that the normality assumption is reasonably fulfilled. In the next step, we evaluate the assumption of heteroscedasticity. Figure 7 shows the residuals plotted against the fitted values of the regression model. In a well-fitted model, the residuals should scatter randomly around zero, indicating homoscedasticity and a correct model specification. The observed random dispersion of the residuals indicates that these assumptions were fulfilled. Deviations from this pattern, such as systematic curves, clusters, or funnel shapes, may indicate problems such as heteroscedasticity, omitted variables, or non-linearity. 

color We used the Goldfeld-Quandt test to test the assumption of ho-35 moscedasticity in the residuals of the model. In this test, the residuals were divided into two groups and tested for a significant difference in the variance between them. The test statistic (GQ = 1.155) and the associated p-value (p = 0.296) showed no significant indication of heteroskedasticity. This indicates that the variance of the residuals in the two segments remained constant. 5 10 15 −6  −4  −2  0 2 4 6

## Residuals vs Fitted Values 

> Fitted Values Residuals

Figure 7: Residuals plotted against fitted values of the regression model. The random dispersion of residuals around zero indicates homoscedasticity and proper model specification. 36 Figure 8: MLP training and validation loss. 

Figure 9: Random effect MLP training and validation loss. 37 Figure 10: GRU training and validation loss. 

Figure 11: Random effect GRU training and validation loss. 38 A.6 Trainig and validation loss 

# References 

[1] Christoher I Hodgson, Nick Draper, Terry McMorris, Glenys Jones, Simon Fryer, and Ian Coleman. Perceived anxiety and plasma cortisol concentrations following rock climbing with differing safety rope protocols. 

British Journal of Sports Medicine , 43(7):531–535, 2009. [2] Nick Draper, Glenys A Jones, Simon Fryer, Christopher I Hodgson, and Gavin Blackwell. Physiological and psychological responses to lead and top rope climbing for intermediate rock climbers. European Journal of Sport Science , 10(1):13–20, 2010. [3] Kevin Mangan, Kathryn Andrews, Brad Miles, and Nick Draper. The psychology of rock climbing: A systematic review. Psychology of Sport and Exercise , page 102763, 2024. [4] David Giles, Nick Draper, Peter Gilliver, Nicola Taylor, James Mitchell, Linda Birch, Joseph Woodhead, Gavin Blackwell, and Michael J Hamlin. Current understanding in climbing psychophysiology research. Sports Technology , 7(3-4):108–119, 2014. [5] JR Rob Pijpers, Raôul RD Oudejans, Floris Holsheimer, and Frank C Bakker. Anxiety–performance relationships in climbing: a process-oriented approach. Psychology of sport and exercise , 4(3):283–304, 2003. [6] Jan R Pijpers, Raôul RD Oudejans, and Frank C Bakker. Anxiety-induced changes in movement behaviour during the execution of a com-plex whole-body task. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology Section A , 58(3):421–445, 2005. [7] Nan M Laird and James H Ware. Random-effects models for longitudinal data. Biometrics , pages 963–974, 1982. [8] Junyoung Chung, Caglar Gulcehre, KyungHyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio. Empirical evaluation of gated recurrent neural networks on sequence modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.3555 , 2014. 39 [9] Giora Simchoni and Saharon Rosset. Integrating random effects in deep neural networks. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 24(156):1–57, 2023. [10] Ingyo Chung, Saehoon Kim, Juho Lee, Kwang Joon Kim, Sung Ju Hwang, and Eunho Yang. Deep mixed effect model using gaussian processes: a personalized and reliable prediction for healthcare. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence , volume 34, pages 3649–3657, 2020. [11] Giora Simchoni and Saharon Rosset. Using random effects to account for high-cardinality categorical features and repeated measures in deep neural networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,34:25111–25122, 2021. [12] Pascal Kilian, Sangbeak Ye, and Augustin Kelava. Mixed effects in machine learning–a flexible mixedml framework to add random effects to supervised machine learning regression. Transactions on Machine Learning Research , 2023. [13] John V Basmajian. Muscles alive. their functions revealed by electromyo-graphy. Academic Medicine , 37(8):802, 1962. [14] Mario Cifrek, Vladimir Medved, Stanko Tonković, and Saša Ostojić. Surface emg based muscle fatigue evaluation in biomechanics. Clinical biomechanics , 24(4):327–340, 2009. [15] Edward A Clancy, Evelyn L Morin, and Roberto Merletti. Sampling, noise-reduction and amplitude estimation issues in surface electromyog-raphy. Journal of electromyography and kinesiology , 12(1):1–16, 2002. [16] Roger M Enoka and Jacques Duchateau. Muscle fatigue: what, why and how it influences muscle function. The Journal of physiology , 586(1):11– 23, 2008. [17] Dumitru Constantin-Teodosiu and Despina Constantin. Molecular mech-anisms of muscle fatigue. International journal of molecular sciences ,22(21):11587, 2021. 40 [18] Jing-jing Wan, Zhen Qin, Peng-yuan Wang, Yang Sun, and Xia Liu. Muscle fatigue: general understanding and treatment. Experimental & molecular medicine , 49(10):e384–e384, 2017. [19] Carlo J De Luca. Myoelectrical manifestations of localized muscular fatigue in humans. Critical reviews in biomedical engineering , 11(4):251– 279, 1984. [20] B Maton. Human motor unit activity during the onset of muscle fatigue in submaximal isometric isotonic contraction. European journal of applied physiology and occupational physiology , 46(3):271–281, 1981. [21] Robert G Eason. Electromyographic study of local and generalized muscular impairment. Journal of applied physiology , 15(3):479–482, 1960. [22] Simon Fryer, Tabitha Dickson, Nick Draper, Mark Eltom, Lee Stoner, and Gavin Blackwell. The effect of technique and ability on the vo2–heart rate relationship in rock climbing. Sports Technology , 5(3-4):143–150, 2012. [23] Tabitha Dickson, Simon Fryer, Gavin Blackwell, Nick Draper, and Lee Stoner. Effect of style of ascent on the psychophysiological demands of rock climbing in elite level climbers. Sports Technology , 5(3-4):111–119, 2012. [24] Jan R Pijpers, Raoul RD Oudejans, Frank C Bakker, and Peter J Beek. The role of anxiety in perceiving and realizing affordances. Ecological psychology , 18(3):131–161, 2006. [25] Paul Ekman. Are there basic emotions? 1992. [26] James A Russell. Core affect and the psychological construction of emotion. Psychological review , 110(1):145, 2003. [27] Jonathan Posner, James A Russell, and Bradley S Peterson. The circum-plex model of affect: An integrative approach to affective neuroscience, cognitive development, and psychopathology. Development and psy-chopathology , 17(3):715–734, 2005. 41 [28] Tyler LeBouef, Zachary Yaker, and Lacey Whited. Physiology, autonomic nervous system. In StatPearls [Internet] . StatPearls Publishing, 2023. [29] Thierry Steimer. The biology of fear-and anxiety-related behaviors. 

Dialogues in clinical neuroscience , 4(3):231–249, 2002. [30] Karrie J. Craig, Kelly J. Brown, and Andrew Baum. Environmental factors in the etiology of anxiety. In Floyd E. Bloom and David J. Kupfer, editors, Psychopharmacology: The Fourth Generation of Progress , pages 1325–1339. Raven Press, New York, 1995. [31] Nick Draper, David Giles, Volker Schöffl, Franz Konstantin Fuss, Phillip Watts, Peter Wolf, Jiří Baláš, Vanesa Espana-Romero, Gina Blunt Gon-zalez, Simon Fryer, et al. Comparative grading scales, statistical analyses, climber descriptors and ability grouping: International rock climbing research association position statement. Sports Technology , 8(3-4):88–94, 2015. [32] Andras N Zsido, Szidalisz A Teleki, Krisztina Csokasi, Sandor Rozsa, and Szabolcs A Bandi. Development of the short version of the spielberger state—trait anxiety inventory. Psychiatry research , 291:113223, 2020. [33] Charles D Spielberger, Fernando Gonzalez-Reigosa, Angel Martinez-Urrutia, Luiz FS Natalicio, and Diana S Natalicio. The state-trait anxiety inventory. Revista Interamericana de Psicologia/Interamerican journal of psychology , 5(3 & 4), 1971. [34] Julie A Chambers, Kevin G Power, and Robert C Durham. The relation-ship between trait vulnerability and anxiety and depressive diagnoses at long-term follow-up of generalized anxiety disorder. Journal of anxiety disorders , 18(5):587–607, 2004. [35] ILD Houtman and FC Bakker. The anxiety thermometer: a validation study. Journal of personality assessment , 53(3):575–582, 1989. [36] SiFi Labs. Biopoint sensor. https://sifilabs.com/, 2024. Accessed: 2024-05-02. [37] Matthias Boeker, Dana Swarbrick, Ulysse Côté-Allard, Michael Alexan-der Riegler, Pål Halvorsen, and Hugo Lewi Hammer. Predictive modelling 42 of muscle fatigue in climbing. In Proceedings of the 7th ACM Interna-tional Workshop on Multimedia Content Analysis in Sports , pages 7–15, 2024. [38] Xiaoyan Li, William Z Rymer, Guanglin Li, and Ping Zhou. The ef-fects of notch filtering on electrically evoked myoelectric signals and associated motor unit index estimates. Journal of neuroengineering and rehabilitation , 8:1–10, 2011. [39] R Merletti and GL Cerone. Tutorial. surface emg detection, conditioning and pre-processing: Best practices. Journal of Electromyography and Kinesiology , 54:102440, 2020. [40] SERGE H Roy, CARLO J De Luca, LYNN Snyder-Mackler, MARK S Emley, RONDA L Crenshaw, and JULIANN P Lyons. Fatigue, recovery, and low back pain in varsity rowers. Medicine and science in sports and exercise , 22(4):463–469, 1990. [41] Jukka HT Viitasalo and Paavo V Komi. Signal characteristics of emg during fatigue. European journal of applied physiology and occupational physiology , 37:111–121, 1977. [42] Bojan Makivić, Marina Nikić Djordjević, and Monte S Willis. Heart rate variability (hrv) as a tool for diagnostic and monitoring performance in sport and physical activities. Journal of Exercise Physiology Online ,16(3), 2013. [43] Christopher M Bishop and Nasser M Nasrabadi. Pattern recognition and machine learning , volume 4. Springer, 2006. [44] John T Hancock and Taghi M Khoshgoftaar. Survey on categorical data for neural networks. Journal of big data , 7(1):28, 2020. [45] Aurélien Géron. Hands-on machine learning with Scikit-Learn, Keras, and TensorFlow . " O’Reilly Media, Inc.", 2022. [46] Mohsen Tavakol and Reg Dennick. Making sense of cronbach’s alpha. 

International journal of medical education , 2:53, 2011. [47] Michaela Paul and Leonhard Held. Predictive assessment of a non-linear random effects model for multivariate time series of infectious disease counts. Statistics in medicine , 30(10):1118–1136, 2011. 43 [48] William H Greene. Fixed and random effects in nonlinear models. 2001. 44