Title: 2603.24887v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.24887v1

Published Time: Fri, 27 Mar 2026 00:19:32 GMT

Number of Pages: 5

Markdown Content:
1

# Electrically controlled propulsion of skyrmions in chiral nematic 

Oleg D. Lavrentovich 

Advanced Materials and Liquid Crystal Institute, Department of Physics, Kent State University, 

Kent, OH 44242 USA 

* Correspondence: olavrent @kent.edu 

Design of soft matter capable of controllable microscale dynamics is a frontier of modern 

science. Jiahao Chen et al. demonstrate that an electric field can drive particle -like solitons -

skyrmions in a chiral nematic along a preprogrammed trajectory with a variable speed 

within a two -dimensional plane. The effect is rooted in flexoelectric polarization of a 

deformed director field. 

The paper has been published in Newton 100462 (2026) 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.newton.2026.100462 2

Dynamics of small particles in fluids has fascinated scientists for centuries, starting with 

the discoveries of self -propelled bacteria by Leeuwenhoek and chaotic motion of pollen grains in 

water by Brown . Controlling such dynamics is challenging because at the microscale, viscous 

forces over come inertia , thus slow ing down any motion , while thermal fluctuations disrupt 

organized flows. To overcome these difficulties, scientists develop approaches to activate motion 

by an external electric field , and to design the carrier medium and microparticl es . Usually, the 

microscale dynamics is explored for an isotropic environment, such as water , a natural habitat of 

microorganisms. Technological advances, however, do not need to be limited by isotropic fluids. 

Recent years have see n a growth of interest in anisotropic fluids, such as a nematic liquid crystal, 

as a means to control microscale dynamics. 

In a nematic, rod -like molecules align parallel to each other, along a so -called director,  𝐧 ̂ .

The orientational order brings about features of importan ce for microscale dynamics. First, it 

imparts a sense of direction as motion along  𝐧 ̂ faces a weaker viscous drag than motion 

perpendicular to  𝐧 ̂ 1. Second, director reorientations trigger hydrodynamic flows. Third, spatial 

variations of  𝐧 ̂ produce topological defects that often behave as material particles and can be 

moved by external fields 2. However, m ost nematics are paraelectric and do not distinguish 

between the heads and tails of the molecules, even when they are different. Thus  𝐧 ̂ and  −𝐧 ̂ describe 

the same state,  𝐧 ̂ ≡ −𝐧 ̂ . Furthermore , nematics permit only point - and line -like topological 

defects , while the most interesting defects are three -dimensional particle -like solitons, representing 

director distortions confined within a finite volume  𝑉 .

Imagine such a soliton of size  𝐷 . A decrease in size  𝐷 → 𝐷 /𝜇 , by a factor  𝜇 > 1, in creases 

the elastic energy density (∇𝐧 ̂ )2 ∝ 1/𝐷 2 by a factor  𝜇 2, while the volume  𝑉  decreases by a factor 

1/𝜇 3. Therefore, a shrinking soliton lowers the total elastic energy, ∫(∇𝐧 ̂ )2𝑑𝑉 ∝ 1/𝜇 , and must 

disappear 2.

Particle -like solitons can be stabilized if a nematic is doped with chiral molecules, which 

force the director to twist in space, usually with a microscale pitch . Regions  𝐧 ̂ and  −𝐧 ̂ of a chiral 

nematic are separated by half of the pitch and cannot be moved closer to each other without a 

dramatic increase of the elastic energy. A similar stabilization, called Dzyaloshinskii -Moriya 

mechanism, is known in ferromagnets 3.Chiral nematics support a rich plethora of particle -like 

solitons, including the so -called skyrmions, as reviewed recently by Wu and Smalyukh 4.

Writing in Newton , Bingxiang Li , Rui Zhang, Juan J. de Pablo, and Yangqing Lu and 

colleague from Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Nanjing University, The 

Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, University of Chicago and Argonne National 

Laboratory, demonstr ate an exciting electric field control of dynamic particle -like skyrmions in 

chiral nematics 5. The liquid crystal is confined between two glass plates with transparent 

electrodes . Surface interactions set the director parallel to the plates , say, along the  𝑥 -axis,  𝐧 ̂ =

(1,0,0). An alternative -current (AC) electric field realigns  𝐧 ̂ parallel to the  𝑧 -axis normal to the 

plates. The realignment is caused by the positive dielectric anisotropy  Δ𝜀 > 0 as the permittivity 3

along  𝐧 ̂ is higher than the permittivity along perpendicular directions. The d ielectric realigning 

torque is proportional to the square of field. Sometimes the two equivalent states,  𝐧 ̂ and  −𝐧 ̂ , find 

themselves separated by a  𝜋  twist of  𝐧 ̂ . A skyrmion is comprised of one of these states in the 

center and another at the periphery, connected by a twist that propagates radially in the plane of 

the cell . Its shrinking is impossible as explained above . The researchers noticed that when a direct 

current (DC) field supplements the AC one, then the skyrmion can be steered along any direction, 

by changing the amplitude and polarity of the DC field. 

The observation poses an intriguing question of how the nearly axially -symmetric 

skyrmion acquire s the sense of direction . The dependency on the field polarity is also puzzling 

since the dielectric torque is not sensitive to the field polarity , as established in numerous electro -

optical studies that culminated in the industry of liquid crystal displays 6. The researchers propose 

that the sense of direction is enabled by the so -called flexoelectric effect predicted by R obert B. 

Meyer 7. Meyer considered nematic molecules with dipoles and a conical shape . I n a uniform 

nematic , the probability of cones to point to the left and to the right is the same, thus there is no 

net polarization , Fig.1a . However, if the director experiences a splay, then the parity is broken, 

Fig.1b, produc ing a macroscopic electric polarization  𝐏 fl , Fig.1b. Mathematically 7,

𝐏 fl = 𝑒 1𝐧 ̂ div 𝐧 ̂ − 𝑒 3𝐧 ̂ × curl 𝐧 ̂, (1)

i.e.,  𝐏 fl  relates to the splay vector  𝐬 = 𝐧 ̂ div 𝐧 ̂ and the bend vector  𝐛 = 𝐧 ̂ × curl 𝐧 ̂;1e and 3e are 

flexoelectric coefficients. These two vectors are polar,  𝐬 ≠ −𝐬  and  𝐛 ≠ −𝐛 , but still preserve the 

underlying  𝐧 ̂ ≡ −𝐧 ̂ symmetry . More symmetric quadrupolar molecules, without permanent 

electric dipoles, also produce flexopolarization, with  𝑒 1 = 𝑒 3 in Eq.1. 8.

Qualitatively, the directional skyrmion propulsion is rooted in the coupling of  𝐏 fl  to the 

electric field, which produces a torque linear in the field,  𝚪 fl = 𝐏 fl × 𝐄 . The AC component causes 

oscillation of  𝐏 fl  and  𝐧 ̂ . In its turn, the oscillation creates hydrodynamic flows that guide the 

locomotion along a time averaged  𝐏 fl . The DC component affects symmetry of director 

deformations and thus the amplitude and direction of  𝐏 fl , acting as a steering wheel .4

Flexoelectricity -enabled propulsion of skyrmions involves the AC and DC fields, bulk 

elasticity and surface anchoring , anisotropic viscosity, etc., and thus requires a sophisticated 

numerical analysis 5. However, the underlying principle can be illustrated by a simpler example of 

dissipative solitons called directrons 9, Fig .1c -f. The directrons form in a uniform nemati c, 𝐧 ̂ 0 =

(0,1,0) (Fig.1c ), as localized perturbations ( ) 

ˆn r  with a flexoelectric polarization  𝐏 fl , excited by 

an AC field; Fig.1d shows a splay directron and Fig.1e shows a bend directron . The AC electric 

field causes up and down oscillations of  𝐏 fl  (Fig.1 f). These oscillations create hydrodynamic flows 

with direction that depen ds on the direction of  𝐏 fl . For example, the splay directron prop els along 

𝐧 ̂ 0, Fig.1d, while the bend one propels perpendicularly to  𝐧 ̂ 0 (Fig.1e,f ). The same principle, 

applied to a more complex geometry of skyrmions, is operational in Ref. 5.

Figure 1: Flexoelectricity -enabled locomotion of directrons. a) A uniform paraelectric nematic 

comprised of cone -like molecules shows no electric polarization in the ground state. b) A

macroscopic flexoelectric polarization  𝐏 fl  emerges in a nematic with a splay deformation. c) A

nematic is uniformly aligned when there is no external electric field. d) , e) . A n AC electric field 

enhances a fluctuative splay,  𝐬 = 𝐧 ̂ div 𝐧 ̂, and bend,  𝐛 = 𝐧 ̂ × curl 𝐧 ̂, respectively , thus creating 

dissipative solitons -directrons. f) The AC field causes oscillations or  𝐏 fl  and propagation of a bend 

directron with a velocity  𝐯 . Panels c) -f) are redrawn with modifications from Ref. 2.x   

> z
> y
> x
> y
> (a) (b)
> (c) (e)
> (d) (f)
> x
> y
> x
> y

5

The discovered omnidirectional dynamics of particle -like skyrmions in chiral nematics 

adds a new dimension to the electrically controlled microscale hydrodynamics of soft matter. It 

might lead to applications such as targeted delivery of optical informatio n and micro -cargo as the 

deformed director regions attract colloidal inclusions 10 . Similar effects could be observed in 

recently discovered flexoelectric nematics , in which the polarization is present even in ground state 

and couples linearly to an electric field. Collective dynamics of skyrmions would be another 

interesting avenue to explore, as these would interact in a nematic not only hydrodynamically but 

also through elastic and electrostatic forces. 

Acknowledgements 

The research of the author is supported by NSF grant DMR -2341 83 0 and ARO MURI 

grant 84914 -SM -MUR .

Declaration of Interest 

The author declare s no competing interests. 

References 

1. Loudet, J.C., P. Hanusse, and Poulin, P. (2004). Stokes drag on a sphere in a 

nematic liquid crystal. Science 306 ,1525 –1525. 

2. Lavrentovich, O.D. (2020). Design of nematic liquid crystals to control microscale 

dynamics. Liquid Crystals Reviews 8, 59 –129. 

3. Dzyaloshinskii, I.E. (1964) . Theory of Helicoidal Structures in Antiferromagnets .1. 

Nonmetals. Soviet Physics JETP 19 , 960 –971. 

4. Wu, J.S. and Smalyukh, I.I. (2022). Hopfions, heliknotons, skyrmions, torons and 

both abelian and nonabelian vortices in chiral liquid crystals. Liquid Crystals 

Reviews 10 , 34 –68. 

5. Chen, J., et al.(2026) . Flexoelectricity -enabled 360 o polar locomotion of nematic 

skyrmions. Newton. 

6. Yang, D. -K. and Wu, S. -T. (2006). Fundamentals of Liquid Crystal Devices. 

Chichester, England: John Wiley & Sons. 394. 

7. Meyer, R.B. (1969). Piezoelectric Effects in Liquid Crystals. Physical Review Letters 

1969 , 918 –920. 

8. Prost, J. and Marcerou, J.P. (1977). On the microscopic interpretation of 

flexoelectricity.  Journal de Physique  38 , 315 –324. 

9.  Li, B.X. , Xiao, R.L., Paladugu, S., Shiyanovskii, S.V., and Lavrentovich, O.D. (2019). 

Three -dimensional solitary waves with electrically tunable direction of propagation 

in nematics. Nature Communications 10 , 3749. 

10 . Voloschenko, D., Pishnyak, O.P., Shiyanovskii, S.V., and Lavrentovich, O.D. (2002) .

Effect of director distortions on morphologies of phase separation in liquid crystals. 

Physical Review E 65 , 060701.