Title: Budgeted Dynamic Trace Structures for Token-Efficient Sequential Computation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.22879v1

Published Time: Mon, 25 May 2026 00:01:55 GMT

Number of Pages: 22

Markdown Content:
# Budgeted Dynamic Trace Structures for Token-Efficient Sequential Computation 

## Faruk Alpay Department of Computer Engineering Bahçeşehir University, Istanbul, Turkey 

## faruk.alpay@bahcesehir.edu.tr 

## Levent Sarioğlu Department of Computer Engineering Bahçeşehir University, Istanbul, Turkey 

## levent.sarioglu@bahcesehir.edu.tr 

Abstract 

Sequential computation increasingly produces long traces containing nested branches, status transitions, textual payloads, and compact summaries of earlier execution. This paper introduces 

budgeted dynamic trace structures (BDTS), a data-structural framework for maintaining rooted trace graphs and append-only histories under an explicit byte or token budget. BDTS combines status-filtered reachability, cursor pagination, soft-capped recency logs, reference-counted obser-vation keys, delta overlays, bounded cost caches, and summary-plus-suffix compaction. We give formal invariants, asymptotic bounds, and an ancillary Rust implementation with reproducible benchmarks. Across synthetic traces with 10,000–40,000 vertices, the prototype builds graphs in 0.58–2.72 ms, enumerates all descendants in 0.24–1.42 ms, and compacts histories of 350k–2.71M approximate tokens to 1,048–4,120 approximate tokens; tokenizer and forward measurements with three public model targets reduce 3,359–3,360 trace tokens to 432–433 tokens. 

# 1 Introduction 

Long-running sequential computations leave traces. A trace may contain small state transitions, large textual payloads, references to external objects, branch points, and later repairs to earlier branches. In many systems the trace is not merely an audit log. It is an active data structure: later computation asks for the current descendants of a node, filters a branch by status, scans recent events, loads a page of older items, or transmits a compact view to a downstream procedure. If the available representation budget is fixed, the trace must also be shortened without destroying the operational boundary between old summarized material and new material still worth preserving verbatim. The classical vocabulary of data structures gives strong tools for parts of this problem. Depth-first and breadth-first traversal give linear-time reachability in static graphs [ 3, 24 ]. Dynamic graph algorithms analyze update/query tradeoffs under edge changes [ 6, 7, 9, 19 , 21 ]. Succinct data structures reduce static tree and sequence representations [ 12 , 16 , 18 ]. Caching theory explains bounded auxiliary storage [ 14 , 23 ]. Streaming algorithms and sliding-window summaries address online retention [ 4, 5, 15 ]. Data compression and subword tokenization describe how symbolic material can be shortened or measured [ 8, 13 , 22 , 25 , 27 , 28 ]. Yet the combined trace problem has a different shape. The representation budget is part of the interface, not merely a storage optimization; the graph and the history must remain coordinated; and compaction must produce a valid replacement trace, not only a compressed byte stream. This paper formulates the combined problem as BDTS. The core object is a rooted directed trace graph, in which each non-root vertex has one current parent and each edge has a state from a 1

> arXiv:2605.22879v1 [cs.DC] 20 May 2026

small finite set. The graph is paired with an append-only history of trace items. A budget policy maps either bytes or tokenizer units to a common accounting interface. A compaction operation selects a recent suffix subject to that budget, truncates the boundary item if needed, and prepends a summary item that records the abstract effect of the discarded prefix. The design is simple enough to serve as an ancillary artifact, but precise enough to support complexity analysis and reproducible measurements. The phrase “token-efficient” is used here in a strictly data-structural sense. Tokens are a representation-cost unit induced by a tokenizer, just as bytes are a representation-cost unit induced by an encoding. The paper does not depend on any semantic claim about the content of the trace. It asks a concrete question: how should a dynamic trace be maintained when the system repeatedly needs a bounded, valid, recent, and queryable view? 

## 1.1 Contributions 

The paper makes four contributions. 1. We define BDTS, a unified data-structure interface for status-filtered rooted reachability, append-only trace histories, and bounded replacement views. 2. We give algorithms for edge upsert, edge-state update, state-filtered child listing, state-filtered descendant traversal, history append, and budgeted compaction. 3. We prove bounds for the abstract structure and identify the constants that matter in practical token-budget settings. 4. We provide an ancillary Rust crate and measured benchmark results, including a concrete tokenizer and forward measurement using the distilbert/distilgpt2 model card target [11, 20]. 

## 1.2 Why a New Formulation Is Useful 

A trace with branches can be stored as a flat log, but flat storage makes descendant queries expensive or forces a later index. A trace graph can answer reachability queries, but graph storage alone does not describe how to fit a long history into a fixed representation budget. A compressor can reduce bytes, but a compressor does not usually preserve a recent suffix as explicit trace items. A sliding window preserves a suffix, but it does not carry a summary of the discarded prefix. BDTS places these operations in one interface, so that their invariants can be checked together. This formulation also clarifies a computational-complexity boundary. Fully dynamic reachability in directed graphs is a difficult problem under general insertions and deletions. BDTS deliberately uses a restricted update model: each child has one current parent, state transitions do not remove the edge record, and descendant queries are rooted and state-filtered. This restriction yields an inexpensive structure with predictable behavior, while still covering the common trace pattern of a computation that branches from earlier states and later marks subtraces as active or closed. 

# 2 Model 

## 2.1 Trace Graphs 

Let V be a finite set of trace identifiers with distinguished root r. Let Σ be a finite set of edge states. In the prototype and experiments we use Σ = {active , closed }, but the algorithms extend to any 2constant-size state set. A trace graph is a directed graph G = ( V, E ) in which each edge is a triple 

(u, v, σ ) with parent u, child v, and state σ ∈ Σ.

Definition 2.1 (Current-parent invariant) . A trace graph satisfies the current-parent invariant if each non-root vertex v appears as the child of at most one edge. Equivalently, there is a partial function p : V \ { r} → V such that (p(v), v, σ ) ∈ E for one state σ whenever v has a parent. 

The current-parent invariant does not prevent a vertex from acquiring a new parent over time. An upsert operation may move v from an old parent to a new parent. The invariant says that after the operation completes the graph contains one current parent for v. This is the natural dynamic analogue of an arborescent trace: a vertex records the computation state from which it currently branches. For a state predicate P : Σ → { true , false }, define 

children P (u) = {v | (u, v, σ ) ∈ E ∧ P (σ)}.

The descendant set desc P (u) is the least set D such that children P (u) ⊆ D and, for every x ∈ D,

children P (x) ⊆ D. Thus desc P (u) is the rooted reachability set induced by edges whose states satisfy 

P .

## 2.2 Histories and Budgets 

The graph captures branch structure. The history captures ordered trace material. A history is a sequence 

H = ⟨h1, h 2, . . . , h n⟩,

where each item hi = ( id i, payload i) has a trace identifier and a string payload. The payload may encode a structured event, a rendered state, or a compact textual summary. The model does not require a particular payload syntax. 

Definition 2.2 (Budget policy) . A budget policy is a pair (m, B ) where m ∈ { bytes , tok } is a measurement mode and B ∈ N is a nonnegative limit. The induced cost of a payload x is either 

bytes( x) or tok( x).

The prototype exposes both byte and token budgets. For fast online estimation, it also supports the approximation ctok (x) = ⌈| x|/4⌉, matching the common engineering rule that one token is roughly four UTF-8 bytes for English-like material. The model, however, allows an exact tokenizer to be used for measurement. 

## 2.3 Compaction 

Compaction maps a long history to a replacement history. The replacement must keep the recent suffix explicit while recording the discarded prefix in a summary item. Let S be a summary payload. Given budget B, compaction chooses the longest suffix 

⟨hj , . . . , h n⟩

whose payload cost is at most B, truncating hj if necessary. The replacement is 

⟨(0 , S ), h ′ 

> j

, . . . , h n⟩,

where h′ 

> j

is either hj or a middle-truncated version of hj . The summary item is deliberately outside the suffix budget in our default policy. This choice makes the suffix budget stable: users of the 3structure can reserve a fixed amount of recent material independent of the summary’s length. An alternate policy may charge the summary against the same budget; the algorithms are unchanged after subtracting the summary cost from B.

Definition 2.3 (Boundary-safe truncation) . A truncation function is boundary-safe if it never splits a UTF-8 character and if the output identifies that material was omitted. 

Boundary safety matters because a trace view is often parsed or displayed after compaction. A broken byte sequence is not a valid replacement item. The ancillary implementation uses middle truncation with an explicit omission marker. 

## 2.4 Operations 

The BDTS interface supports the following operations. 

• upsert (u, v, σ ): insert or move the current edge for child v so that its parent is u and its state is 

σ.

• setState (v, σ ): update the state of the current edge whose child is v.

• children (u, P ): list the children of u whose states satisfy P .

• descendants (u, P ): list descendants of u in breadth-first order using only edges satisfying P .

• append (h): append a trace item to the history. 

• compact (B, S ): produce a summary-plus-suffix replacement history under budget B and sum-mary S.

r

1 2

3 4 5

active closed 

active active closed               

> Figure 1: A status-filtered trace graph. With predicate P(σ)≡(σ=active ), the descendants of rare {1,3},while the descendants of 2are {4}.

## 2.5 Problem Variants 

The default problem charges only the retained suffix against the user-facing budget. This is the most convenient policy when the summary has its own reserved allowance. Three variants are useful in other settings. 

Charged-summary compaction charges the summary item against the same budget as the suffix. If the summary cost is s, Algorithm 3 is run with budget max (0 , B − s) and the summary is prepended only if s ≤ B. If s > B , the summary itself must be truncated. The complexity is unchanged, but the retained suffix may be empty even for a positive budget. 

Lossless-backed compaction stores the discarded prefix in a cold archive and places a reference to that archive in the summary payload. The replacement history remains bounded, while exact replay 4is still possible by consulting the archive. The live data structure does not need to know the archive representation; it needs only a stable reference. 

Predicate-indexed compaction applies different budgets to different classes of trace items. For example, structural items can be given a larger retention weight than verbose payload items. This variant replaces the single cost function by cost (hi, π i), where πi is an item class. The backward scan remains the same, but the interpretation of maximality is with respect to class-weighted cost. The paper analyzes the default variant because it is the smallest complete problem. The variants show that BDTS is a family of interfaces rather than one hard-coded policy. 

# 3 Data Structures 

## 3.1 Adjacency with State Partitions 

The abstract structure stores, for each parent u, adjacency buckets A[u, σ ] keyed by state. It also stores a map M [v] = ( u, σ ) from child to current parent and state. With balanced dictionaries, an upsert first checks whether v already has a parent, removes it from the old bucket if necessary, inserts it into the new bucket, and updates M .For constant-size Σ, the space is O(|V | + |E|). If buckets are stored as sorted arrays, direct listing is cache friendly and simple. If buckets are stored as balanced sets, movement and state update have 

O(log d) worst-case cost, where d is the affected parent’s degree. The ancillary crate uses sorted vectors for clarity and deterministic output, while the analysis states the standard dictionary version. 

## 3.2 History Storage 

The history is append-only between compactions. Appending an item is O(1) amortized with a growable array. A page query can be supported by storing offsets at fixed intervals; the artifact exposes the simpler sequence interface, while the manuscript’s model permits page boundaries. The important invariant is that the history order is independent of graph adjacency order. The graph answers structural questions; the history answers temporal and representation questions. 

## 3.3 Consistency Between Graph and History 

The graph and history are intentionally decoupled, but a full trace system usually wants them to satisfy a weak consistency relation. If a history item refers to identifier v, then either v is present in the graph or the item is explicitly marked as external to the graph. This condition is weaker than requiring every vertex to have a history item. Some vertices may be structural branch points with no payload; some payloads may describe several vertices at once. The weak condition is enough to prevent a compacted view from containing an unexplained identifier. 

Definition 3.1 (Trace-reference consistency) . A pair (G, H) is trace-reference consistent if every identifier appearing in a non-summary history item is either a vertex of G or belongs to a declared external identifier namespace. 

Trace-reference consistency is preserved by edge upserts, state updates, and descendant queries because they do not modify history payloads. It is preserved by append if the appended item satisfies the condition. It is preserved by compaction because the retained suffix is copied from the original history and the summary item is allowed to describe a prefix rather than refer to one current vertex. This small invariant is helpful in implementations that expose both graph queries and history pages through the same interface. 53.4 Pagination 

Long histories are rarely consumed in one scan. A page interface returns a slice of items plus a cursor. For append-only histories, a cursor can be an integer offset, a byte offset in a serialized log, or a pair consisting of a turn identifier and an item offset. The asymptotic behavior depends on the chosen storage layer. If the history is an in-memory vector, page retrieval is O(p) for page size p. If the history is a line-oriented file, retrieval from an arbitrary offset is O(p) after the offset is known, but constructing the offset may require an auxiliary sparse index. 

Algorithm 1 Page an append-only history  

> 1:

procedure Page (H, c, p ) 

> 2:

i ← cursor offset represented by c 

> 3:

R ← ⟨ hi, h i+1 , . . . , h min( i+p−1,n )⟩ 

> 4:

if i + p ≤ n then  

> 5:

c′ ← cursor for offset i + p 

> 6:

else  

> 7:

c′ ← ⊥  

> 8:

end if  

> 9:

return (R, c ′) 

> 10:

end procedure 

Pagination interacts cleanly with compaction if each compacted replacement is treated as a new history epoch. Cursors from old epochs can either be rejected or mapped through an epoch table. The ancillary artifact keeps the core sequence interface small, but the model includes pagination because it is the natural way to expose long traces. 

## 3.5 Budget Accounting 

Budget accounting is separated from the history. A budget policy supplies byte_budget() and 

token_budget() conversions. Exact tokenization can be expensive if applied repeatedly to large payloads, so the framework permits a bounded cost cache. The cache is not part of the semantic state: dropping cached estimates may slow a later operation but does not change the valid output. 

Proposition 3.2 (Cache noninterference) . Let C be any finite cost cache whose entries are recom-putable from payload strings and a fixed budget policy. Evicting any subset of C cannot change the graph, history, or compacted replacement selected by exact accounting. Proof. The semantic operations depend on graph edges, history order, payload strings, and the measurement function. A cache entry stores only the result of applying the measurement function to a payload. If an entry is absent, the same value is recomputed. Thus cache contents affect only the running time of measurement, not the selected suffix or graph result. 

## 3.6 Compaction Window 

A compaction window records which compacted epoch is current and optionally stores a prefill estimate, i.e., an estimate of representation cost already present at the start of the window. Starting a new window increments the ordinal and clears the estimate. This small structure prevents an implementation from conflating costs measured before and after replacement. 63.7 Soft-Capped Append Logs 

A live trace may need a small durable event log even when the full history has a separate archival representation. The source architecture motivates a soft-capped log : append entries under an exclusive writer discipline, and whenever the byte length exceeds a hard cap M , trim old entries until the remaining log is at or below a soft target ρM for some 0 < ρ ≤ 1. The newest entry is always preserved, even if it alone exceeds the soft target. The soft target prevents trimming on every append after the first overflow; after a trim, several later appends can occur before the next trim. 

Definition 3.3 (Soft-capped log) . A soft-capped log is a sequence L with hard cap M and soft ratio ρ. After appending item x, if |L|bytes > M , the structure removes oldest items until |L|bytes ≤

max( ρM, |x|bytes ) or only x remains. 

Lemma 3.4 (Newest-entry preservation) . Soft-cap enforcement never removes the item most recently appended. Proof. The enforcement loop removes only from the front of the deque and stops when one item remains. Since the newest item is appended at the back, it cannot be removed unless all older entries have already been removed, at which point the loop stops. Soft-capped logs are different from summary compaction. Compaction creates a semantic replacement history. Soft capping is a storage discipline for a bounded log where retaining the newest raw entries is more important than retaining a summary of the discarded entries. Both structures are useful: one supplies a bounded view, and the other supplies bounded durable recency. 

## 3.8 Reference-Counted Observation Registry 

Dynamic trace systems often have many consumers interested in overlapping regions of the trace. Registering every consumer separately with the underlying event source is wasteful. BDTS therefore includes a reference-counted observation registry. Each subscriber registers keys in one of two modes: exact, which reports only changes to that key, or recursive, which reports changes to the key and its descendants under a separator order. The registry deduplicates repeated registrations, maintains counts by key and mode, and exposes the effective mode needed by the underlying source. 

Definition 3.5 (Effective observation mode) . For a key x, let cE (x) and cR(x) be the exact and recursive registration counts. The effective mode is recursive if cR(x) > 0, exact if cR(x) = 0 and 

cE (x) > 0, and absent otherwise. 

This rule is a small data-structural optimization. Recursive observation dominates exact observa-tion for the same key, so the underlying source needs only the strongest active mode. Removing a registration decrements the appropriate counter; the source is reconfigured only when the effective mode changes. The ancillary artifact implements this registry over strings, but the same rule applies to any ordered namespace. 

## 3.9 Delta Overlays 

The trace graph records structural lineage, while the history records temporal payloads. A third useful object is a delta overlay : a temporary map that aggregates exact changes between a baseline key-value state and a current key-value state. The overlay stores three maps: baseline values by key, current values by key, and origin keys for moved current keys. It supports add, delete, update, and 7move-update operations. If an operation is not exact, the overlay can be invalidated, after which no exact diff is reported. Delta overlays matter because trace compaction frequently wants a short description of what changed during a window. Replaying every item in the window is expensive; storing only the final key-level delta can be much smaller. The overlay is not a replacement for the history, since it loses operation order, but it is a useful auxiliary summary. It is also a good example of the general BDTS principle: keep the exact active structure small, and make lossy or order-insensitive summaries explicit. 

# 4 Algorithms 

## 4.1 Graph Update and Query 

Algorithm 2 shows edge upsert. The operation is intentionally total: if the child already appears under another parent, it is moved. This is useful for traces that are repaired or rebased. 

Algorithm 2 Upsert a status-labeled trace edge  

> 1:

procedure Upsert (u, v, σ ) 

> 2:

if M contains v then  

> 3:

(u0, σ 0) ← M [v] 

> 4:

remove v from A[u0, σ 0] 

> 5:

end if  

> 6:

insert v into A[u, σ ] 

> 7:

M [v] ← (u, σ ) 

> 8:

end procedure 

State update is a special case: find (u, σ 0) = M [v], remove v from A[u, σ 0], insert it into A[u, σ ],and update M [v].For descendant enumeration, breadth-first traversal uses the predicate to select buckets. If P

accepts a set ΣP ⊆ Σ, then the children of u are the concatenation of A[u, σ ] for σ ∈ ΣP , optionally sorted by identifier for deterministic output. Breadth-first order is useful in trace systems because it reports shorter branch distance before deeper material. Depth-first order can be substituted with the same asymptotic bound. 

## 4.2 History Compaction 

Algorithm 3 gives the default compaction procedure. It scans backward through the history and selects as many recent payloads as fit under budget. The first item that does not fit is middle-truncated if there is any remaining budget. The summary item is then prepended. The algorithm is online with respect to the suffix: it never needs to inspect discarded prefix items after the boundary has been found. 

Lemma 4.1 (Suffix maximality) . For a fixed nonnegative budget B and nonnegative item costs, the suffix selected by Algorithm 3 is the longest suffix whose total cost is at most B, up to truncation of the boundary item. Proof. The algorithm scans from the last item to the first, subtracting cost while the next whole item fits. Suppose it stops before item hj because cost (hj ) > b , where b is the remaining budget. Any longer untruncated suffix must include hj plus all already selected items, whose total cost 8Algorithm 3 Budgeted suffix compaction  

> 1:

procedure Compact (H, B, S ) 

> 2:

R ← empty list  

> 3:

b ← B 

> 4:

for i = n, n − 1, . . . , 1 do  

> 5:

c ← tok( hi.payload ) 

> 6:

if c ≤ b then  

> 7:

prepend hi to R 

> 8:

b ← b − c 

> 9:

else if b > 0 then  

> 10:

prepend TruncateMiddle (hi, b ) to R 

> 11:

b ← 0 

> 12:

break  

> 13:

else  

> 14:

break  

> 15:

end if  

> 16:

end for  

> 17:

prepend summary item (0 , S ) to R 

> 18:

return R 

> 19:

end procedure 

would exceed B. If b > 0, a boundary-safe prefix/suffix fragment of hj is included, which is the only additional material allowed without exceeding the budget. 

## 4.3 Soft-Cap Enforcement 

Algorithm 4 gives the soft-cap procedure. The target max (ρM, |x|) makes a deliberate exception for very large newest entries. If the newest entry is larger than the soft cap, the structure keeps that entry and discards older entries. If the newest entry is small, the structure trims to the soft target and thereby creates slack for future appends. 

Algorithm 4 Enforce a soft byte cap after append  

> 1:

procedure EnforceSoftCap (L, M, ρ, x ) 

> 2:

if |L|bytes ≤ M then  

> 3:

return L 

> 4:

end if  

> 5:

T ← max( ⌊ρM ⌋, |x|bytes ) 

> 6:

while |L|bytes > T and L has more than one item do  

> 7:

remove the oldest item from L 

> 8:

end while  

> 9:

return L 

> 10:

end procedure Proposition 4.2 (Amortized trimming) . Assume each appended item has byte length at most ∆

and ρ < 1. After a trim to target at most ρM , at least ⌊(1 − ρ)M/ ∆⌋ further appends are required before another overflow is forced. 

9Proof. Immediately after trimming, the log has length at most ρM unless the newest entry alone is larger than that value. Under the stated bounded-item assumption, each subsequent append increases the length by at most ∆. The log cannot exceed M until the accumulated increase is greater than (1 − ρ)M , giving the stated lower bound. 

## 4.4 Observation Registration 

Algorithm 5 summarizes registration in the observation registry. The input key list is sorted and deduplicated before counters are updated. This makes repeated registration of the same key idempotent for a fixed subscriber. 

Algorithm 5 Register observed keys  

> 1:

procedure Register (s, K ) 

> 2:

sort and deduplicate K 

> 3:

for each (key, mode ) ∈ K do  

> 4:

if (key, mode ) is not already registered by s then  

> 5:

add (key, mode ) to subscriber s 

> 6:

increment counter C[key, mode ] 

> 7:

recompute the effective mode of key  

> 8:

end if  

> 9:

end for  

> 10:

end procedure 

Projection of notifications is a predicate query over registered keys. For exact mode, key x

matches changed key y only when x = y. For recursive mode, x matches y when y = x or when y

lies below x in the separator namespace. With a trie over registered keys, projection takes O(|y| + z)

time, where z is the number of subscribers reported. The artifact uses maps for clarity; a trie is the natural asymptotic improvement for very large subscriber sets. 

## 4.5 Delta Overlay Operations 

The delta overlay maintains three maps. On update, the old value is stored in the baseline map if the key has not already been seen, and the new value is stored in the current map. On delete, the current value is removed; if the key was not already current, the supplied old value is recorded in the baseline map. On move-update, the source key is associated with a destination key in the origin map. A rename pair is reported only if the origin key exists in the baseline, the destination key exists in the current map, and the origin key no longer exists in the current map. 

Lemma 4.3 (Overlay exactness) . If all overlay operations are exact and the overlay is not invalidated, the set of changed keys reported by the overlay is exactly the symmetric difference between baseline and current key-value maps, plus keys whose values differ. Proof. The overlay inserts a baseline value the first time a key is modified and updates the current map after each exact operation. Keys that are never modified are absent from both maps and therefore not reported. A modified key is reported precisely when its optional baseline value differs from its optional current value. This condition captures additions, deletions, and value changes. 10 4.6 Truncation 

Middle truncation keeps both the beginning and end of a boundary payload. This is preferable for trace items whose prefix contains an identifier or operation name and whose suffix contains a final value. The omission marker is charged to the boundary item. If a strict external budget must include the marker, the implementation can reserve marker cost before splitting the payload. The ancillary prototype uses a practical approximation: split the byte budget between left and right, align both boundaries to UTF-8 character boundaries, and insert a marker stating the number of omitted characters. 

## 4.7 Cost Caching 

Exact tokenizer calls may dominate compaction when payloads are large and repeatedly measured. A bounded least-recently-used cache is therefore a natural auxiliary structure. The cache key can be a hash of the payload and the budget mode. Since cost values are deterministic, cache eviction is safe by Proposition 1. Classical paging analysis explains why recency is a reasonable default when access locality is present [ 23 ]; adaptive replacement is a possible extension when scans and repeated hits interleave [14]. 

# 5 Complexity Analysis 

Let n = |V |, m = |E|, d(u) be the degree of parent u, and mP (u) be the number of edges reachable from u under predicate P . Let L be the number of history items and let ℓi be the measured cost of item i. Let q be the number of items retained by compaction. 

Theorem 5.1 (Graph operation bounds) . Using balanced adjacency buckets and a child-to-parent map, BDTS supports edge upsert and edge-state update in O( log d) time for the affected parent degree d, direct child listing in O(k + log d) time for k reported children, and state-filtered descendant enumeration in O(mP (u) + 1) time after the first reported vertex. Proof. The child-to-parent map locates the previous edge for a child in expected O(1) time with hashing or O(log n) with a balanced map. Removing from and inserting into a balanced adjacency bucket costs O(log d). Listing children under a constant number of accepted states scans exactly the reported bucket entries, plus lookup overhead. Breadth-first descendant enumeration places each reported vertex in the queue once and scans exactly the accepted outgoing edges of reported vertices. Thus the traversal is linear in the reachable filtered subgraph. 

Theorem 5.2 (Compaction bounds) . With precomputed or cached item costs, Algorithm 3 runs in O(q + 1) time and O(q + 1) output space. Without cached costs, it runs in O(q + 1 + Pni=j |hi|)

time, where hj is the boundary item. Proof. The algorithm scans retained suffix items and at most one boundary item. With cached costs, each inspected cost is O(1) . The output consists of the summary plus retained items and possibly one truncated boundary item. Without cached costs, the tokenizer or byte counter must inspect each selected payload and the boundary payload, giving the stated additional measurement term. 

Proposition 5.3 (Space bound) . The combined structure uses O(n + m + L + C) space, where C is the capacity of the auxiliary cost cache. 

11 Proof. The graph stores one current-parent map entry per child and one adjacency entry per edge. The history stores L item records plus payload storage. The compaction window is constant size. The cost cache is explicitly bounded by C entries.  

> Table 1: Asymptotic behavior of the abstract BDTS interface.

Operation Time Additional space Edge upsert O(log d) O(1) 

State update O(log d) O(1) 

Direct child listing O(k + log d) O(k) output Filtered descendants O(mP (u) + 1) O(w) queue History append O(1) amortized O(1) plus payload History page O(p) after cursor resolution O(p) output Budgeted compaction O(q + 1) with cached costs O(q + 1) output Soft-cap trim O(t) for t removed items O(1) 

Observation register O(k log k) map version O(k)

Notification projection O(s) map version, O(|y| + z) trie version O(z) output Delta overlay update O(log r) with ordered maps O(1) new records Cost-cache lookup O(1) expected bounded by C

## 5.1 Restricted Reachability Versus General Dynamic Reachability 

The current-parent invariant is the reason BDTS avoids the hardest cases of general dynamic reachability. General directed reachability under arbitrary insertions and deletions motivates sophisticated algebraic and combinatorial techniques [ 19 , 21 ]. BDTS instead stores a rooted trace relation whose updates are local moves or state changes. Descendant enumeration remains output-sensitive because the operation asks for the reachable set itself, not merely a Boolean answer. This is appropriate for trace maintenance: if a query returns 10,000 descendants, writing the answer already costs Ω(10 , 000) .

## 5.2 Budget Lower Bound 

No compaction scheme that returns an explicit suffix can avoid reading the boundary region in the worst case. Consider a history whose last q items all fit exactly and whose (q + 1) st item exceeds the remaining budget by one unit. Any algorithm that claims to return the longest suffix must distinguish this instance from one in which the (q + 1) st item fits. That distinction requires knowing the cost of the boundary item. Thus the cached-cost O(q + 1) bound is optimal up to dictionary overhead for exact suffix maximality. 

# 6 Implementation 

The ancillary artifact contains a Rust crate named budgeted-trace-structures . Its public types mirror the mathematical objects grouped in Table 2: graph reachability, bounded history, compaction windows, budget policies, soft-capped logs, observation registries, delta overlays, cost caches, and benchmark drivers. The implementation uses deterministic sorted vectors for adjacency lists in order to keep outputs stable in tests and benchmark files. This choice keeps the artifact compact and 12 readable. Replacing each adjacency vector by a balanced set gives the asymptotic update bounds in Table 1 without changing the interface.  

> Table 2: Artifact components and their role.

Component Public object Purpose Trace graph TraceGraph status-filtered child and descendant queries History BudgetedHistory append-only payload sequence Budget policy BudgetPolicy byte/token accounting interface Window state CompactionWindow compacted epoch and prefill estimate Auxiliary cache BoundedCostCache bounded recomputable cost estimates Soft log SoftCappedLog hard/soft bounded durable recency Observation registry ObservationRegistry reference-counted exact/recursive keys Delta overlay DeltaOverlay exact key-level change aggregation Benchmark TraceBench synthetic measurement driver 

## 6.1 Engineering Choices 

The prototype makes three conservative choices. First, graph identifiers are integer trace identifiers, avoiding allocation-heavy keys inside the hot path. Second, cost accounting is explicit rather than hidden in the history. This makes it possible to run the same trace under byte budgets, approximate token budgets, or exact tokenizer measurements. Third, the benchmark driver emits JSON and CSV. JSON preserves structured metadata; CSV is convenient for plots and tables. The Python measurement script in the artifact loads distilbert/distilgpt2 , gpt2 , and 

facebook/opt-125m . The first two use the GPT-2 byte-level BPE family [ 11 , 17 ]; the third is from the OPT family [ 26 ]. The script uses these models only as concrete tokenizer and forward computation targets. The measured quantity is representation cost, not output quality. 

# 7 Experiments 

## 7.1 Questions 

The experiments answer three questions. 1. How quickly does the prototype build and query a status-filtered trace graph with tens of thousands of vertices? 2. How much can a budgeted summary-plus-suffix representation reduce a long synthetic history? 3. Does the reduction remain visible under an actual byte-level BPE tokenizer and a small forward computation? 

## 7.2 Synthetic Trace Matrix 

The synthetic benchmark matrix constructs rooted traces with 10,000, 20,000, and 40,000 vertices. The three workloads vary branching factor, state period, payload length, and budget. Each workload assigns closed state to children whose identifiers are divisible by a workload-specific period and active state to all other edges. The history contains one payload per vertex, and compaction retains a summary plus the largest suffix fitting the approximate token budget. 13 Table 3: Measured Rust benchmark matrix. Times are milliseconds.                                                          

> Workload Vertices Edges Active desc. All desc. Build Active query Full query Compact balanced_10k 10,000 9,999 3,624 9,999 0.582 0.107 0.243 0.0056 wide_20k 20,000 19,999 7,854 19,999 1.169 0.255 0.589 0.0091 deep_40k 40,000 39,999 10,954 39,999 2.722 0.689 1.415 0.0390
> Table 4: Budget and auxiliary-structure outcomes from the same Rust matrix.
> Workload Original tok. Compact tok. Ratio Soft-log entries Soft-log bytes Registry time balanced_10k 350,000 1,048 0.002994 110 15,400 0.00158 ms wide_20k 1,030,000 2,072 0.002012 116 23,780 0.00238 ms deep_40k 2,710,000 4,120 0.001520 100 26,900 0.00454 ms

Tables 3 and 4 show three effects. First, graph construction and traversal scale with the output size, as predicted by the analysis. The 40,000-vertex workload enumerates 39,999 descendants in 1.415 ms and the active filtered subset in 0.689 ms. Second, summary-plus-suffix compaction reduces histories by two to three orders of magnitude under these budgets. Third, the soft-capped log and observation registry remain small auxiliary structures: the log retains roughly one hundred recent entries, and registry projection is below 0.005 ms in all three workloads. 

## 7.3 Tokenizer and Forward Matrix 

The model-budget measurement builds two strings for each model. The raw string contains 160 event lines with 112-byte payloads. The compact string contains a summary line and 20 retained event lines. Both strings are tokenized. The compact string is also passed through a forward computation over a 256-token window and a deterministic eight-token generation step over a 128-token window. The raw string is used only for token counting when it exceeds a model’s nominal context length.                              

> Table 5: Measured tokenizer and forward matrix. Times are milliseconds.
> Model Context Raw tok. Compact tok. Ratio Load Forward Generate
> distilbert/distilgpt2 1,024 3,359 432 0.12861 1,728.0 66.8 50.9
> gpt2 1,024 3,359 432 0.12861 1,904.5 113.6 85.6
> facebook/opt-125m 2,048 3,360 433 0.12887 1,975.3 70.9 87.7

The token ratio in Table 5 is stable across two GPT-2-family tokenizers and the OPT tokenizer: the compact representation uses about 12.9% of the raw tokens. The load time varies substantially because the measurement includes local model initialization and first-use cache effects. The forward and generation columns document that the compact representation is accepted by each concrete computation target. The OPT measurement is included to avoid relying on a single tokenizer family and to test a larger context limit. 

## 7.4 Reproducibility 

The artifact records the exact commands in its README. The aggregate result files are: 

• anc/results/tracebench_matrix.json and anc/results/tracebench_matrix.csv ;14 • anc/results/model_matrix.json and anc/results/model_matrix.csv .The manuscript tables were copied from those generated files. The arXiv source bundle places the ancillary files under the root-level anc/ directory, following the arXiv ancillary-file convention for code and data material. 

# 8 Discussion 

## 8.1 Why Summary Plus Suffix 

Pure compression and pure suffix retention solve different problems. Compression can preserve many bytes but may obscure the most recent items. Suffix retention preserves recency but forgets all older material. BDTSuses a hybrid: a summary item stands for the prefix, while the suffix keeps recent trace items explicit. This is a data-structural compromise. It does not require the summary to be perfect; it only requires the replacement history to make the boundary visible and enforce the budget. 

## 8.2 State-Filtered Reachability 

The edge-state predicate is a small addition with large practical effect. Many trace systems need to distinguish currently active branches from closed, interrupted, or archived branches. Encoding that status in the edge relation allows queries such as “give the active descendants of this root” without scanning unrelated material. The model also supports future states by treating states as strings or small enums. If the number of states grows, buckets can be indexed by a dictionary rather than an array. 

## 8.3 Why Reference Counts Belong in the Structure 

Observation registration can be implemented outside the trace structure, but placing it beside the trace has two advantages. First, the registry shares the same namespace as the graph and history, so recursive observation of a subtree can be interpreted consistently with descendant queries. Second, reference counts make reconfiguration proportional to changes in effective mode rather than proportional to the number of subscribers. If one hundred subscribers observe the same recursive key, the underlying source needs one recursive registration, not one hundred. The exact/recursive dominance rule is intentionally simple. Recursive mode dominates exact mode for the same key because every exact event is also reported by recursive observation. For different keys, no dominance is assumed unless the namespace relation implies it. This keeps the registry local: it does not need to solve a global set-cover problem over observed regions. A trie implementation can reduce projection time while preserving the same semantics. 

## 8.4 Soft Caps Versus Sliding Windows 

A sliding window usually retains the most recent items whose total cost is below a threshold. A soft-capped log is slightly different: it permits the log to grow up to a hard cap, then trims below that cap. The gap between the hard cap and the soft target creates hysteresis. Hysteresis is useful when trimming has a fixed overhead, for example when rewriting a line-based file or updating a sparse offset index. The resulting structure is still bounded by M after enforcement, but it avoids turning every later append into a trim operation. 15 8.5 Delta Overlays and Compaction Summaries 

Delta overlays are a bridge between exact histories and compact summaries. They preserve the final key-level effect of a window without preserving the full order of operations. This makes them unsuitable for exact replay, but well suited for summary construction, conflict detection, and change headers. A compaction routine can include a delta overlay in the summary payload, making the summary more structured than free text while keeping the suffix budget unchanged. 

## 8.6 Approximate Versus Exact Tokens 

Approximate token counts are useful inside hot paths because they are cheap, deterministic, and conservative enough for engineering decisions. Exact tokenizer counts are useful for final accounting and experiments. The separation of BudgetPolicy from BudgetedHistory is therefore important: the same history can be compacted under a fast estimate or measured with an external tokenizer after the fact. Subword tokenization methods such as BPE [ 8, 22 ] and SentencePiece [ 13 ] make this distinction explicit. 

## 8.7 Relation to Succinctness 

BDTS is not a succinct data structure in the strict static sense of Jacobson-style encodings [ 12 , 16 ]. It is a dynamic representation-budget structure. The objective is not to approach an information-theoretic lower bound for a fixed tree, but to preserve useful dynamic operations under an explicit representation limit. Nevertheless, succinct techniques suggest future encodings for cold trace segments. A completed prefix could be stored in a compressed tree sequence while the active suffix remains in mutable form. 

# 9 Related Work 

## 9.1 Dynamic Graph Algorithms 

The graph component descends from classical traversal and dynamic reachability. Tarjan’s depth-first search gives the linear-time baseline for static graph analysis [ 24 ]. Even and Shiloach studied online deletion in graph problems [ 7]. Henzinger and King developed randomized fully dynamic graph algorithms with polylogarithmic update time for several graph properties [ 9]. Dynamic transitive closure and reachability have also been attacked through matrix and combinatorial methods [ 19 , 21 ]. BDTS is more restricted: it focuses on rooted output-sensitive enumeration under a current-parent trace invariant. 

## 9.2 Static-to-Dynamic Transformations and Search 

Bentley and Saxe’s decomposable searching framework shows how static structures can be lifted into dynamic settings [ 2]. The BDTS graph can be seen as the opposite design point: it begins with a restricted dynamic interface and then asks which static summaries may be attached to inactive regions. Efficient string matching, such as the Aho–Corasick automaton [ 1], is relevant when payloads must be searched after compaction, but payload search is orthogonal to the trace graph. 

## 9.3 Succinct and Compact Structures 

Succinct tree and dictionary representations [ 12 , 18 ] and broader compact-data-structure treatments [16 ] are relevant for storing old trace regions. Their main target is static or semi-static representation. 16 BDTS instead keeps the active region mutable and budgeted, but it can use succinct encodings for frozen prefixes. 

## 9.4 Streaming and Windowed Summaries 

Streaming algorithms maintain compact summaries of large input sequences [ 15 ]. Sliding-window statistics [ 5] and sketches such as Count-Min [ 4] show how approximate answers can be kept under space constraints. BDTS differs by preserving an explicit suffix and a valid replacement history. The compacted result is not only a statistic; it remains a sequence of trace items. 

## 9.5 Compression and Tokenization 

Universal compression algorithms [ 27 , 28 ] and dictionary methods such as LZW [ 25 ] reduce byte representations. BPE [ 8] and its use in subword processing [ 13 , 22 ] motivate token-budget ac-counting. Distilled transformer models [ 10 , 20 ], GPT-2-family models [ 17 ], OPT [ 26 ], and the 

distilbert/distilgpt2 card [11] provide concrete tokenizer targets for the experiments. 

# 10 Limitations 

The current formulation uses a single current parent per trace vertex. This is appropriate for rooted trace branching, but it does not express a general directed graph with arbitrary joins. A future version could allow multiple parents by replacing the child-to-parent map with a child-to-edge set, at the cost of more expensive movement and duplicate-control logic. The compaction summary is treated as an input to the data structure rather than derived by a fixed semantic algorithm. This is deliberate: summary quality is application-dependent, while the data-structure problem is to place, budget, and preserve the summary-plus-suffix replacement. For tasks requiring exact replay, compaction should be paired with a lossless archive of discarded items. The benchmark is intentionally small enough to be reproducible on a local workstation. It does not claim to characterize all hardware, all tokenizers, or all trace distributions. Its purpose is to verify that the artifact performs the operations described in the analysis and to provide a concrete measured table rather than an illustrative estimate. Finally, approximate token accounting can undercount or overcount for languages and payload formats far from the English-like byte distribution implicit in the four-byte rule. Exact tokenizer measurements should be used when a hard external limit must be satisfied. 

# 11 Conclusion 

BDTS frames token-efficient sequential computation as a data-structures problem. The structure maintains a status-filtered rooted trace graph, an append-only history, a soft-capped log, a reference-counted observation registry, a delta overlay, a byte/token budget interface, and a compaction window that replaces old material by a summary plus explicit suffix. The resulting operations have simple output-sensitive bounds and a compact implementation. The measured artifact demonstrates that 10,000–40,000 vertex traces can be built, queried, observed, paged, and compacted quickly, and that the representation reduction is visible across multiple concrete tokenizer and forward-computation targets. The broader lesson is that representation budgets should be first-class in dynamic trace structures: when a computation must carry its history forward, the history needs the same algorithmic care as the computation itself. 17 A Proof Details 

## A.1 Deterministic Breadth-First Order 

If each adjacency bucket is sorted by child identifier, breadth-first enumeration is deterministic. Let 

Q be the queue after processing t vertices. The next vertex is the earliest enqueued unprocessed child among all vertices at the current frontier distance. Sorting buckets fixes the within-parent child order, and queue discipline fixes the between-parent order. By induction on frontier distance, the output is uniquely determined by the graph and predicate. 

## A.2 Replacement Validity 

A replacement history is valid if it is a finite sequence of trace items whose payloads are valid strings and whose first item is a summary item. Algorithm 3 returns a valid replacement history because it constructs a finite list, copies valid payloads from the original history, and applies boundary-safe truncation to at most one payload. The summary payload is supplied as a valid string. Thus every output payload is valid. 

## A.3 Budget Monotonicity 

Let R(B) be the retained suffix selected by Algorithm 3 under budget B, ignoring the summary item. If B1 ≤ B2, then R(B1) is a suffix of R(B2), except that the boundary item under B1 may be a shorter truncation of the corresponding boundary item under B2. This follows because the backward scan under B2 has at least as much remaining budget at every step as the scan under B1.

# B Additional Implementation Notes 

## B.1 Why the Artifact Uses Sorted Vectors 

The artifact favors transparency. A sorted vector adjacency list is easy to inspect, serializes naturally, and gives deterministic output without an additional ordering layer. For the benchmark size used in the paper, the constant factors are small. For workloads with frequent movement under high-degree parents, a balanced-set bucket is the direct replacement. 

## B.2 CSV and JSON Outputs 

The benchmarks write both structured JSON and CSV files. JSON is used by automated checks because field names reduce ambiguity. CSV is used for manuscript tables because it can be imported directly into spreadsheet or plotting tools. The matrix drivers generate one per-workload JSON file and one aggregate matrix file. 

# C Extended Example: End-to-End Maintenance 

This section gives a complete operational example that combines the components analyzed above. Consider a sequential computation that begins at root r = 0 and emits a new trace vertex whenever it reaches a durable state. Each vertex stores only an identifier in the graph; the larger payload is appended to the history. Suppose vertices 1, 2, 3 branch from the root, vertex 4 branches from 1,and vertex 5 branches from 4. If vertex 2 is later closed, the edge (0 , 2) remains in the graph but its state changes from active to closed . A query for active descendants of 0 now reports 1, 3, 4, 5 and 18 omits 2. A query without the state predicate still reports all five descendants. The update has not rewritten history items; it has changed only the structural index. At the same time, the history receives payloads h1, . . . , h 5. A page request with page size two returns ⟨h1, h 2⟩ and a cursor for the third item. A later page request resumes from that cursor. Because the history is append-only within the epoch, existing cursors remain meaningful until compaction creates a new epoch. This separation is useful: graph queries can be answered in structural order, while pages are answered in temporal order. Now suppose a client observes the key root recursively and another client observes root/branch/4 

exactly. The registry stores one recursive count for root and one exact count for root/branch/4 . A change at root/branch/4/value is projected to the recursive observer but not the exact observer. A change at root/branch/4 is projected to both. If several clients observe the same recursive key, the registry increments a counter rather than duplicating the effective observation mode. Removing a client decrements the counter and changes the effective mode only when the counter reaches zero. During this window, a delta overlay records the exact key-level effect of payload updates. If key a changes from x to y, the overlay records baseline value x and current value y. If a is then moved to b and updated to z, the overlay records the rename relation (a, b ) and the current value at 

b. The ordered history still contains both operations; the overlay records the final window effect. This distinction allows a summary to contain a small exact change header while the retained suffix keeps the most recent ordered items. Finally, suppose the representation budget is B = 512 tokens and the history has grown to many thousands of items. Compaction scans backward from the newest item, inserts whole items while their costs fit, and truncates one boundary item if needed. The replacement history begins with a summary item that can include the current epoch number, the number of discarded items, and the delta overlay’s changed keys. The selected suffix then follows verbatim. The graph is not rebuilt by this operation: the graph continues to answer structural queries, while the history epoch has changed to a summary-plus-suffix representation. 

Proposition C.1 (Composed batch cost) . Consider a batch with a graph upserts, s state updates, 

h history appends, o observation registrations after deduplication, and one compaction retaining q

items. With balanced adjacency buckets, cached payload costs, and map-based observation counters, the batch takes 

O(( a + s) log dmax + h + o log o + q)

time plus output size, where dmax is the maximum affected parent degree in the batch. Proof. Each upsert or state update touches a child-to-parent entry and at most two adjacency buckets, costing O( log dmax ) under balanced buckets. Each append is amortized O(1) . The registration list is sorted and deduplicated in O(o log o) time before counters are updated. Compaction with cached costs inspects the retained suffix and one possible boundary item, giving O(q) time. The operations touch disjoint structural components except for the identifier namespace, so their costs add. 19 Table 6: End-to-end maintenance roles in one trace epoch. 

Object Maintained information Main query or update Trace graph current rooted parent relation filtered descendants History ordered payload sequence page and compact Soft log bounded newest raw entries append with hysteresis Observation registry counted key subscriptions projected notification set Delta overlay baseline/current key differences compact change header Cost cache recomputable payload costs repeated budget accounting Compaction window epoch and prefill estimate replacement boundary The example highlights why BDTS is not just a graph, a log, or a compressor. The graph supplies rooted reachability; the history supplies ordered representation; the registry and overlay supply small auxiliary summaries; the soft log supplies bounded recent durability; and the compaction window states where one bounded replacement view ends and the next begins. Each object has a narrow invariant, but the combination gives a trace representation that can be queried, transmitted, and shortened without changing its structural vocabulary. 

# D Artifact Checklist 

The ancillary artifact contains: 

• a Rust library with the trace graph, budgeted history, compaction window, budget policy, bounded cost cache, soft-capped log, observation registry, and delta overlay; 

• a Rust benchmark binary and a matrix runner that emit JSON and CSV; 

• Python scripts that run tokenizer and compact forward measurements for the three reported model targets; 

• generated result files used in Tables 3, 4, and 5; 

• a README with commands for reproducing the measurements. 

# References 

[1] Alfred V. Aho and Margaret J. Corasick. Efficient string matching: An aid to bibliographic search. Communications of the ACM , 18(6):333–340, 1975. doi: 10.1145/360825.360855. [2] Jon Louis Bentley and James B. Saxe. Decomposable searching problems i: Static-to-dynamic transformation. Journal of Algorithms , 1(4):301–358, 1980. doi: 10.1016/0196-6774(80)90015-2. [3] Thomas H. Cormen, Charles E. Leiserson, Ronald L. Rivest, and Clifford Stein. Introduction to Algorithms . MIT Press, 3 edition, 2009. [4] Graham Cormode and S. Muthukrishnan. An improved data stream summary: The count-min sketch and its applications. Journal of Algorithms , 55(1):58–75, 2005. doi: 10.1016/j.jalgor. 2003.12.001. [5] Mayur Datar, Aristides Gionis, Piotr Indyk, and Rajeev Motwani. Maintaining stream statistics over sliding windows. SIAM Journal on Computing , 31(6):1794–1813, 2002. doi: 10.1137/ S0097539701398363. 20 [6] Camil Demetrescu and Giuseppe F. Italiano. A new approach to dynamic all pairs shortest paths. Journal of the ACM , 51(6):968–992, 2004. doi: 10.1145/1039488.1039492. [7] Shimon Even and Yossi Shiloach. An on-line edge-deletion problem. Journal of the ACM , 28(1): 1–4, 1981. doi: 10.1145/322234.322235. [8] Philip Gage. A new algorithm for data compression. C Users Journal , 12(2):23–38, 1994. [9] Monika Rauch Henzinger and Valerie King. Randomized fully dynamic graph algorithms with polylogarithmic time per operation. In Proceedings of the Thirty-First Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing , pages 519–527, 1999. doi: 10.1145/301250.301383. [10] Geoffrey Hinton, Oriol Vinyals, and Jeff Dean. Distilling the knowledge in a neural network. In 

NIPS Deep Learning and Representation Learning Workshop , 2015. [11] Hugging Face. distilbert/distilgpt2 model card. https://huggingface.co/distilbert/ distilgpt2 , 2026. Accessed 20 May 2026. [12] Guy Jacobson. Space-efficient static trees and graphs. In 30th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science , pages 549–554, 1989. doi: 10.1109/SFCS.1989.63533. [13] Taku Kudo and John Richardson. Sentencepiece: A simple and language independent subword tokenizer and detokenizer for neural text processing. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: System Demonstrations , pages 66–71, 2018. doi: 10.18653/v1/D18-2012. [14] Nimrod Megiddo and Dharmendra S. Modha. Arc: A self-tuning, low overhead replacement cache. In Proceedings of the 2nd USENIX Conference on File and Storage Technologies , pages 115–130, 2003. [15] S. Muthukrishnan. Data Streams: Algorithms and Applications . Now Publishers, 2005. doi: 10.1561/0400000002. [16] Gonzalo Navarro. Compact Data Structures: A Practical Approach . Cambridge University Press, 2016. doi: 10.1017/CBO9781316588284. [17] Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever. Language models are unsupervised multitask learners, 2019. Technical report. [18] Rajeev Raman, Venkatesh Raman, and S. Srinivasa Rao. Succinct indexable dictionaries with applications to encoding k-ary trees and multisets. In Proceedings of the Thirteenth Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms , pages 233–242, 2002. [19] Liam Roditty and Uri Zwick. Improved dynamic reachability algorithms for directed graphs. 

SIAM Journal on Computing , 37(5):1455–1471, 2008. doi: 10.1137/060650271. [20] Victor Sanh, Lysandre Debut, Julien Chaumond, and Thomas Wolf. Distilbert, a distilled version of bert: Smaller, faster, cheaper and lighter. In NeurIPS Workshop on Energy Efficient Machine Learning and Cognitive Computing , 2019. [21] Piotr Sankowski. Dynamic transitive closure via dynamic matrix inverse. In 45th Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science , pages 509–517, 2004. doi: 10.1109/FOCS. 2004.25. 21 [22] Rico Sennrich, Barry Haddow, and Alexandra Birch. Neural machine translation of rare words with subword units. In Proceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , pages 1715–1725, 2016. doi: 10.18653/v1/P16-1162. [23] Daniel D. Sleator and Robert E. Tarjan. Amortized efficiency of list update and paging rules. 

Communications of the ACM , 28(2):202–208, 1985. doi: 10.1145/2786.2793. [24] Robert E. Tarjan. Depth-first search and linear graph algorithms. SIAM Journal on Computing ,1(2):146–160, 1972. doi: 10.1137/0201010. [25] Terry A. Welch. A technique for high-performance data compression. Computer , 17(6):8–19, 1984. doi: 10.1109/MC.1984.1659158. [26] Susan Zhang, Stephen Roller, Naman Goyal, Mikel Artetxe, Moya Chen, Shuohui Chen, Christopher Dewan, Mona Diab, Xian Li, Xi Victoria Lin, Todor Mihaylov, Myle Ott, Sam Shleifer, Kurt Shuster, Daniel Simig, Punit Singh Koura, Anjali Sridhar, Tianlu Wang, and Luke Zettlemoyer. Opt: Open pre-trained transformer language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.01068 , 2022. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2205.01068. [27] Jacob Ziv and Abraham Lempel. A universal algorithm for sequential data compression. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory , 23(3):337–343, 1977. doi: 10.1109/TIT.1977.1055714. [28] Jacob Ziv and Abraham Lempel. Compression of individual sequences via variable-rate coding. 

IEEE Transactions on Information Theory , 24(5):530–536, 1978. doi: 10.1109/TIT.1978.1055934. 22