Title: A Dataset of Nonlinear Equations for Subdivision

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.27499v1

Published Time: Tue, 31 Mar 2026 01:09:17 GMT

Number of Pages: 49

Markdown Content:
# A Dataset of Nonlinear Equations for Subdivision 

## Juan Xu 1,2 , Huilong Lai 1,2 , Yingying Cheng 1,2 , Wenqiang Yang 1,2 , and Changbo Chen ∗1,2 1Chongqing Institute of Green and Intelligent Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Chongqing, China 

2Chongqing School, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Chongqing, China March 31, 2026 

Abstract Purpose : Subdivision is a basic and important reliable method for solving sys-tems of nonlinear equations, including both polynomial and transcendental equa-tions. This work aims to provide a large real dataset for benchmarking and opti-mizing subdivision methods as well as helping to develop machine learning methods to solve nonlinear equations. 

Design/methodology/approach: To build the dataset, we have searched the existing main benchmark suits for subdivision methods. We have also browsed over 1000 literatures and searched in detail over 300 literatures related to subdivi-sion to find examples not covered by these repositories. After carefully comparing these systems and removing duplicate examples, we are left with a collection of 451 polynomial systems and 130 non-polynomial systems from the literatures and pub-lic datasets. To enhance the dataset, we further generate 48000 zero-dimensional instances from 5 families of parametric nonlinear systems arising in practical ap-plications. We leverage two subdivision solvers IbexSolve and RealPaver as well as a symbolic solver RootFinding:-Isolate in Maple to provide reliable solutions for these examples. 

Findings : By providing solution information for the examples in our dataset, we have run a large scale test on subdivision solvers and have the following key findings: There is a large overlap among the examples collected from the litera-tures/repositories; Overall, the two state-of-the-art subdivision solvers IbexSolve 

> ∗

Corresponding author. Email: chenchangbo@cigit.ac.cn 

1

> arXiv:2603.27499v1 [cs.SC] 29 Mar 2026

and RealPaver are more efficient than the symbolic solver RootFinding:-Isolate and IbexSolve is more efficient than RealPaver, however, none of them is universally faster than the others; Although the subdivision solvers are recognized to be re-liable, our experiments suggest that in rare cases IbexSolve may miss out some solutions. 

Research limitations : The studies have been focusing on collecting zero-dimensional systems for subdivision. It does not cover literatures or repositories on using subdivision to solve positive dimensional systems, such as approximat-ing curve or surface. Although some literatures and repositories on solving zero-dimensional systems using symbolic or homotopy methods are also included, the study primarily focuses on subdivision methods and does not systematically collect examples for non-subdivision methods. 

Practical implications : This dataset may be employed to benchmark different subdivision solvers. As the dataset contains the solution information obtained with the default strategies of two state-of-the-art subdivision solvers, it provides a solid baseline when developing new subdivision methods or inventing alternative solving strategies for existing subdivision methods. This labelled dataset could also be used to aid the development of machine learning techniques for subdivision methods. 

Originality/value : We provide so far the largest real dataset of zero-dimensional nonlinear systems suitable for solving with subdivision. Great efforts have been taken to remove duplicate systems coming from different sources and to obtain reliable solution information of the systems in the dataset. This labelled dataset can potentially be useful for training and evaluating machine learning models in addition to serving as a benchmark for subdivision solvers. Another value of this work is to compare subdivision methods with symbolic methods, which was seldom systematically done before and the comparision sheds insights on the strength and weakness of both methods. 

Keywords : Subdivision; Dataset; Zero-dimensional nonlinear equations; Polynomial equations; Transcendental equations. 

# 1 Introduction 

Solving systems of nonlinear equations is a fundamental task with application in various fields. Subdivision methods are a class of reliable methods for locating the real solutions of system of nonlinear equation within a bounded region, the basic idea of which is to repeatedly partition the region of interest until the solutions are isolated or sufficiently approximated. Of course, subdivision is not limited to real-root computation; variants have been used for complex root isolation (Becker et al., 2018) and for global optimiza-tion (Neumaier, 2004; Chabert and Jaulin, 2009). In this paper, however, we restrict attention to subdivision methods for computing real roots. Naturally, these methods 2fall under the Branch-and-Prune framework: regions proven to contain no solutions are pruned, those containing a unique solution (or sufficiently small) are retained, and un-certain regions are further branched into smaller regions. It can be observed that this framework shares many similarities with the Branch-and-Bound (B&B) framework used for global optimization and is often discussed alongside it (Neumaier, 2004; Chabert and Jaulin, 2009). Besides subdivision, symbolic methods (Cox et al., 1997; Von Zur Gathen and Ger-hard, 2003) and homotopy continuation (Sommese et al., 2005) are two principal ap-proaches to solve nonlinear equations. Unlike subdivision, these approaches are mainly applicable to polynomial systems. Symbolic methods, or more precisely elimination meth-ods, transform a polynomial system into triangular systems which are easier to solve. Then real root isolation techniques, which are typically based on subdivision, can be applied to locate the solution of the system. Symbolic methods are theoretically elegant and rigorous, but are often costly in memory and computation because they rely on exact arithmetic. Homotopy continuation, by contract, solves a polynomial system by tracking solution paths from a start system with known (or easily computed) solutions to the tar-get system. It is generally efficient but not inherently certified, as path jumping during tracking can lead to missed solutions. In many applications, interest is limited to solutions within a prescribed domain. In such cases, as noted in Sherbrooke and Patrikalakis (1993), symbolic and homotopy meth-ods often deliver more information than needed: symbolic elimination still transforms the system to triangular form, and homotopy continuation still tracks all complex solution paths; and these steps typically dominate the runtime. By contrast, subdivision restricts computation to the specified region, so the smaller the region, the lower the cost. Afurther distinction is that: many subdivision methods apply to general nonlinear systems (including those with elementary functions), whereas symbolic and homotopy approaches are largely confined to polynomial systems. The Branch-and-Prune framework used in subdivision methods is closely related to the Branch-and-Bound framework. And heuristics have been playing an important role in Branch-and-Bound algorithms. A successful application of these heuristics requires a balance between effectiveness and efficiency. For instance, the strong branching heuris-tic has been shown be to very effective in reducing the size of the B&B tree. On the other hand, the cost of applying such a heuristic is high due to the need to solve linear programming problems for all branching variables. To reduce such a cost, one can apply supervised machine learning to imitate the behavior of strong branching. Solely relying on imitation can hardly find heuristics more effective than those designed by humans. Another important direction is to apply reinforcement learning to find solving strategies in a more autonomous way, aiming to beat the best one invented by humans. Although important progress has been made on integrating machine learning to branch and bound 3algorithms (Scavuzzo et al., 2024), a recent evaluation of ML-based solvers for combi-natorial optimization, including mixed integer linear programming, shows that it is still difficult for learning based approaches to beat the best solvers (Feng et al., 2025), in particular on hard benchmark examples. Nevertheless, for both training and evaluating learning based approaches, a collection of high quality benchmark examples are manda-tory. We are also interested in applying machine learning to accelerate subdivision. To do this, a necessary step is to have a real dataset to assess different methods or heuristics. In this paper, we report on the largest labelled dataset constructed so far for solv-ing zero-dimensional nonlinear systems with subdivision-based methods. A brief, non-exhaustive survey with emphasis on the literature from the past two decades is also pro-vided to accompany with the dataset. The value of the dataset has been demonstrated through benchmarking existing implementations as well as being used for learning to clas-sify the real roots of parametric systems. To summarize, our contribution is three-fold: 

• We provide a survey on the development of subdivision algorithms for solving zero-dimensional systems, which may serve as a guide for understanding the dataset and a tutorial for beginners interested on optimizing subdivision. 

• We collect zero-dimensional examples for subdivision from a broad range of litera-tures and benchmark datasets on subdivision. We run several different solvers on these examples and collect timing and solution information to form a labelled real dataset for subdivision. 

• We demonstrate the usefulness of this dataset through benchmarking different solvers, finding the potential room to improve subdivision methods, and train-ing machine learning models to classify the number of real solutions of parametric nonlinear systems. 

# 2 Notations and preliminaries 

This section provides an overview of the notation and preliminary background that will be used throughout the paper. Following the standardized notation proposed in Kearfott et al. (2010), we use lowercase letters to denote scalars and vectors, boldface lowercase letters to denote intervals and boxes (interval vectors), and uppercase letters to denote matrices. For notational simplicity, vectors are treated as column vectors by default, and transposes are omitted when clear from the context. A (real, closed, nonempty) interval represented by [ a, b ] with a ≤ b is the set {x ∈

R | a ≤ x ≤ b}. We also allow unbounded intervals by permitting endpoints in R ∪{−∞ , +∞} . Let IR denote the set of all (possibly unbounded) real intervals. A box can be considered as an interval vector x = ( x1, . . . , xn) ⊆ IR n, which consists of all points 4x = ( x1, · · · , x n) such that xk ∈ xk for any k = 1 , . . . , n . A one-dimensional interval can be considered as a special case of a box. For a box x with dimension greater than 1, we denote its i-th component by xi.Given an interval x, denote by x and x the lower and upper bounds (endpoints) of x,respectively. The width and center of an interval x = [ x, x] are defined as wid( x) = x−x

and mid( x) = x+x 

> 2

, respectively. The width of a box x = ( x1, . . . , xn) is defined as the the vector wid( x) = (wid( x1), . . . , wid( xn)) and the maximum width is then defined as max wid( x) = max 1≤i≤n wid( xi). Similarly, the center of a box is defined as mid( x) = (mid( x1), . . . , mid( xn)), and the center of an interval matrix is defined analogously, in a componentwise manner. Unless stated otherwise, wid( ·) and mid( ·) are defined for bounded intervals (and boxes). Denote by int( x) the interior of the box x. Given a set 

S ⊂ R, denote by S the smallest interval that contains S.For any operation ◦ ∈ { +, −, ∗} , the operation between two intervals a and b is defined by 

a ◦ b = {a ◦ b | a ∈ a, b ∈ b}.

Division and some basic elementary functions (without composition) between intervals can be defined analogously, although particular caution is needed if the divisor includes zero or if the function is not defined throughout the interval. Detailed formulas can be found in classic references such as Hansen and Walster (2003). In interval arithmetic, it is crucial to clearly distinguish between functions and ex-pressions. While a function represents an abstract mathematical mapping from inputs to outputs, an expression refers to a specific syntactic arrangement of operations used to evaluate that function. Different expressions representing the same function can lead to significantly different interval evaluations due to the so-called dependency problem. Conceptually we keep this distinction, but for notational convenience we shall usually use the same symbol, say f , both for a function and for one fixed expression representing it; the intended meaning will be clear from the context. We use lowercase letters for scalar-valued functions and uppercase letters for vector-valued functions or expressions. Boldface letters are used to denote interval- or box-valued functions or expressions. Given an expression f and a box x, the interval evaluation obtained by substituting the component intervals of x into the expression and performing the interval arithmetic operations is denoted as f (x). Note that f (x) is typically not equal to the exact range of the function f over the box x, which is defined as range( f, x) := {f (x) | x ∈ x}. Instead, due to the dependency problem, the exact range is always contained within the com-puted interval evaluation: range( f, x) ⊆ f (x). The interval function f (x) : IR n → IR ,constructed in this manner, is referred to as the natural interval extension of the func-tion represented by f . This extension provides an enclosure of the true range of f , and its inclusion property guarantees that the computed interval always contains the exact 5range. In addition, the natural interval extension converges to the exact range of the function as the width of the input box tends to zero (assuming exact arithmetic and no rounding errors). As a function may admit multiple algebraically equivalent expressions, it can also have multiple corresponding interval extensions. Different interval extensions can lead to different enclosures of the range. A notable example is the Horner extension, which rewrites a polynomial into a nested (Horner) form and then applies the natural interval extension to this reformulated expression. This extension typically requires fewer interval operations and reduces the dependency effect, often resulting in tighter enclo-sures. Another commonly used interval extension is the mean value extension. Given a differentiable function f and a box x, the mean value extension of f is constructed using the formula: 

f MV (x) = f (m) + Jf (x)( x − m)where m is the center of x and Jf (x) is an interval extension of the Jacobian matrix of 

f over x.

# 3 A survey of subdivision 

In this section, we present a survey of subdivision methods for certified real-root solving. Unlike elimination and homotopy methods, which solve the original system by relating it to a more easily solvable one, either through algebraic transformation or continuous deformation, subdivision methods directly search for solutions of the original system within the prescribed domain of the variables, in a quite natural way. We first present the general framework of subdivision methods, then discuss the key algorithmic ingredients, including verification operators and contractors. Finally, we review strategies for choosing and combining these ingredients. 

## 3.1 A framework (algorithm) for subdivision 

Subdivision algorithms typically follow this general framework: Given a box of interest 

x(0) ⊆ Rn, the algorithm first attempts to reduce the box as much as possible. Then it checks whether the box satisfies the output criterion. If the criterion is met, the box is added to the output list; otherwise, the box is bisected, and the same procedure is recursively applied to the resulting sub-boxes. 6Algorithm 1: Framework 

Input: An initial box of interest x(0) ⊆ Rn.

Output: A list of boxes L, each contained in x(0) and satisfying the output criterion.  

> 1

Set W = {x(0) }; L = ∅; 

> 2

while W̸ = ∅ do  

> 3

Select and remove a box x(k) from W by a node selection strategy ; 

> 4

Reduce x(k) by removing regions that are proven to contain no roots by a 

contraction strategy ; 

> 5

if x(k) is non-empty then  

> 6

if x(k) satisfies the output criterion by a check strategy then  

> 7

Add x(k) to L; 

> 8

else  

> 9

Divide x(k) into two sub-boxes x(k, 1) , x(k, 2) by a bisection strategy ; 

> 10

Add x(k, 1) and x(k, 2) to W; 

> 11

end  

> 12

end  

> 13

end  

> 14

return L;Alg.1 outlines the general framework of the subdivision algorithms, whcih follows a branch-and-prune structure (Caro et al., 2014). The implementation of the above framework requires further specification and instantiation of a few key components: the node selection strategy in line 3, the contraction strategy in line 4, the bisection strategy in line 9, and the check strategy in line 6. The choice of strategies is guided, on the one hand, by the objective of the algorithms and, on the other hand, by efficiency considerations. The objective of the algorithm can be described from two perspectives: in terms of the number of outputs, it can be classified into three categories: finding a single solution, a specified number of solutions, or all solutions within a box; and in terms of the output requirement, it can be classified into two categories: root isolation or root approximation. For root isolation, the check strategy is to detect whether the box B contains exactly one root, typically achieved by a verification operator. For root approximation, the check strategy is to detect whether the size of B falls below a prescribed tolerance ε. In the case of root approximation, the algorithm is guaranteed to terminate, provided that the bisection strategy in line 9 is properly chosen. In contrast, for root isolation, it is generally difficult to prove that a box in the working list will eventually be confirmed by the verification operator, even if the box does contain exactly one root. As a result, most algorithms in the literature introduce a tolerance as a fallback termination condition, and sufficiently small boxes are accepted as output, even though they may not be truly 7isolating. As an exception, (Stahl, 1995; Xu and Yap, 2019) analyze the success conditions of the verification operator in the presence of a simple root, enabling termination without relying on such a tolerance. It is important to note that verification operators are unable to confirm the existence of multiple roots. This limitation is a common challenge for numerical algorithms. In the presence of multiple roots, a tolerance is typically introduced to ensure the termination of the algorithm. Most work in the literature aims to find all the roots in a given box. In this case, the node selection strategy does not affect either the output or the efficiency, so one can choose any strategy arbitrarily (Araya and Reyes, 2016). A depth-first strategy is often preferred since it allows a box to be fully processed without switching regions. In contrast, when the goal is to find only one or a few roots, the node selection strategy becomes critical, as certain roots are easier to locate while others are more challenging, especially if they are ill-conditioned. Such cases are rare in the literature, with only a few exceptions. In Huang et al. (2019), where the goal is to find a single root, a depth-first selection strategy is still adopted; instead, the discussion is placed on the choice of the partitioning strategy. In Bublitz (2023), to quickly find a root of the system, the node selection strategy prioritizes the box at the center of which the sum of the absolute values of the function evaluations is minimal. Meanwhile, a heuristic root-finding procedure is also incorporated to accelerate the convergence to a root. While node selection strategies are seldom investigated for zero-dimensional systems, they play an important role and have been discussed in Branch-and-Prune algorithms for positive-dimensional systems (de Latour et al., 2021; Chenouard et al., 2009), and especially in Branch-and-Bound algorithms for global optimization (Neveu et al., 2016). In any context, both the contraction strategy and the bisection strategy are critical for efficiency of algorithms. We will discuss these aspects in section 3.4, after introducing the contractors. 

## 3.2 Verification operators 

The verification operator checks whether there is exactly one solution inside a box. In sub-division algorithms, the most commonly used verification operators are interval Newton-type operators such as Krawczyk operator and Hansen-Sengupta operator. The Krawczyk operator, derived from fixed-point theorem, is particularly popular due to its simplicity and ease of implementation. Given a box x, the Krawczyk operator is defined as 

K(x, ˜x) := ˜ x − Cf (˜ x) + ( I − C · Jf (x))( x − ˜x)where ˜ x is a point in x, C is a preconditioning matrix, f and Jf are respectively interval extensions of f and the Jacobian of f . It has been proven that the Krawczyk operator yields the best (tightest) results when ˜ x = mid( x) and C = mid( Jf (x)) −1. The Krawczyk 8operator K(x, ˜x) has the following properties (Neumaier, 2004): 1. Any zero x∗ ∈ x of f lies in x ∩ K(x, ˜x). 2. If x ∩ K(x, ˜x) = ∅, then x contains no zero of f .3. If K(x, ˜x) ⊆ int( x) then x contains a unique zero of f .These properties show that the Krawczyk operator can serve both as a verification op-erator and as a contractor. While the Krawczyk operator is simple and widely used in practice, it is not as powerful as Hansen-Sengupta operator (Neumaier, 1990). To in-troduce the definition of Hansen-Sengupta operator, we define a function for intervals 

a, b, x ∈ IR :Γ( a, b, x) := x | ax = b for some a ∈ a, b ∈ b .

The function can be extended to interval matrix and vectors as Γ( A, b, x) := y where 

A ∈ IR n×n, b ∈ IR n, x ∈ IR n, and the i-th component yi of y is defined as 

yi = Γ( Aii , bi − X

> j<i

Aij yi − X

> j>i

Aij xi, xi), i = 1 , . . . , n. (1) The operator Γ( A, b, x) is known as the interval Gauss-Seidel operator, which is used for solving interval linear systems. It provide an enclosure of the following set 

x | Ax = b for some A ∈ A, b ∈ b . (2) Given a box x, the Hansen-Sengupta operator is defined as 

H(x, ˜x) := ˜ x + Γ( C · Jf (x), −Cf (˜ x), x − ˜x) (3) where ˜ x is a point in x and C is a preconditioning matrix. This operator shares the same nice properties as the Krawczyk operator described earlier. In addition, when used as a contractor, the Hansen–Sengupta operator is often more effective in practice, as it consistently produces tighter, or at least equally tight, enclosures for the solution set. Another variant of interval Newton-type operators can be obtained by replacing the in-terval Gauss-Seidel operator in (3) with the interval version of Gaussian elimination (Neu-maier, 2004, 1990). This new operator preserves the key properties of interval Newton-type methods and experiments show that it is more powerful than Hansen-Sengupta operator (Jaulin et al., 2001). However, due to its higher computational cost, it is less commonly used in practice. As mentioned above, interval-newton type can be used as a verification operator which confirms the uniqueness of a root within a box. In addition to these, there exist other tests, such as the Miranda test and the Borsuk test, that can verify only the existence, 9but not the uniqueness, of a solution within a box. The Miranda test confirms the existence of a zero of a continuous function in a box by checking for sign changes on opposite faces of the box. It can be viewed as an application of the intermediate value theorem in higher dimensions. The Borsuk test is a topological method for verifying the existence of a root by exploiting the antipodal properties of continuous functions over symmetric domains. It is theoretically powerful but more complex to implement, and thus rarely used in algorithms. It has been shown to be at least as powerful as the Miranda test (Frommer and Lang, 2005). In practice, the Miranda test is typically applied after preconditioning (Moore and Kioustelidis, 1980). A standard implementation of the Miranda test is shown to be at least as powerful as the existence test based on the Krawczyk operator (Frommer et al., 2004), but less powerful than the one based on the Hansen–Sengupta operator (Goldsztejn, 2007), with similar computational cost. 

## 3.3 Contractors 

As described earlier, interval Newton-type operators can be used as contractors. How-ever, they are computationally expensive, as they involve computations over the entire system, including evaluating the interval Jacobian and solving interval linear system for all variables simultaneously. When applied to large boxes in the early stages of the search, the entries of the interval Jacobian matrix tend to have large widths, which may lead to poor performance of the operators. In such cases, the reduction achieved may not justify the computational cost. Consistency techniques provide an alternative approach to box reduction. Unlike interval Newton-type methods, which operate on the entire system, consistency techniques act on individual constraints (i.e., equations). Each constraint is used independently to reduce the domains of the variables involved. Compared to interval Newton methods, consistency techniques incur lower computational cost, and are better suited for quickly pruning large boxes during the early stages of the search. Here we describe some common consistency techniques used in continuous constraint satisfaction problems, among which hull consistency and box consistency are the most widely used. These techniques are applied to a single constraint at a time. In general, a constraint may be an equation or an inequality; in this paper, we focus on equations, i.e., constraints of the form f (x) = 0. Hull consistency, also known as 2B-consistency, aims to compute the smallest box that encloses all solutions of a given equation. A box x = ( x1, · · · , xn) is hull consistent with respect to a constraint c(x1, . . . , x n) if and only if ∀i = 1 , . . . , n 

xi = {ri ∈ xi | ∃ r1 ∈ x1, . . . , r i−1 ∈ xi−1, r i+1 ∈ xi+1 , . . . , r n ∈ In : c(r1, . . . , r n)}.

In other words, a box x is hull consistent if, in each dimension, the corresponding interval cannot be further reduced, because the projection of the solution set onto that dimension 10 covers both endpoints. Hull consistency is typically enforced through forward-backward propagation (Benhamou et al., 1999). Given a constraint, forward-backward propagation operates on the variable domains in two directions: Forward evaluation computes the interval image of the constraint function over current box of the input variables. Backward evaluation attempts to refine the interval of each variable involved by intersecting it with the pre-image that could produce the computed output interval. =ˆ2 x      

> [-5,5]
> [132 ,32] +
> z
> [2,10]
> ˆ
> y
> [-5,5]
> 2
> [0,25]
> [2,35]
> =ˆ2x
> [1,5]
> [2,32] +
> z
> [2,7]
> ˆ
> y
> [-5,5]
> 2
> [0,25]
> [2,32]

Figure 1: Forward (left) and backward (right) propagation for the constraint 2 x = z + y2.Notice that forward-backward propagation attempts to reduce all the variables in-volved simultaneously. If each variable appears only once in the constraint, forward-backward propagation yields an optimal result, that is, the resulting box is hull consis-tent. However, when variables occur multiple times, each repeated occurrence is treated as an independent new variable during the evaluation process. This breaks the inherit dependency structure and may cause significant overestimation, thereby reducing the pruning efficiency of the method. In case of multiple occurrence of variables, box consistency may provide better result. Unlike hull consistency, box consistency technique refines the interval of each variable independently by turning the original multivariate constraint into a univariate one, sub-stituting all other variables with their interval. Consider a constraint f (x1, . . . , x n) = 0 and f an interval extension of f . A box (x1, · · · , xn) ∈ IR n is box consistent with respect to f if and only if for ∀i = 1 , . . . , n ,the following holds: 

(0 ∈ f (x1, . . . , xi−1, [xi, xi+], xi+1 , . . . , xn)0 ∈ f (x1, . . . , xi−1, [xi−, xi], xi+1 , . . . , xn)where x+ (resp. x−) denotes the floating-point successor of x (resp. the floating-point predecessor of x). Observe that box consistency is defined with respect to the interval ex-tension f of f . For the same function f , different interval extensions may induce different forms of box consistency (Van Hentenryck et al., 1997). To enforce box consistency for 11 reducing the box ( x1, · · · , xn), we fix each variable xj for j̸ = i to their current interval 

xj and consider the resulting interval function 

f i = f (x1, . . . , xi−1, x, xi+1 , . . . , xn).

This yields a univariate interval function of x. To prune the interval xi, it amounts to tightening xi until its endpoints are close to the leftmost and rightmost zeros of f i. This can be achieved by recursively splitting the interval, pruning infeasible subintervals, and searching for the desired zeros within the leftmost and rightmost subintervals that have not yet been eliminated. The univariate interval Newton method may be used to improve the efficiency of this process. A detailed discussion on the efficient implementation of contractors based on box consistency is presented in Goldsztejn and Goualard (2010). Unlike hull consistency, which is defined using existential quantification, box consis-tency evaluates the interval extension of the constraint by plugging in the intervals of the other variables. By definition, hull consistency appears to be stricter than box consis-tency. However, in practice, the box consistency technique produces tighter result than the forward-backward propagation when variables appear multiple times in the constraint. This is because box consistency focuses on one variable at a time and by searching for its leftmost and rightmost zeros, it effectively reduces the impact of variable dependency in that dimension (Collavizza et al., 1999). On the other hand, hull consistency is less costly and has the potential to reduce the domains of all involved variables simultaneously. Since hull consistency and box consistency are defined with respect to a single con-straint, they are referred to as local consistency. In a subdivision algorithm, it is necessary to propagate these consistency techniques across all constraints repeatedly until further reductions become negligible. However, since the constraints are treated individually, it may happen that the box fails to converge to the solution, even after all constraints have been processed, as shown in Fig. 2. In such case, stronger consistency techniques can be applied to further contract the box. Figure 2: The box ([ −1, 1] , [−1, 1]) is hull consistent and box consistent with respect to the system {x2 = −x1, 2x2 = ( x1 + 1) 2 − 2}.A box x = ( x1, · · · , xn) is said to be 3B-consistent with respect to a set of constraints 

S if and only if for every i = 1 , . . . , n , the box x is 2B-consistent (i.e. hull consistent) with respect to the reduced systems 

S ∪ xi = xi and S ∪ { xi = xi} .

12 It is easy to see that the box in Fig 2 is not 3B-consistent for the constraints, since, for instance, the box is not 2B-consistent to the system {x2 = −x1, 2x2 = ( x1 + 1) 2 − 2, x 1 =

−1}. To reduce the box x in the i-th dimension by the definition of 3B-consistency, one can probe the interval xi from both ends, and try to prove the infeasibility of small bound-ary subintervals using 2B-consistency techniques such as forward-backward propagation. For the example in Fig. 2, one can prove the infeasibility of the subbox ([ −1, 0] , [−1, 1]) using 3B-consistency. 3B-consistency technique is expected to be more powerful than box consistency and hull consistency techniques, while it is more expensive. If, in the definition of 3B-consistency, the hull-consistency is replaced by box consistency, that is, x

is box consistent with respect to the reduced systems, then the resulting notion is called bound-consistency. Please refer to Collavizza et al. (1999) for comparisons of the power of the consistency techniques described above. The definition of 3B-consistency can be generalized to kB-consistency by induction: A box x = ( x1, · · · , xn) is said to be kB-consistent with respect to a set of constraints S

if and only if fo every i = 1 , . . . , n , the box B is ( k − 1)B-consistent with respect to 

S ∪ xi = xi and S ∪ { xi = xi} .

However, kB technique for k > 3 is rarely used in practice since it is too expensive. In Trombettoni and Chabert (2007), the authors introduced two improved contractors, CID and 3BCID. Unlike standard 3B-consistency based contractors, which only attempt to remove boundary subboxes at the two ends of a chosen dimension, these methods also examine subboxes in the interior. They apply a hull-consistency contractor to these in-termediate regions, thereby enabling additional reductions of the interior subboxes—and consequently of the whole box x—in several, and potentially all, dimensions. Further improvements to 3BCID were later proposed in Neveu et al. (2015). Another effective method for reducing the size of search boxes is linear relaxation. The core idea is to enclose the solution set of each non-linear equation with a polytope defined by a set of linear inequalities, By solving the resulting linear problems, one can derive improved bounds in each dimension. Affine arithmetic offers an approach for constructing linear relaxation of the system. As an extension of interval arithmetic (Kolev, 2001, 2004; Messine, 2002), affine arithmetic preserves variable dependencies by representing each variable as an affine combination of noise symbols, resulting in tighter bounds than interval arithmetic. By applying affine arithmetic operations to all expressions in the constraints, these constraints are transformed into affine forms. The resulting affine representations naturally yield linear relaxations of the constraints (Ninin et al., 2015). Lebbah et al. (2005a,b) proposed a linear relaxation technique for polynomial sys-tems, adapted from reformulation-linearization technique. This method replaces nonlin-ear terms with auxiliary variables and introduces corresponding identity constraints into 13 the original system. Linear inequalities are then constructed to approximate the seman-tics of these nonlinear term. By exploiting the specific structure of quadratic terms, this technique achieves tight enclosures of the solution set. Domes & Neumaier Domes and Neumaier (2010) introduced an alternative relaxation method for quadratic constraint, which can be naturally extended to more general polynomial constraint. The main dif-ference between these two relaxation approach lies in the way that bilinear constraints are handled. A integration and comparison of these linear relaxation techniques, along with experimental evaluations, is presented in Domes and Neumaier (2012). More recently, Araya et al. (2012) introduced a linear relaxation technique based on interval Taylor expansions evaluated at a pair of opposite vertices of a box. In Araya et al. (2025), the author proposes a hybrid approach that combines the affine relaxation technique with the extremal Taylor method, achieving better performance on constrained global optimization instances. As mentioned earlier, interval-Newton-type operators, such as the Krawczyk operator and Hansen-Sengupta operator, can also serve as contractors by virtue of their first property. When used as a contractor, the Krawczyk operator remains unchanged, whereas the Hansen-Sengupta operator requires a slight modification: in each iteration (1), yi is intersected with xi to obtain a tighter enclosure. In addition, the interval Gauss-Seidel operator can be applied recursively until further improvement becomes negligible. It can be seen that the interval-Newton-type operators act on the entire system and have the potential to reduce the box in each direction. Compared to previously described contractors, which impose no restrictions on the shape of the system, interval-Newton-type methods require the system to be square. 

## 3.4 Strategy of solvers 

The previous subsection introduced the key ingredients of the subdivision framework. The performance of a practical solver, however, depends critically on the strategies used to orchestrate these ingredients. We have already discussed about node-selection and checking strategies in Section 3.1. Here we focus on the contraction strategy and the bisection strategy. For contraction, one must decide in what order to apply contractors, how aggressively to iterate propagation, and when to switch from contraction to branching. For bisection, one must decide how to partition a box. While the bisection operation may appear straightforward, it can significantly affect the overall performance, and its impact on the efficiency is often harder to predict than that of the contraction strategy. It is often noted in the literature that bisection should be avoided as much as possible, especially when the number of variables is high (Jaulin et al., 2001). Typically, it is used only as a last resort, when the available contractors yield little or no significant reduction 14 of the box, since a bisection in one direction is often followed by further bisections in others, resulting in exponential complexity. 

3.4.1 Strategy on the contractors 

As noted in Jaulin et al. (2001), no contractor can be regarded as universally superior to the others. Each is designed to be effective under specific conditions. For instance, backward-forward propagation (based on hull consistency) is generally effective and has the potential to reduce a box along all dimensions. However, its effectiveness can be significantly diminished when a variable appears multiple times within a constraint. In contrast, contractors based on box consistency are more costly and reduce only one variable at a time. However, they can yield better results than forward-backward propa-gation. As mentioned above, these two type of contractors are local, and are well-suited for use in the early stages of the algorithm. However, relying solely on them may lead to the situation of deadlock, where the box can no longer be reduced. To overcome this limitation, it is often necessary to combine them with less local contractors, such as 3B contractors, interval Newton-based contractors, or linear-relaxation-based contractors. Accordingly, the latter three types of contractors are more computationally expensive. Interval Newton-based contractors and linear-relaxation-based contractors are efficient only when the box is sufficiently small or when the system is approximately linear, as they typically involve the use of an interval Jacobian matrix or similar structures. If the entries of this interval matrix have large widths, the power of the contractors will be substantially reduced. Given the varying applicability and computational overhead of these contractors, an effective combination strategy of the contractors is essential for achieving high algorithmic efficiency. A straightforward and commonly adopted heuristic is to first apply cheaper contractors and then invoke the more expensive ones (Vu et al., 2009a; Beelitz et al., 2005; Granvilliers and Benhamou, 2001; Benhamou et al., 1999; Granvilliers, 2001). In par-ticular, Benhamou et al. (1999) proposed a classical algorithm that performs constraint propagation, which first employs forward-backward propagation and then applies box consistency techniques only on variables that occur multiple times within the constraint. Existing solvers generally adopt similar heuristic for combining the contractors. The default strategy in RealPaver (Granvilliers and Benhamou, 2006) integrates the method proposed byBenhamou et al. (1999) with the Hansen–Sengupta operator to enhance prun-ing efficiency. In IbexSolve (Chabert and Jaulin, 2009), the default strategy employs a sequence of contractors, including the forward-backward propagator, the ACID contrac-tor, an interval Newton-type operator, and a linear-relaxation-based contractor, typically applied in the order presented above. Unlike the fixed contractor combinations used in previous works, Araya et al. (2015) proposed an adaptive strategy that fine-tunes the 15 invocation frequency of each contractor. The key idea is to reduce the usage of expensive contractors unless they prove effective in reducing a recently processed box. In addition to the choice and scheduling of various contractors, the implementation parameters or details within individual contractors can also have a considerable effect on algorithmic efficiency, particularly for constraint propagation contractors. Constraint propagation contractors, based on hull or box consistency, handle one constraint at a time. When applied to a set of constraints, they must be propagated across all constraints re-peatedly until a fixed box is reached, that is, until no further reduction is possible. In practice, to balance computational cost and pruning strength, the propagation process may be terminated early when no substantial improvement is observed. The appropriate threshold for termination is typically chosen based on empirical performance (Baharev et al., 2011). Box-consistency contractors offer more flexibility because they operate on constraint-variable pairs, and each constraint may involve multiple variables. However, applying the contractor to all variables can be costly. To mitigate this cost, Goualard and Jermann (2008) proposed a dynamic selection strategy that assigns and continuously updates weights for constraint-variable pairs based on their past domain reduction per-formance, prioritizing those with higher weights. Focusing on a single box-consistency contractor, Goldsztejn and Goualard (2010) proposed an adaptive shaving process that tightens the domain inward from both bounds, yielding more robust performance than the original implementation. In Trombettoni and Chabert (2007), experiments were con-ducted to evaluate how different parameter settings in the CID and 3BCID contractors affect overall efficiency on benchmark problems, and to choose appropriate parameters. 

3.4.2 Strategy on the bisectors 

So far, we have not discussed bisectors separately, as the operation itself is relatively straightforward—dividing a box into two sub-boxes along a chosen dimension. However, the choice of which dimension to split can still have a significant impact on the effi-ciency of the algorithm, and determining the optimal choice is a challenging and open question (Baharev et al., 2011; Granvilliers, 2012). Round-Robin (RR), MaxDom (or Largest-First ) and Smear-based heuristic are among the most commonly adopted heuristic strategies. The Round-Robin (RR) strategy selects variables in a circular order; it is simple, deterministic, and does not rely on any problem-specific information or heuristics. The MaxDom strategy selects the variable with the largest domain in the current box, aiming to reduce variable dependency as much as possible, which can lead to stronger contractions through local consistency techniques. Smear-based strategies use information of the system and the current box to detect the variable that has the most impact on the system. Given a box x = ( x1, · · · , xn), the 16 smear value of xi with respect to fj is given by smear( xi, f j ) = |Aij | · wid (xi)where Aij is the evaluation of an interval form of ∂f j 

> ∂x i

over x. The MaxSmear heuristic se-lects the variable xi which maximizes max j=1 ,...,n (smear( xi, f j )); the SumSmear heuristic selects the variable xi which maximizes Pnj=1 (smear( xi, f j )). As an improvement, Trom-bettoni et al. (2011) proposed heuristics based on the relative smear criterion, which normalize smear( xi, f j ) by the sum of all the smear values related to fj . The improved heuristics are show to be more efficient than the original ones. More sophisticated smear-based heuristics are presented in Araya et al. (2013). As noted in Granvilliers (2012), the efficiency of a subdivision algorithm depends on the coupling of bisection strategy and the contraction procedures. Based on the observa-tion that MaxSmear is more useful when the size of the box is small, Granvilliers (2012) proposed an adaptive strategy that favors RR in the early stages of the search,gradually shifts toward MaxSmear, aiming to balance the benefits of both approaches. An alternative strategy used in the literature is to select the splitting variable based on the output of the contractor. In the application of the Hansen-Sengupta operator, the diagonal entries of the interval Jacobian matrix may contain zero. Division by such an interval results in two disjoint intervals separated by a gap. This phenomenon may indicate the presence of multiple solutions. Therefore, when such a situation arises, a reasonable splitting strategy is to exploit the gap for further branching (Hansen and Greenberg, 1983). Moreover, Batnini et al. (2005) showed that gaps can occur in hull consistency and box consistency techniques due to division by intervals containing zero. Therefore, splitting strategies that exploit such gaps can be designed accordingly. An analogous splitting strategy is also proposed in Trombettoni and Chabert (2007), based on the gaps produced by the CID contractor. Beyond the classical strategies and their variants, several exploratory efforts have been made to devise novel bisection strategies. In addition to local information, as used in MaxDom and smear-based heuristics, Reyes and Araya (2014) attempts to guide the variable selection using past information. This information is gathered in a preprocessing phase through exploratory runs in different directions. After this phase, each variable is assigned a weight, which is then incorporated into the variable selection heuristic during the search process. Huang et al. (2019) introduced the lookahead branching heuristic in the attempt to make locally optimal choice. It performs exhaustive splitting over each of the variables to estimate the gain from bisection in different directions, and keeps the branch which yields the most progress in the next several steps. The strategy is compared with MaxDom and a smear-based heuristic in the implementation. Interestingly, the experimental results show that different branching methods perform quite differently on 17 larger instances; however, no single heuristic consistently outperforms the others. 

## 3.5 Other techniques 

Aside from various contractors, which are the main ingredients of the subdivision algo-rithm, there are additional techniques that can enhance its efficiency. Here we briefly discuss about the directed acyclic graph (DAG) representation of constraint system, and the symbolic techniques. As noted earlier, forward–backward propagation is a basic contractor in subdivision al-gorithms. However, propagating each constraint individually can limit pruning efficiency. To address this, Schichl and Neumaier (2005) proposed representing the constraint sys-tem as a DAG rather than as separate trees. Common subexpressions across different constraints then appear only once in the DAG, which reduces dependency effects and thereby decreasing interval overestimation. This representation yields tighter contrac-tions in forward–backward propagation. Vu et al. (2009b,a) further developed techniques based on this representation and proved its efficiency. Another technique to enhance efficiency is symbolic computation. As noted by Beelitz et al. (2005); Benhamou and Granvilliers (2006), a nonlinear system can be reformulated by introducing a shared auxiliary variable for each subterm common across different con-straints, an idea akin to the DAG representation, in order to mitigate dependency and reduce interval overestimation. More aggressively, additional variables can be introduced to reduce the number of occurrences of each variable within a constraint Granvilliers et al. (2001), which typically yields tighter contractions at the cost of higher computational ef-fort. Symbolic computation can also normalize a polynomial system to an equivalent system with the same zero set, via Gr¨ obner bases or other elimination methods, in the spirit of Gaussian elimination for linear systems. The resulting system is typically easier to compute with. However, Gr¨ obner-basis computation is expensive (with worst-case doubly–exponential complexity), so determining how aggressively to apply symbolic pre-processing is itself a nontrivial design choice (Benhamou and Granvilliers, 2006). 

# 4 Dataset description 

Our dataset consists of square systems of nonlinear equations with zero-dimensional so-lution sets, which are particularly well suited to subdivision-based solvers. It can be di-vided into two parts: the first part comprises benchmarks drawn from the literature and publicly available datasets, while the second part consists of examples constructed from selected parametric systems arising in practical applications. The first part of the dataset comprises 581 systems, including 451 polynomial and 130 non-polynomial systems. The second part consists of examples generated from 5 families of parametric systems; by in-18 stantiating parameters in each family, we obtain 2,000–30,000 zero-dimensional systems per family. In what follows, we will describe the structure of the dataset, then present statistics for each part, including system size, number of solutions, and other salient features. 

## 4.1 Overview of the dataset 

The Sub Division Dataset (SDD) is organized in the following manner. Inside the root directory SDD, there are two directories: non-parametric and parametric . The non-parametric directory contains the directory non-polynomial and the directory polynomial .Each collected non-parametric system is assigned to a subdirectory with a unique identi-fier and placed into the above two directories according to its type. Inside the subdirectory for each system lie in four files: the file sys.txt stores the information of the input system; the file output.txt stores the computation time, the number of certified and uncertified solutions, and the number of cells (applicable to subdivision solvers) for three solvers; the file solution.txt stores the solutions of the input system and the solvers used for obtaining such solutions; the file info.txt contains the origin information of the system. Inside the parametric directory, each parametric system is assigned to a unique subdi-rectory, inside which there are three files: parameter.txt listing different values of param-eters, parametricSys.txt describing the parameter system, and a folder instances storing the specialized systems with values in parameter.txt. Each specialized system is now a non-parametric one and is organized exactly the same as the ones in the non-parametric 

directory. The solutions of the systems are obtained with two subdivision solvers and a symbolic solver on a desktop. The precise information of the software and hardware is reported in Table 1. For all the solvers, we impose a timelimit of 1000 seconds. IbexSolve is called with the option “ibexsolve -e 1e-6”, which sets the bisection tolerance to 10 −6. RealPaver is called with the option “-number +oo -precision 1e-6”, the reason for using this option will be detailed in 5.1. Table 1: Hardware and software information. Machine Intel i9-11900K@3.50GHz, MEM 128GB, Ubuntu 20.04 IbexSolve Release 2.8.9, with option “-e 1e-6” RealPaver v. 0.4 (c) LINA 2004, with option “-number +oo -precision 1e-6” RootFinding Maple 2025 

## 4.2 Collection of existing examples from the literature 

We report the details and summary statistics for the first part of the dataset, which consists of benchmarks collected from existing literature. The examples were gathered 19 from a variety of sources, including the IbexSolve (Chabert and Jaulin, 2009) and Real-Paver (Granvilliers and Benhamou, 2006) software suites, the COCONUT (Shcherbina et al., 2002), PHCpack (Verschelde, 2011), and ALIAS benchmarks (Merlet, 2007), as well as numerous published references, such as Boulier et al. (2014); Lukˇ san and Vlcek (1999); Stuber et al. (2010); Van Hentenryck et al. (1997); Wang (1996); Vu (2005); Xia and Zhang (2006); Abbott and Brent (1975); Hou and Zhang (2019); Mantzaflaris et al. (2011); Sherbrooke and Patrikalakis (1993); Verschelde et al. (1994); Kuri-Morales (2002); Moore et al. (2009); Gawali et al. (2022), etc. When collecting the examples, an initial screening has been made to discard obviously duplicate examples. This results in a total of 770 examples listed in Table 2. After solving these examples with subdivision methods, by examining the examples with the same number of solutions and carefully comparing the input systems, we further identify nearly 200 duplicate examples, including those with variables renamed. Finally we obtain a dataset containing 451 polynomial systems and 130 non-polynomial systems. We believe that these examples cover the vast major-ity of cases reported in the literature. Their sources span a wide range of application domains, including economics, chemical reaction kinetics, circuit analysis, mechanical design, computer vision, neurophysiology, and more. Table 2: Sources of examples. 

Source Source Name #Ex. Name #Ex. 

IbexSolve benchmark 1 260 PHCpack database 2 85 COCONUT benchmark 3 101 ALIAS benchmark 4 104 galaad 5 9 Boulier et al. (2014) 51 Lukˇ san and Vlcek (1999) 22 RealPaver benchmark 6 18 Stuber et al. (2010) 17 Van Hentenryck et al. (1997) 21 Wang (1996) 16 Vu (2005) 16 Xia and Zhang (2006) 6 others 44 Total 770 ( 581 )

Table 3 summarizes the distribution of the polynomial systems in our benchmark with respect to the number of variables. For each variable range, it reports the number of examples, together with the ranges of numbers of equations and terms, the total and partial degrees, the coefficient magnitudes, as well as the number of instances solved by each solver. Table 4 provides an overview for the 130 non-polynomial systems. It classifies the systems according to the types of non-polynomial functions involved and for each class 

> 1https://ibex-team.github.io/ibex-lib/
> 2https://homepages.math.uic.edu/~jan/demo.html
> 3https://arnold-neumaier.at/glopt/coconut/Benchmark/Library3_new_v1.html
> 4https://www-sop.inria.fr/coprin/logiciels/ALIAS/Benches/benches.html
> 5https://www-sop.inria.fr/galaad/data/BASE/2.multipol/centralpos.html
> 6https://realpavergroup.univ-nantes.io/realpaver/

20 Table 3: Statistics of the polynomial problems.                                                                                                                

> Problem characteristics Solved instances Variables Examples Equations Terms Total Degree Partial Degree Coefficients Range IbexSolve RealPaver Maple 1–3 93 1-3 1-61 1-21 1-21 [−1.38 ×10 19 ,1.38 ×10 19 ]92 108 93 4–6 104 4-6 2-32 2-11 1-6 [−1.92 ×10 7,1.59 ×10 14 ]86 75 93 7–10 100 7-10 2-64 1-13 1-7 [−1.21 ×10 15 ,8.26 ×10 14 ]87 64 70 11–25 76 11-25 2-96 2-30 1-30 [−200 ,220] 55 32 18 26–50 41 26-44 1-121 2-30 1-3 [−400 ,293 .0] 24 10 451–100 13 51-100 1-83 2-3 2-3 [−80 .0,12 .8] 960101–500 13 101-482 1-403 3-4 2-3 [−400 .0,12 .8] 640501–1000 10 501-1000 3-901 2-3 2-3 [−900 .0,11 .8] 010
> >1000 11001 5-1001 33[−1000 .0,11 .8] 000

reports the number of examples together with the ranges of numbers of variables and terms. Table 4: Information on non-polynomial systems. 

Type # Ex. No. of variables No. of terms Rational functions 5 1-9 2-7 Radicals (algebraic functions) 3 1 3-7 Exponential functions 38 1-1000 2-6 Logarithmic functions 1 1 2Trigonometric functions 49 1-1001 2-1001 Absolute value function 1 2 2Hyperbolic function 3 1-2 3-4 Mixed forms of the above 30 1-100 2-12 

Table 5 reports the distribution of the number of certified solutions for polynomial and non-polynomial systems. A system is included in this table only if at least one of IbexSolve or Maple returns an exact root count, so that no suspect regions remain. Among the 451 polynomial and 130 non-polynomial systems in our benchmark, the solvers succeed in determining the exact number of solutions for 358 and 91 systems, respectively. For the remaining instances, none of the solvers manages to certify the root count within 1000 seconds, either because they all hit the time limit, crash or error out, or because their outputs still contain suspect regions that may hide a root. 

## 4.3 Parametric Systems 

In this section, we present five class of parametric systems in the dataset. Table 6 sum-marizes their key information, including the system type and the numbers of variables and parameters. For each class, we instantiate the parameters to generate a collection of zero-dimensional square systems. Table 6 reports, for each class, the number of in-stances that IbexSolve fails to solve within the 1000-second time limit. For the remaining instances, Table 6 further reports the average solving time. 21 Table 5: Distribution of the number of solutions. 

# Zeros # Poly # Non-poly # Zeros # Poly # Non-poly 0 8 11 11–20 35 21 80 33 21–50 28 52 71 24 51–100 4 23 25 5 101–200 8 14 26 3 201–1000 3 05 8 0 > 1000 1 06–10 61 5

Table 6: Summary of parametric systems.                                                       

> Application System Type Number of Variables (Equations) Number of Parameters Number of Instances Average Timing (s) Number of Timeout Instances Multi-joint Robot Arm Planar-Trigonometric Non-polynomial 30–42 8–10 5000 9.33 65 Planar-Polynomial Polynomial 20–28 8–10 5000 2.84 99 Spatial-Trigonometric Non-polynomial 9–15 3–7 3000 9.55 303 Spatial-Polynomial Non-polynomial 15–25 3–7 3000 15.6 389 Stewart Platform Stewart Polynomial 929 10000 1.04 0Kuramoto Model Kuramoto Polynomial 10 510000 0.351 0Flash Unit Flash unit Non-polynomial 28 410000 7.80 0Orbit Determination Orbit Polynomial 14 30 2000 358 277

4.3.1 Multi-joint Robot Arm 

> Base
> End

Figure 3: Multi-joint robot arm. Multi-joint robot arms are widely used in robotics for tasks such as manipulation, assembly, and precise positioning. A fundamental problem arising in their analysis is the localization of planar or spatial multi-joint robot arms: given the coordinates of the end point (end effector), one seeks to determine the feasible configurations of the intermediate joints. This localization naturally leads to a system of nonlinear equations derived from the kinematic constraints of the robot arm. We focus on the localization problem of a simple serial multi-joint robot arm. Assume the robot consists of m serially connected links L1, . . . , L m extending from the base to the end effector, with respective lengths l1, . . . , l m. The base is fixed at the origin. First, we consider the planar case of the localization problem. Given the coordinates 22 of the end point of the last link ( xm, y m), the goal is to determine the feasible positions and orientations of all intermediate joints. In this setup, the resulting system of kinematic equations has a total of 3 m − 2 unknowns: ( xi, y i) for i = 1 , . . . , m − 1, representing the end point coordinates of the i-th link, and θi for i = 1 , . . . , m , representing the orientation of the i-th link measured counterclockwise from the positive x-axis. This system consists of 2 m equations: 

P1 =

(

xj − Pji=1 ℓi cos( θi) = 0,yj − Pji=1 ℓi sin( θi) = 0, j = 1 , . . . , m. 

With the coordinates ( xm, y m) fixed, this system contains 3 m − 2 variables and 2 m equa-tions, so for m ≥ 3 the solution set is generally positive-dimensional. To obtain a zero-dimensional system, we need to fix m − 2 variables. Randomly assigning values to these variables would most likely lead to an inconsistent system with no solution. Therefore, the system needs to be constructed with care. We now describe in detail how the systems are generated. First, the number of links m is fixed, and the lengths of the links are randomly chosen as integers from 1 to 10. Next, we construct a consistent system by randomly assigning θi ∈ [−π, π ] for i = 1 , . . . , m and computing the values of the coordinates ( xi, y i) for i = 1 , . . . , m . Now we have a known consistent system, we construct a zero-dimensional square system by fixing the end point coordinates ( xm, y m)of the last link and m − 2 coordinates in {xi, y i}i=1 ,...,m −1 as constants, and treating the remaining variables as unknowns. The unknowns consist of {θi}i=1 ,...,m and m variables in {xi, y i}i=1 ,...,m −1. There are 2 m unknowns and 2 m equations. The intervals of interest for the variables are set as xj , y j ∈ [− Pji=1 ℓi, Pji=1 ℓi] and θj ∈ [−π, π ] for j = 1 , . . . , m .During the process of fixing m − 2 coordinates in {xi, y i}i=1 ,...,m −1, care must be taken in choosing which variables to fix so that the resulting system has a zero-dimensional but non-empty solution set. The basic idea is to ensure that any subsystem formed by a con-secutive subset of links is neither overdetermined nor underdetermined. The implemen-tation is as follows: 1) Randomly select m − 2 coordinates from the set {xi, y i}i=1 ,...,m −1.2) Arrange all selected coordinates into an ordered list L by sorting them in the order 

x1 < y 1 < x 2 < y 2 < · · · < x m−1 < y m−1. 3) For each index j such that both xj and yj

appears in L, check whether the number of elements preceding xj in L is equal to j − 2. If this condition holds, then the subsystem formed by the links from 1 to j is a square system; otherwise, the current random selection is rejected. We repeat this random selec-tion–and–checking procedure until the chosen coordinates satisfy the above conditions. We use Python scripts to generate 5000 instances in total, with m ranging from 10 to 14, and 1000 instances generated for each value of m. The range of m is chosen to ensure that the solving time for the systems is neither excessively long nor trivially short. Beyond expressing the problem as the nonlinear system described above, we also 23 formulate the same problem in polynomial systems, for comparison. It suffices to replace sin( θi) and cos( θi) in P1 with auxiliary variables si and ci, respectively, and to add the constraints c2 

> i

+ s2 

> i

= 1 for i = 1 , . . . , m . The procedure for generating random instances is the same as described above: first construct a consistent system, and then fix ( xm, y m)and m − 2 of the coordinates in {xi, y i}i=1 ,...,m −1 as constants. The only difference is that the unknown {θi}i=1 ,...,m are replaced by {si, c i}i=1 ,...,m , together with the additional constraints {c2 

> i

+ s2 

> i

= 1 }i=1 ,...,m . This yields a polynomial system with 3 m equations and 3m variables. We generated 5000 instances, representing the same problems as described above, except that they are expressed as polynomial systems. When solving the systems, the intervals of interest for ci and si are set to [ −1, 1]. Each trigonometric instance in our benchmark has a matching polynomial counter-part: the two formulations encode the same underlying problem, differing only in rep-resentation. We solve both versions with IbexSolve using “ibexsolve -e1e-6”, which sets the bisection tolerance to 10 −6. With this configuration, we run IbexSolve on the two formulations independently and record the outcomes. Across the 5,000 instances, IbexSolve reports 196 distinct root counts, ranging from 2 to 1,920. Table 7 summarizes the distribution of root counts for different numbers m

of links. We aggregate results from both the trigonometric and polynomial formulations: an instance is included as long as IbexSolve returns an exact root count for at least one formulation. Instances are excluded if, for both formulations, IbexSolve either fails to terminate within the 1,000 seconds time limit or returns suspect regions. For this class of instances, all excluded cases are due to timeouts in both formulations. In the table, the column “Exact” reports the number of instances for which an exact root count is available, the column “Min” (resp. “Max”) reports the minimum (resp. maximum) number of roots, and the column “C” reports the number of distinct root counts observed. The remaining columns report, for each root-count range, how many instances fall into that interval. Table 7: Distribution of exact root counts in the planar case.                                                                    

> mExact Min Max C1–10 11–50 51–100 101–200 201–500 501–1000 >1000 10 999 2272 73 150 583 186 69 11 0011 998 2556 87 102 498 247 115 34 2012 997 2896 108 44 440 254 175 71 13 013 993 41664 107 34 307 271 213 137 28 314 998 41920 116 21 251 242 233 186 57 8

From Table 7, we observe that IbexSolve can reliably isolate the right number of real roots for most of the instances. As m increases, the number of distinct feasible configurations for the multi-joint robot arm substantially increases. In addition to the planar multi-joint robot arm, we also consider the localization problem for spatial multi-joint robot arms. The setup is the same as above, except that 24 the links move in three-dimensional space rather than in a plane. The problem can be formulated as 

P ′ 

> 1

=



xj − Pji=1 ℓicos (θi)cos (ϕi) = 0, f or j = 1 , . . . , m yj − Pji=1 ℓicos (θi)sin (ϕi) = 0, f or j = 1 , . . . , m zj − Pji=1 ℓisin (θi) = 0, f or j = 1 , . . . , m 

where ( xi, y i, z i) for i = 1 , . . . , m denotes the coordinates of the end point of link i. In practice, ( xm, y m, z m) is usually fixed. Then this system has 5 m − 3 variables and 3 m

equations, so for m ≥ 2, 2 m−3 of the variables must be fixed to obtain a zero-dimensional system. To avoid generating a system that is likely to be inconsistent, we first construct a known system by randomly assigning values to the variables θi and ϕi for i = 1 , . . . , m .We then fix 2 m − 3 coordinates among ( xi, y i, z i) for i = 1 , . . . , m − 1, and fix the end coordinates ( xend , y end , z end ). This results in a system of 3 m variables and 3 m equations. We use python script to generate 3000 instances in total, with m ranging from 3 to 5, and 1000 instances generated for each value of m. The procedure for generating instances and the criteria for selecting m follow essentially the same line as outlined above. Just as for the planar systems, we also produce polynomial formulations for the spatial systems. Specifically, we replace sin (θi), cos (θi), sin (ϕ1) and cos (ϕi) with four variables 

st i, ct i, sp i, cp i respectively, and add the constraints st 2 

> i

+ ct 2 

> i

= 1 , sp 2 

> i

+ cp 2 

> i

= 1 for 

i = 1 , . . . , m . We generated 3000 polynomial systems, each encoding the same underlying problem as its trigonometric counterpart. As in the planar case, we solve both the trigonometric and polynomial formulations with IbexSolve and record the outcomes. Table 8 summarizes the distribution of root counts for these systems. We aggregate the results across the two formulations in the same way as for the planar systems. In the table, the column “Exact” reports the number of instances for which an exact root count is available. For the instances where IbexSolve fails to produce an exact root count in both formulations, almost all cases correspond to timeouts in both formulations. The only exception is a single instance for m = 5: one formulation times out, while the other terminates but produces non-certified output (i.e., the output includes unknown boxes). The columns on the right report, for each root count, the number of instances attaining that value. For this set of instances, the root counts takes fewer distinct values, since the numbers of links m are smaller compared to the planar case. Table 8: Distribution of exact root counts in the spatial case.                                                 

> mExact 16 32 64 96 128 192 256 320 384 448 512 31000 586 414 0000000004943 0333 426 48 136 0000005844 00148 0370 51 205 13 20 730

25 We compare the performance of IbexSolve on the trigonometric and polynomial for-mulations for both the planar and spatial cases. Among the instances where IbexSolve successfully returns a result, we observe that the polynomial formulation has a shorter average solving time in the planar case, whereas the trigonometric formulation is faster on average in the spatial case. However, in both settings, the polynomial formulation ex-hibits a higher incidence of timeouts and non-certified outcomes (i.e., runs that terminate with unknown boxes). The details are presented in Table 9. Table 9: IbexSolve outcomes for robot systems. Each entry reports (top to bottom): 

TO = #(timeout), NC = #(non-certified), and Avg = average time (s) computed over instances not timeout.                                                   

> Planar case Spatial case m=10 m=11 m=12 m=13 m=14 m=3 m=4 m=5 Trig. TO 812 12 22 11 084 219
> NC 10010110
> Avg 3.598 5.357 7.942 9.941 19.834 1.230 10.862 18.656
> Poly. TO 18 13 18 24 26 23 129 237
> NC 12001234
> Avg 0.630 2.024 2.657 3.903 5.013 6.673 19.626 22.517

Since the trigonometric and polynomial instances encode the same underlying prob-lem, we cross-check the solver outputs by comparing the numbers of certified solution boxes produced for the two formulations. For all instances reported in the tables above, the results of the two formulations are consistent. However, we found a few planar instances (not included in the table) for which the two formulations yield inconsistent results. For example, for one instance the trigono-metric formulation produces 64 certified solution boxes and reports no suspect regions, whereas the corresponding polynomial formulation produces neither certified solutions nor suspect boxes. Moreover, the polynomial run terminates after pruning the initial domain at the very beginning of the search, without any bisection. Interestingly, if we manually bisect the initial domain into two sub-boxes and solve the two subproblems separately, each subproblem returns certified solutions, and the combined solution count becomes consistent with that of the trigonometric formulation. This behavior suggests an instability in the solver’s pruning on the polynomial formulation: simply splitting the initial box into two sub-boxes can change the outcome of the solver, even though the underlying set of real solutions is unchanged. However, we found that disabling the linear-relaxation component makes IbexSolve produce stable results, and the certified so-lution counts on these problematic instances become consistent with those obtained from the trigonometric formulation. 26 4.3.2 Stewart platform 

The Stewart platform, as show in Figure 4 is a parallel robotic mechanism consisting of a movable platform, which is a rigid body, connected to a fixed base by six adjustable-length rods, widely used in flight simulators, precision machining, and motion control. Given the lengths of the connecting rods, the problem is to determine all possible configu-

Figure 4: A Stewart platform. rations (postures) of the movable platform. This is a well-known and important problem in robotics, as it is critical for the design, control, and motion planning of parallel manip-ulators. Dietmaier (1998) showed that this problem can have (up to) 40 solutions, and it has been used as a challenging benchmark in the literature (Baharev et al., 2017). This classic problem can be formulated in various ways. Here, we adopt the for-mulation of Dietmaier (1998), as it provides a relatively clear framework and allows for convenient parameter specification. Figure 4 illustrates the setup of the Stewart platform. An orthogonal coordinate frame is fixed to the base with origin at A1 and axes E1, E 2, E 3, while another frame is attached to the platform (rigid body) with origin at B1 and axes e1, e 2, e 3. Here 

E1, E 2, E 3 and e1, e 2, e 3 are vectors. These symbols are typically written in boldface in the literature, but we keep the plain (non-bold) notation here for consistency with the preceding sections. The directions of E1 and e1 are chosen so that points A2 and B2 lie along these axes, respectively, and E2 and e2 are oriented such that points A3 and B3 lie in the planes defined by ( E1, E 2) and ( e1, e 2), respectively. A configuration is feasible if each corresponding pair of points Aj and Bj is separated by a distance Lj , the length of the connecting rod. For simplicity, we assume L1 = 1. A unit vector n pointing from A1

to B1 is indicated in the figure. Let aij (bij , respectively) denote the coordinates of Ai

(Bi, respectively) in the base (platform, respectively) frame. The constraints imposed by the connecting rods can be formulated as: 27 

∥n + b21 e1 − a21 E1∥2 = L22,

∥n + ( b31 e1 + b32 e2) − (a31 E1 + a32 E2)∥2 = L23,

∥n + ( b41 e1 + b42 e2 + b43 e3) − (a41 E1 + a42 E2 + a43 E3)∥2 = L24,

∥n + ( b51 e1 + b52 e2 + b53 e3) − (a51 E1 + a52 E2 + a53 E3)∥2 = L25,

∥n + ( b61 e1 + b62 e2 + b63 e3) − (a61 E1 + a62 E2 + a63 E3)∥2 = L26.

(4) One may set E1 = (1 , 0, 0) , E 2 = (0 , 1, 0) , E 3 = (0 , 0, 1), and then express n, e1, and e2

as linear combinations of the base frame vectors E1, E 2, E 3, with coordinates nj = n · Ej

and eij = ei · Ej . The vector e3 is eliminated by substituting e3 = e1 × e2. In this formulation we obtain the following additional constraints: 



n21 + n22 + n23 = 1 ,e211 + e212 + e213 = 1 ,e221 + e222 + e223 = 1 ,e11 e21 + e12 e22 + e13 e23 = 0 .

(5) Combing (4) and (5), we have a polynomial system of 9 equations. We treat (L2, L 3, L 4, L 5, L 6, a 21 , b 21 , a 31 , a 32 , b 31 , b 32 , a 41 , a 42 , a 43 , b 41 , b 42 , b 43 ,a51 , a 52 , a 53 , b 51 , b 52 , b 53 , a 61 , a 62 , a 63 , b 61 , b 62 , b 63 )as geometric parameters and (n1, n 2, n 3, e 11 , e 12 , e 13 , e 21 , e 22 , e 23 )as variables. This yields a system of 9 equations in 9 unknowns. When generating random instances, we assign parameter values as follows. Here, L1

is already fixed as 1 by assumption. For i = 2 , . . . , 6, the rod lengths Li are uniformly sampled from [0 .5, 2]. The coordinates a21 and b21 are uniformly sampled from [0 , 2], and all remaining coordinates are uniformly sampled from [0 , 1.5]. These bounds were chosen to cover a special parameter configuration Dietmaier (1998) in which the system admits 40 real solutions, although this specific configuration was not observed in any of our 10 ,000 randomly generated instances. IbexSolve succeeds to solve all the 10 ,000 generated instances, as well as the instance with 40 real solutions reported in Dietmaier (1998), within 1 ,000 seconds, producing certified results for each instance. Table 10 summarizes the distribution of root counts across these 10 ,001 instances. 28 Table 10: Distribution of exact root counts.                   

> Root count 0246810 12 14 40 Instances 7521 1365 658 303 126 23 311

4.3.3 Kuramoto model 

The Kuramoto model is a classic model which describes a system of coupled oscillators with different natural frequencies, capturing how synchronization emerges from their interactions. The general Kuramoto model is given by: 

dθ i

dt = ωi − 1

N

> N

X

> j=1

Ki,j sin( θi − θj ), for i = 1 , . . . , N, (6) where N is the number of oscillators, Ki,j is the coupling strength between the i-th and 

j-th oscillators. Because the system is invariant under a global phase shift, it is common to fix a reference angle, e.g., set θN = 0, and then drop the corresponding equation  

> dθ N
> dt

= 0. Among several equivalent formulations of the equilibrium equations (Chen et al., 2019), we adopt a polynomial formulation for its simplicity. Specifically, we set 

Ki,j = 1, corresponding to assuming uniform coupling, which is a common simplification. Then for i = 1 , . . . , N − 1, 



ωi − 1

N

> N

X

> j=1

(sicj − sj ci) = 0 ,c2 

> i

+ s2 

> i

− 1 = 0 ,

with cN = 1 , s N = 0. This is a polynomial system with 2( N − 1) equations and 2( N − 1) unknowns. It can be solved by various approaches (Coss et al., 2018); in this work, we focus on the subdivision method. When generating the examples, we need to fix the parameters ωi for i = 1 , . . . , N − 1. To reflect practical scenarios, we sample each ωi from a zero-mean Gaussian distribution with standard deviation 0 .3, i.e., ωi ∼ N (0 , 0.32). Under this setting, we generated 5 ,000 random instances with N = 6. Each instance is a square polynomial system with 10 equations in 10 variables. The intervals of interest for 

ci and si are set to [ −1, 1]. IbexSolve successfully solves all 10,000 systems and returns certified results for each of them. Table 11 reports the distribution of the root counts. Table 11: Distribution of exact root counts.                       

> Root count 10 12 16 18 20 22 24 26 289 30 32 Instances 46 415 310 809 65 143 464 4180 4261

Since the instances are relatively small and fall within the capability of symbolic methods, we use Maple’s RootFinding package to cross-check the number of real roots. 29 RootFinding returns results that are consistent across the instances reported in Table 11. However, we identified four additional instances (not listed in Table 11) for which Ibex-Solve reports one fewer certified solution than RootFinding, while no suspect/unknown region is reported. This reveals an inconsistency between the two solvers: the certified enclosures returned by IbexSolve appear incomplete in these cases. To investigate this discrepancy, we conducted a set of controlled experiments by mod-ifying IbexSolve’s default contractor. In particular, when we disable the linear relaxation component, IbexSolve recovers the missing solution and its certified solution count be-comes consistent with Maple for all four instances. A plausible explanation is that the linear relaxation step relies on floating-point LP computations. While such relaxations can strengthen pruning in practice, the LP com-ponent relies on floating-point solvers, and floating-point roundoff can, in rare cases, lead to numerically fragile pruning. Similar concerns about the interaction between floating-point linear programming and rigorous interval reasoning have been pointed out in the literature (see, e.g., Trombettoni et al. (2011)). The above four instances therefore serve as concrete evidence that, in rare cases, enabling LP-based linear relaxation may lead to overly aggressive pruning and the loss of a certified solution enclosure. 

4.3.4 Flash unit 

A flash unit is a separation device, used for generating vapor–liquid equilibrium streams by partially vaporizing a liquid mixture, and is commonly found in chemical and petro-chemical industries. We consider the flash unit model from Bublitz (2023), which de-scribes the partial vaporization of an ethanol–water mixture. In this model, the liquid and vapor phases are assumed to be perfectly mixed and in thermodynamic equilibrium, and the unit temperature is maintained constant by heat supply. The feed conditions, pressure drop, and operating temperature are specified, while the unknowns are the phase compositions, flow rates, and heat duty. The constraints in this problem capture multiple balances, including phase equilibrium, material and energy conservation, thermodynamic property relations, and geometric conditions of the flash unit. This problem involves 28 equations; for further details, please refer to Bublitz (2023). The full steady-state model consists of phase equilibrium (7), activity-coefficient relations (8), material and energy balances (9), thermodynamic volume relations (10), and geometric constraints (11). 



Kixi − yi = 0 ( i = 1 , 2) , y 1 + y2 = 1 , x 1 + x2 = 1 , x F 

> 1

+ xF 

> 2

= 1 

hF −  xF 

> 1

hF 

> 1

+ xF 

> 2

hF 

> 2

+ hEF  = 0 ,hL −  x1hL 

> 1

+ x2hL 

> 2

+ hEL  = 0 ,hV −  y1hV 

> 1

+ y2hV 

> 2

+ hEV  = 0 ,

∆p − (pF − p) = 0 , K i − γi psat  

> i

/p = 0 (i = 1 , 2) .

(7) 30 

γi −

exp 

h

(1 − xi)

 αi 

> xi+αi(1 −xi)

− αj 

> αjxi+(1 −xi)

i 

xi + αi(1 − xi) = 0 ( i = 1 , 2; j = 3 − i),αi − (v1 + v2) − vi

vi

exp 



−λi

T



= 0 ( i = 1 , 2) .

(8) 

F F hF − F V hV − F LhL + Q = 0 , F F xFi − F V yi − F Lxi = 0 ( i = 1 , 2) . (9) 



U − nL



hL − p  10 5 (x1v1 + x2v2 + vEL )

− nV



hV − R (T z V )



= 0 ,V − (V L + V V ) = 0 ,ni −  xi nL + yi nV  = 0 , i = 1 , 2,V L −  (v1x1 + v2x2 + vEL ) nL = 0 ,V V − nV R (T z V )

p · 10 5 = 0 .

(10) 

HL − 4V L

πD 2 = 0 , A − πD 2

4 = 0 , V − AH = 0 , r − DH = 0 . (11) The variables in this system are K1, K 2, x 1, x 2, x F 

> 2

, y 1, y 2, γ 1, γ 2, α 1, α 2, p, h F , h L, h V , F L,F V , Q, n 1, n 2, n L, n V , U, V L, V V , V, A, r. Here Ki are vapor–liquid equilibrium ratios, xi

and yi are the liquid- and vapor-phase mole fractions of component i, and xF 

> 2

is the feed composition of component 2. The quantities γi and αi are, respectively, the activity coefficients and their temperature-dependent parameters. The scalar p is the operating pressure. The symbols hF , h L, h V denote the specific enthalpies of the feed, liquid phase, and vapor phase; F L and F V are the liquid and vapor outlet flow rates; and Q is the heat duty. The variables ni are the holdup amounts of component i in the vessel, while 

nL and nV are the total liquid and vapor holdups. The quantity U is the total internal energy. The variables V L, V V , and V are the liquid, vapor, and total volumes. Finally, 

A is the vessel cross-sectional area and r is the diameter-to-height ratio. The rest of the symbols in the system are treated as parameters. To generate in-stance, we fix the following parameters relating to the operating conditions, thermophys-ical constants, or geometric data with the data in Bublitz (2023): the flash temperature 

T = 353 .15 K and feed temperature T F = 353 .15 K; the enthalpy offset terms hEF , hEL ,

hEV (taken as 0 in the present setting); the vessel diameter D = 0 .16, characteristic height 

H = 0 .5, and reference liquid height HL = 0 .25; the excess liquid volume contribution 

vEL = 0; and the vapor compressibility factor zV = 1 .0. Thermodynamic correlations are encoded by per-component parameters for enthalpy and saturation pressure. For each component i ∈ { 1, 2}, the liquid-, vapor-, and feed-phase enthalpies hLi , hVi , hFi

are evaluated from expressions with coefficients given numerically in the implementation 31 (see p.187 in Bublitz (2023) for details), as well as the saturation pressures psat  

> i

. The pa-rameters ( λ1, λ 2) = (95 .68 , 506 .7) are empirical constants and the liquid molar volumes (v1, v 2) = (5 .869 × 10 −5, 1.807 × 10 −5), all in consistent units. Finally, the gas constant is R = 8 .314, which enters the vapor holdup and volume relations. Apart from the fixed parameters, several operating inputs are treated as user-specified: the pressure drop ∆ p, the feed pressure pF , the feed composition xF 

> 1

of component 1, and the feed flow rate F F . To generate benchmark instances, we systematically vary these user-specified parameters over predefined ranges with fixed step sizes. By combining these variations on a grid, we obtain a total of 10 ,000 problem instances. The choice of parameter ranges is motivated by the values reported in Bublitz (2023), and extended to cover practically relevant operating conditions. The region of interest for each variable is set to [ −10 9, 10 9] as in Bublitz (2023). IbexSolve successfully produced outputs for all 10,000 instances. However, none of these outputs are fully certified: every instance contains at least one unknown box. In addition to the unknown boxes, 3436 of the 10000 instances also contain certified solu-tion boxes, 1956 instances produce one solution box, 1290 produce two and 190 produce three. The prevalence of unknown boxes across all instances appears to stem mainly from two factors. First, the initial search domains are extremely wide. Second, the systems are high-dimensional and strongly nonlinear, combining multivariate polynomials with exponential terms and rational expressions. These features make rigorous interval-based certification much more difficult, especially when wide domains allow denominators to ap-proach zero. Empirically, once the initial domains are tightened to physically meaningful ranges, the frequency of unknown boxes decreases substantially. 

4.3.5 Initial Orbit determination 

Initial Orbit Determination (IOD) estimates a body’s Keplerian orbit from minimal ob-servations—often angles-only (lines of sight), with no prior information. Geometrically, this reduces to finding a conic with a specified focus that meets the observed lines of sight. Here we consider the following problem: find a conic in R3 with one focus at the origin that is incident to five given, generically positioned lines. This admits a formulation as a square system of nonlinear equations. As in other practical settings, the problem has multiple equivalent algebraic reformulations (Duff et al., 2022; Huang et al., 2025); here we adopt the formulation of Huang et al. (2025). Here we briefly describe the known data, variables and the constraints. The positions of the five observers are given in the known 3 × 5 matrix P , and their lines of sight (unit direction vectors) are given in the known 3 × 5 matrix U . We take w = ( w1, w 2, w 3) ∈ R3

as the unit normal to the orbital plane and, by symmetry, assume w1 ≥ 0. This introduces three variables w1, w 2, w 3 with the region of interest w1 ∈ [0 , 1] , w 2, w 3 ∈ [−1, 1], and a 32 Figure 5: Geometric setup: the points Pi mark observer positions, and the lines depict the observed lines of sight. constraint ∥w∥2 = 1. To complete a local orthonormal frame on the orbital plane, we need to add two unit vectors v, v ′ ∈ R3. Following Huang et al. (2025), let e1 = (1 , 0, 0), set v′ = λ′(w × e1), with λ′ = 1 

> ∥w×e1∥

, and define v = v′ × w. Here λ′ is introduced as a variable, with region of interest [1 , ∞); the corresponding constraint is λ′ = 1 

> ∥w×e1∥

.We introduce scalar variables ρi for the intersections of each line of sight with the orbital plane. Let pi and ui be the i-th columns of P and U , respectively, and define 

ri = pi + ρiui, i = 1 , . . . , 5subject to the coplanarity conditions ri · w = 0 for i = 1 , . . . , 5 since vectors in the orbital plane are orthogonal to the normal w. This introduces five variables {ρi}5 

> i=1

and five linear constraints. In the local orthonormal frame, the conic (after normalization) takes the form ax 2 +

bxy + cy 2 + dx + ey + 1 = 0, with five variables a, b, c, d, e . Plugging the intersection points 

ri (expressed in this frame) into the conic equation yields five constraints, one for each 

i = 1 , . . . , 5. The requirement that the focus lie at the origin imposes two additional constraints (Sem-ple and Kneebone, 1998): 

e2 − d2 + 4 a − 4c = 0 , de − 2b = 0 .

Together, these equations yield a square polynomial system in 14 variables as follows: 



∥w∥2 = 1 ,λ′2 · ∥ w × e1∥2 = 1 ,w · (pi + ρiui) = 0 , i = 1 , . . . , 5,a x 2 

> i

+ b x iyi + c y 2 

> i

+ d x i + e y i + 1 = 0 , i = 1 , . . . , 5,e2 − d2 + 4 a − 4c = 0 ,de − 2b = 0 ,

(12) where w = ( w1, w 2, w 3), e1 = (1 , 0, 0), pi and ui are respectively the i-th columns of 33 matrices P and U , the coordinates xi = ( pi+ρiui)·v, yi = ( pi+ρiui)·v′ with v′ = λ′(w×e1), and v = v′ × w. In this system, the matrix P and U are given data, and the unknowns are w1, w 2, w 3, λ ′, ρ i(i = 1 , . . . , 5) , a, b, c, d, e .To generate instances, we construct the position matrix P ∈ R3×5 by drawing pi ∈ R3

independently and identically distributed from the uniform box [ −10 , 10] 3 and stacking them as the columns of P . The direction matrix U ∈ R3×5 is formed by sampling vector 

zi ∈ R3 independently from standard normal distribution and normalizing ui = zi/∥zi∥,and stacking the unit vectors ui as the columns of U . Using this procedure, we generated 2,000 instances. These instances are fairly challenging: when solved with IbexSolve, most of them time out. To accelerate the search, we augment the original square system with an additional inequality for each instance, b2 − 4ac < 0,which restricts the trajectory to be elliptical. Under this setting, IbexSolve solved 1 ,723 instances with certified results, while the rest 277 instances timed out. Table 12 reports the distribution of the root counts over the 1,723 instances. Table 12: Distribution of root counts.                           

> Root count 012345678910 11 13 Instances 118 182 315 275 294 222 145 87 45 26 11 21

# 5 Application of the dataset 

## 5.1 As a benchmark dataset 

To compare the performance of different solvers and to collect solution information for the benchmarks, we ran these examples on IbexSolve, RealPaver, and Maple. We will reports and compare the results across these solvers. We first consider the two subdivision-based solvers, IbexSolve and RealPaver. The solvers, although sharing a common subdivision framework, differs in various aspects, such as the contraction strategy, bisection strategy, node selection strategy and other implementation details, which leads to differences in efficiency and, in some cases, in the outcomes. IbexSolve uses depth-first search by default. Its default contractor is a compo-sition of several techniques, including hull consistency technique, the Hansen–Sengupta operator, the ACID contractor, and linear-relaxation–based contractors. The default bi-section strategy is the Relative Smear Sum (RSS) strategy. For zero-dimensional square systems, IbexSolve subdivides the entire region of interest and outputs solution boxes, which are verified to contain a unique solution, and suspect boxes, which can neither be discarded nor certified for uniqueness. RealPaver employs a composite contractor 34 that integrates hull and box consistency techniques, the Hansen–Sengupta operator, and 3B-consistency methods. By default, RealPaver performs depth-first search and uses a bisection policy that combines round-robin with a max-narrow rule (selecting the vari-able whose Jacobian column has the largest absolute sum; if the Jacobian is unavailable, it falls back to round-robin). However, in our experiments, this strategy caused 18 in-stances to produce outputs exceeding 1 GB when no cap on the number of boxes was set, indicating an output blow-up under this setting. We therefore switched to paving mode, which adopts breadth-first search with a largest-first bisection policy. Apart from these outliers, the overall performance of paving mode and the default mode is comparable. On balance, we report results using paving mode. Unless otherwise noted, all RealPaver results below are for paving mode. RealPaver outputs all boxes that meet the prescribed precision and cannot be pruned by its contractors; unlike IbexSolve, in most cases, it does not certify and label boxes as containing a unique solution, even though verification-style operators (e.g., Hansen–Sengupta) may be used internally as contractors. For fairness, we fix the bisection precision to the same value for both solvers, setting it to 10 −6, and impose a timeout of 1000 seconds. Among the 581 instances, 1 runs failed in RealPaver due to unrecognized syntax, and 2 runs failed in IbexSolve with a segmentation fault (possibly a bug). Of the remaining instances, 459 were solved by IbexSolve within 1000 seconds; among these, 393 produced only certified boxes (i.e., no suspect regions). RealPaver solved 385 instances within the same time limit. Table 13: Numbers of solved examples in different timing intervals. Timing (s) ≤ 1 1-10 10-100 100-1000 Timeout ( >1000) IbexSolve 288 83 47 41 120 RealPaver 268 49 37 31 195 Table 13 counts the number of solved examples in different timing intervals. Figure 6 further reports the cumulative runtime comparison between IbexSolve and RealPaver, where instances that timed out are excluded. From both Table 13 and Figure 6, we observe that, statistically, IbexSolve is substantially faster than RealPaver. Across the 581 instances, IbexSolve exclusively solved 102/581 (17.6%) and RealPaver exclusively solved 28/581 (4.8%)—i.e., solved by one solver while the other timed out or errored. Both solved 357/581 (61.4%); among these, excluding the 241 easy cases solved by both within 1 second, IbexSolve was faster in 85 cases (74.6%) and RealPaver in 29 (25.4%). In addition to the subdivision-based solvers, we also ran the instances in Maple using 

RootFinding[Isolate] , which is based on symbolic computation. Because symbolic methods are applicable only to polynomial systems, we restricted the Maple experiments to the polynomial subset of our benchmark. The output of RootFinding[Isolate] is 35 0 2500 5000 7500 10000 12500 15000 17500 20000 

> Cumulative Time (s)
> 0
> 100
> 200
> 300
> 400
> Number of Examples Solved
> 459
> 385
> IbexSolve
> RealPaver

Figure 6: Cumulative runtime comparison: IbexSolve and RealPaver. a list of isolating intervals/boxes for the real solutions of the input polynomial system. The routine is designed to compute all real solutions and does not support restricting the search to a user-specified region of interest. Among 451 polynomial instances, Maple produced solutions for 278; the remainder either timed out, were terminated due to a kernel crash, or were inapplicable because the system defines a positive-dimensional complex variety. Table 14: Distribution of timing of RootFinding in Maple(in seconds). Timing ≤ 1 1-10 10-100 100-1000 Timeout ( >1000) Error Count 201 40 19 18 156 17 Figure 8 reports the cumulative runtime comparison between IbexSolve, RealPaver and Maple, restricted to the polynomial subset. Overall, in our experiments, IbexSolve outperforms both RealPaver and Maple’s RootFinding[Isolate] , and the latter two are comparable. On the other hand, as seen in the IbexSolve–RealPaver comparison, no single solver is uniformly faster than another across instances. We therefore compare Maple’s RootFinding[Isolate] against IbexSolve and RealPaver separately. Across the 451 instances, IbexSolve exclusively solved 104/451 (23.1%) and Maple exclusively solved 23/451 (5.1%), i.e., solved by one solver while the other timed out or errored; among the 104 instances solved only by IbexSolve, 80 were exact and 24 were non-exact. Both solved 255/451 (56.5%), among which IbexSolve was exact in 222 cases and non-exact in 33 cases. Excluding the 146 easy cases both solved within 1 second (119 exact and 27 non-exact for IbexSolve), IbexSolve was faster in 51 cases (46.8%; all exact) and Maple in 58 (53.2%; 52 exact and 6 non-exact for IbexSolve). 36 102 

28 

357 

94 

> IbexSolve only (102, 17.6%) RealPaver only (28, 4.8%) Both solved (357, 61.4%) Both failed (94, 16.2%)

(a) Coverage on 581 instances 

85 

29 

241  

> IbexSolve faster (85, 23.9%) RealPaver faster (29, 8.2%) Easy cases (both ≤1s) (241, 67.9%)

(b) Breakdown among both-solved cases (355) 

Figure 7: IbexSolve vs. RealPaver: comparison of timing. 0 2000 4000 6000 8000 10000 12000 14000 16000 

> Cumulative Time (s)
> 0
> 50
> 100
> 150
> 200
> 250
> 300
> 350
> Number of Examples Solved
> 359
> 300
> 278
> IbexSolve
> RealPaver
> Maple

Figure 8: Cumulative runtime comparison: IbexSolve , RealPaver and Maple Across the 451 instances, RealPaver exclusively solved 88/451 (19.5%) and Maple exclusively solved 66/451 (14.6%). Both solved 212/451 (47.0%); among these, excluding the 126 easy cases both solved within 1 second, RealPaver was faster in 38 cases (44.2%) and Maple in 48 (55.8%). To assess consistency across methods, we compare the solutions returned by IbexSolve and Maple. RealPaver is excluded at this stage because it does not certify roots (e.g., it does not prove uniqueness). From our experiments, we observe 31 instances in which Maple isolates more solutions within the region of interest than IbexSolve. However, this does not imply that IbexSolve’s search missed solutions: in every such instance, the additional Maple solutions fall inside IbexSolve’s suspect (unknown) boxes. Evaluating 37 104 

23 

255 

69 

> IbexSolve only (104, 23.1%) Maple only (23, 5.1%) Both solved (255, 56.5%) Both failed (69, 15.3%)

(a) Coverage on 451 instances 

51 

58 

146  

> IbexSolve faster (51, 20.0%) Maple faster (58, 22.7%) Easy cases (both ≤1s) (146, 57.3%)

(b) Breakdown among both-solved cases (255) 

> Hatched areas mark instances with non-certified IbexSolve output

Figure 9: IbexSolve vs. Maple: comparison of timing the Jacobian at these non-certified solutions yields det( J) ≈ 0, indicating the presence of multiple roots. Hence IbexSolve’s failure to certify uniqueness is most plausibly due to root multiplicity, which is consistent with its certification procedure. In this sense, the outputs of the two tools are mutually consistent. From the above comparisons, IbexSolve is generally more efficient than RealPaver, and RealPaver tends to be faster than Maple. However, this ordering is only statistical: across individual instances, none of the solvers is universally faster than the others. This observation also echoes our earlier discussion on subdivision strategies. For the two subdivision-based tools, IbexSolve and RealPaver, IbexSolve is generally faster overall. However, for some high-dimensional families in our dataset, such as the Yamamura and Trigo series (with up to thousands of variables), RealPaver performs remarkably well, often succeeding where IbexSolve fails. Compared with the symbolic tool RootFinding, subdivision-based solvers tend to have an advantage on problems with larger numbers of variables but relatively well-behaved solution sets, especially when the number of solutions is small. In contrast, symbolic methods are often more suitable for lower-degree systems with intricate algebraic structure, especially when multiple roots are present. Overall, these results indicate that solver performance is highly instance-dependent, suggesting that a feature-driven strategy can be an effective way to improve efficiency. By running IbexSolve on both the benchmarks we collected and the instances we generated, we observed several issues that suggest IbexSolve may contain implementation bugs or, at least, has room for improvement. Overall, we categorize these observations into four types: for two of them we have identified plausible causes, while the other two still require more careful investigation. The first issue is related to the use of the linear relaxation technique, which can 38 88 

66 

212 85 

> RealPaver only (88, 19.5%) Maple only (66, 14.6%) Both solved (212, 47.0%) Both failed (85, 18.8%)

(a) Coverage on 451 instances 

38 

48 

126  

> RealPaver faster (38, 17.9%) Maple faster (48, 22.6%) Easy cases (both ≤1s) (126, 59.4%)

(b) Breakdown among both-solved cases (212) 

Figure 10: RealPaver vs. Maple: comparison of timing lead to results that are not fully certified. We have already discussed this point in 4.3.3 and 4.3.1, and our experiments provide concrete evidence of this issue. The second issue concerns a few benchmarks where IbexSolve reports more solutions than Maple. A closer inspection suggests that this is largely due to the box inflation performed during IbexSolve’s final verification stage. If two neighboring boxes are both checked and a solution lies near their common boundary, both boxes can be certified as containing a (unique) solution, so the same solution gets counted twice. Fortunately, this overcounting can typically be corrected with a simple post-processing procedure. The third issue concerns the spatial systems in 4.3.1. For a small number of instances, the solutions produced by the trigonometric and polynomial formulations do not agree, even though the two formulations describe the same underlying problem. After ruling out the first two explanations above, the mismatch still remains, and we have not yet identified its cause. Finally, we observed a fourth issue: IbexSolve crashes with a segmentation fault on two benchmarks, one of which is quite simple and should be easy to solve. Although these are isolated cases, they may indicate a latent bug in the implementation. Another observation comes from running IbexSolve on the robot systems in 4.3.1. We found that, if we relax the bisection tolerance to 10 −3 (instead of the default 10 −6

used throughout the previous experiments), IbexSolve actually produces certified results for more instances within the same 1000-second time limit, excluding those that either time out or still contain suspect regions. This phenomenon is consistent across all four categories of systems in 4.3.1. The result is somewhat counterintuitive, since higher precision is often expected to provide more information and thus facilitate certification. A plausible explanation is that a tighter tolerance forces substantially more bisection and propagation, leaving less budget for the final certification steps; in contrast, a slightly coarser tolerance may reduce the search overhead and allow more instances to reach a 39 certified conclusion. This finding may shed light on practical ways to improve efficiency of solvers by choosing an appropriate bisection tolerance. 

## 5.2 For training machine learning models 

In this section, we use the Kuramoto model to demonstrate the usefulness of the dataset on training real roots classification models. For this purpose, three machine learning methods implemented in Python’s scikit-learn library, including K-Nearest Neighbors (KNN), Support Vector Machine (SVM), and Random Forest, are employed. These models take a given value of parameters as input and predict the number of real solutions of the Kuramoto model. The dataset for the Kuramoto model contains 10,000 examples and it is split into the training set, the validation set and the testing set in the ratio of 8:1:1. The experimental results on the testing set are illustrated in Fig. 11. For the purpose of visualization, the results have been projected on the parameter space ( w1, w 4). From the figure, we observe that the KNN model can classify the number of real roots of the parametric Kuramoto model at a very high accuracy (93.3%). Hyperparameter tuning was performed for the three baseline machine learning models on the validation set of the Kuramoto system. The KNN model achieved its best performance with k=2, attaining an accuracy of 93.3%. The SVM model obtained its highest accuracy of 55.1%, when using the radial basis function kernel with penalty parameter C=10, where C determines the balance between margin maximization and training error penalization. For Random Forest, the optimal setting was n estimators=40, where n estimators denotes the number of trees in the ensemble, and this configuration achieved an accuracy of 89.8%. 

# 6 Conclusion and future work 

In this work, we have made a comprehensive search of literatures and repositories on sub-division to collect nonlinear equations with finitely many real solutions. We identify and remove duplicate examples combing from different resources, call state-of-the-art subdi-vision solvers to compute real solutions, and further verify these results with symbolic solvers. As a result, we obtain so far the largest labelled real dataset of zero-dimensional nonlinear equations for subdivision. We further select 5 families of nonlinear parametric systems coming from different application domains, randomly sample values from the ranges of parameters, specialize at these parametric values to generate more than 48K zero-dimensional nonlinear equations, and call IbexSolve to compute the real solutions to enhance the dataset. We demonstrate that the dataset can benchmark different solvers as well as training machine learning models. When we develop the dataset, most of the examples have been solved by the state-of-the-art subdivision solver IbexSolve. During the development of 40 1.00 0.75 0.50 0.25 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 

w1

> 1.0
> 0.5
> 0.0
> 0.5
> 1.0
> w4

True Distribution of Real Roots        

> 1.00 0.75 0.50 0.25 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75

w1

> 1.0
> 0.5
> 0.0
> 0.5
> 1.0
> w4

SVM (rbf, C=10) Prediction (55.1%)        

> True
> False
> 1.00 0.75 0.50 0.25 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75

w1

> 1.0
> 0.5
> 0.0
> 0.5
> 1.0
> w4

KNN (n=2) Prediction (93.3%)        

> True
> False
> 1.00 0.75 0.50 0.25 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75

w1

> 1.0
> 0.5
> 0.0
> 0.5
> 1.0
> w4

Random Forest (n=40) Prediction (89.8%) 

> True
> False
> 10
> 11
> 12
> 13
> 14
> 15
> 16
> 17
> 18
> 19
> 20
> 21
> 22
> 23
> 24
> 25
> 26
> 27
> 28
> 29
> 30
> 31
> 32
> Number of Real Roots

Figure 11: The Performance Visualization of Models on Test Set. the dataset, we also identify several weakness of the default strategies of IbexSolve, which creates opportunities in the future to develop more efficient heuristic or learning-based strategies. 

# Acknowledgment 

The authors would like to thank J¨ urgen Gerhard for helping us getting Maple licence. 

# Funding information 

This research was supported by the following grants: the National Key Research Project of China under Grant No. 2023YFA1009402, the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant No.12301650 and Chongqing Talents Plan Youth Top-Notch Project under Grant No. 2021000263. 41 Data availability statements 

The data that support the findings of this study are openly available in Science Data Bank at https://doi.org/10.57760/sciencedb.34211 . Please cite the source when using the data. 

# References 

James P Abbott and Richard P Brent. Fast local convergence with single and multistep methods for nonlinear equations. The ANZIAM Journal , 19(2):173–199, 1975. Ignacio Araya and Victor Reyes. Interval branch-and-bound algorithms for optimization and constraint satisfaction: a survey and prospects. Journal of Global Optimization ,65:837–866, 2016. Ignacio Araya, Gilles Trombettoni, and Bertrand Neveu. A contractor based on convex interval taylor. In International Conference on Integration of Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Operations Research (OR) Techniques in Constraint Programming , pages 1– 16. Springer, 2012. Ignacio Araya, Victor Reyes, and Cristian Oreallana. More smear-based variable selec-tion heuristics for ncsps. In 2013 IEEE 25th International Conference on Tools with Artificial Intelligence , pages 1004–1011. IEEE, 2013. Ignacio Araya, Ricardo Soto, and Broderick Crawford. Adaptive filtering strategy for numerical constraint satisfaction problems. Expert Systems with Applications , 42(21): 8086–8094, 2015. Ignacio Araya, Fr´ ed´ eric Messine, Jordan Ninin, and Gilles Trombettoni. Hybridizing two linear relaxation techniques in interval-based solvers. Journal of Global Optimization ,91(3):437–456, 2025. Ali Baharev, Lubomir Kolev, and Endre R´ ev. Computing multiple steady states in homogeneous azeotropic and ideal two-product distillation. AIChE Journal , 57(6): 1485–1495, 2011. Ali Baharev, Ferenc Domes, and Arnold Neumaier. A robust approach for finding all well-separated solutions of sparse systems of nonlinear equations. Numerical algorithms , 76 (1):163–189, 2017. Heikel Batnini, Claude Michel, and Michel Rueher. Mind the gaps: A new splitting strategy for consistency techniques. In International Conference on Principles and Practice of Constraint Programming , pages 77–91. Springer, 2005. 42 Ruben Becker, Michael Sagraloff, Vikram Sharma, and Chee Yap. A near-optimal sub-division algorithm for complex root isolation based on the pellet test and newton iter-ation. Journal of Symbolic Computation , 86:51–96, 2018. Thomas Beelitz, Andreas Frommer, Bruno Lang, and Paul Willems. Symbolic–numeric techniques for solving nonlinear systems. In PAMM: Proceedings in Applied Mathe-matics and Mechanics , volume 5, pages 705–708. Wiley Online Library, 2005. Fr´ ed´ eric Benhamou and Laurent Granvilliers. Continuous and interval constraints. Foun-dations of Artificial Intelligence , 2:571–603, 2006. Fr´ ed´ eric Benhamou, Fr´ ed´ eric Goualard, Laurent Granvilliers, and Jean-Fran¸ cois Puget. Revising hull and box consistency. In Logic Programming: Proceedings of the 1999 International Conference on Logic Programming , page 230, 1999. Fran¸ cois Boulier, Changbo Chen, Fran¸ cois Lemaire, and Marc Moreno Maza. Real root isolation of regular chains. In Ruyong Feng, Wen-shin Lee, and Yosuke Sato, edi-tors, Computer Mathematics , pages 33–48, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2014. Springer Berlin Heidelberg. Saskia Bublitz. Initialization and reformulation strategies for improved solving of non-linear algebraic equation systems tested on chemical process models . PhD thesis, Tech-nische Universitaet Berlin (Germany), 2023. St´ ephane Caro, Damien Chablat, Alexandre Goldsztejn, Daisuke Ishii, and Christophe Jermann. A branch and prune algorithm for the computation of generalized aspects of parallel robots. Artificial Intelligence , 211:34–50, 2014. Gilles Chabert and Luc Jaulin. Contractor programming. Artificial Intelligence , 173(11): 1079–1100, 2009. Tianran Chen, Jakub Mareˇ cek, Dhagash Mehta, and Matthew Niemerg. Three formu-lations of the kuramoto model as a system of polynomial equations. In 2019 57th Annual Allerton Conference on Communication, Control, and Computing (Allerton) ,pages 810–815. IEEE, 2019. Raphael Chenouard, Alexandre Goldsztejn, and Christophe Jermann. Search strategies for an anytime usage of the branch and prune algorithm. In International Joint Con-ference on Artificial Intelligence , pages p–468, 2009. H´ elene Collavizza, Fran¸ cois Delobel, and Michel Rueher. Comparing partial consistencies. 

Reliable computing , 5(3):213–228, 1999. 43 Owen Coss, Jonathan D Hauenstein, Hoon Hong, and Daniel K Molzahn. Locating and counting equilibria of the kuramoto model with rank-one coupling. SIAM Journal on Applied Algebra and Geometry , 2(1):45–71, 2018. David Cox, John Little, Donal O’shea, and Moss Sweedler. Ideals, varieties, and algo-rithms . Springer, 1997. Thomas Richard de Latour, Rapha¨ el Chenouard, and Laurent Granvilliers. Strat´ egies de r´ esolution anytime de probl` emes de satisfaction de contraintes num´ eriques. In Journ´ ee Francophone de la Programmation par Contrainte , 2021. Peter Dietmaier. The stewart-gough platform of general geometry can have 40 real pos-tures. In Advances in robot kinematics: Analysis and control , pages 7–16. Springer, 1998. Ferenc Domes and Arnold Neumaier. Constraint propagation on quadratic constraints. 

Constraints , 15:404–429, 2010. Ferenc Domes and Arnold Neumaier. Rigorous filtering using linear relaxations. Journal of Global Optimization , 53:441–473, 2012. Timothy Duff, Michela Mancini, Anton Leykin, and John A Christian. Geometric ini-tial orbit determination from bearing measurements. In AAS/AIAA Astrodynamics Specialist Conference, Charlotte, NC , 2022. Shengyu Feng, Weiwei Sun, Shanda Li, Ameet Talwalkar, and Yiming Yang. A compre-hensive evaluation of contemporary ml-based solvers for combinatorial optimization, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.16952 .Andreas Frommer and Bruno Lang. Existence tests for solutions of nonlinear equations using borsuk’s theorem. SIAM journal on numerical analysis , 43(3):1348–1361, 2005. Andreas Frommer, Bruno Lang, and Marco Schnurr. A comparison of the moore and miranda existence tests. Computing , 72(3):349–354, 2004. DD Gawali, Ahmed Zidna, and PSV Nataraj. An integrative approach for analysis of nonlinear electrical circuits using-polynomial b-spline expansion and b-spline krawczyk operator. International Journal of Applied and Computational Mathematics , 8(1):1, 2022. Alexandre Goldsztejn. Comparison of the hansen-sengupta and the frommer-lang-schnurr sts. Computing , 79:53–60, 2007. 44 Alexandre Goldsztejn and Fr´ ed´ eric Goualard. Box consistency through adaptive shaving. In Proceedings of the 2010 ACM symposium on applied computing , pages 2049–2054, 2010. Fr´ ed´ eric Goualard and Christophe Jermann. A reinforcement learning approach to inter-val constraint propagation. Constraints , 13(1):206–226, 2008. Laurent Granvilliers. On the combination of interval constraint solvers. Reliable Com-puting , 7(6):467–483, 2001. Laurent Granvilliers. Adaptive bisection of numerical csps. In International Conference on Principles and Practice of Constraint Programming , pages 290–298. Springer, 2012. Laurent Granvilliers and Fr´ ed´ eric Benhamou. Progress in the solving of a circuit design problem. Journal of Global Optimization , 20:155–168, 2001. Laurent Granvilliers and Fr´ ed´ eric Benhamou. Algorithm 852: Realpaver: an interval solver using constraint satisfaction techniques. ACM Transactions on Mathematical Software (TOMS) , 32(1):138–156, 2006. Laurent Granvilliers, Eric Monfroy, and Fr´ ed´ eric Benhamou. Symbolic-interval coopera-tion in constraint programming. In Proceedings of the 2001 international symposium on Symbolic and algebraic computation , pages 150–166, 2001. Eldon Hansen and G William Walster. Global optimization using interval analysis: revised and expanded , volume 264. CRC press, 2003. Eldon R Hansen and Ronald I Greenberg. An interval newton method. Applied Mathe-matics and Computation , 12(2-3):89–98, 1983. Guoliang Hou and Shugong Zhang. An improved verification algorithm for nonlinear systems of equations based on krawczyk operator. Journal of Computational and Ap-plied Mathematics , 359:145–152, 2019. ISSN 0377-0427. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/ j.cam.2019.03.034. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/ S0377042719301591 .Calvin Huang, Soonho Kong, Sicun Gao, and Damien Zufferey. Evaluating branching heuristics in interval constraint propagation for satisfiability. In Numerical Software Verification: 12th International Workshop, NSV 2019, New York City, NY, USA, July 13–14, 2019, Proceedings 12 , pages 85–100. Springer, 2019. Ruiqi Huang, Anton Leykin, and Michela Mancini. Projective plane subdivision method for initial orbit determination. In International Workshop on Computer Algebra in Scientific Computing , pages 98–117. Springer, 2025. 45 Luc Jaulin, Michel Kieffer, Olivier Didrit, and Eric Walter. Applied interval analysis with examples in parameter and state estimation, robust control and robotics, 2001. RB Kearfott, MT Nakao, S Neumaier, SM Rump, SP Shary, and P van Hentenryck. Standardized notation in interval analysis. Reliable computing , 15(1):7–13, 2010. Lubomir V Kolev. Automatic computation of a linear interval enclosure. Reliable Com-puting , 7(1):17–28, 2001. Lubomir V Kolev. An improved interval linearization for solving nonlinear problems. 

Numerical Algorithms , 37:213–224, 2004. ´Angel Fernando Kuri-Morales. Solution of simultaneous non-linear equations using genetic algorithms. 2002. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID: 1721781 .Yahia Lebbah, Claude Michel, and Michel Rueher. A rigorous global filtering algorithm for quadratic constraints. Constraints , 10:47–65, 2005a. Yahia Lebbah, Claude Michel, Michel Rueher, David Daney, and Jean-Pierre Merlet. Efficient and safe global constraints for handling numerical constraint systems. SIAM Journal on Numerical Analysis , 42(5):2076–2097, 2005b. L Lukˇ san and Jan Vlcek. Sparse and partially separable test problems for unconstrained and equality constrained optimization, 1999. Angelos Mantzaflaris, Bernard Mourrain, and Elias Tsigaridas. On continued fraction expansion of real roots of polynomial systems, complexity and condition numbers. 

Theoretical Computer Science , 412(22):2312–2330, 2011. JP Merlet. Alias-c++. Available on line at: http://wwwsop. inria. fr/coprin/logiciels/ALIAS/ALIAS-C++/ALIAS-C++. html , 2007. Fr´ ed´ eric Messine. Extentions of affine arithmetic: Application to unconstrained global optimization. J. Univers. Comput. Sci. , 8(11):992–1015, 2002. Ramon E Moore and John B Kioustelidis. A simple test for accuracy of approximate solutions to nonlinear (or linear) systems. SIAM Journal on Numerical Analysis , 17 (4):521–529, 1980. Ramon E. Moore, Ralph Baker Kearfott, and Michael J. Cloud. Introduction to interval analysis. 2009. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:20069281 .Arnold Neumaier. Interval methods for systems of equations . Cambridge university press, 1990. 46 Arnold Neumaier. Complete search in continuous global optimization and constraint satisfaction. Acta numerica , 13:271–369, 2004. Bertrand Neveu, Gilles Trombettoni, and Ignacio Araya. Adaptive constructive interval disjunction: algorithms and experiments. Constraints , 20:452–467, 2015. Bertrand Neveu, Gilles Trombettoni, and Ignacio Araya. Node selection strategies in interval branch and bound algorithms. Journal of Global optimization , 64:289–304, 2016. Jordan Ninin, Fr´ ed´ eric Messine, and Pierre Hansen. A reliable affine relaxation method for global optimization. 4OR , 13(3):247–277, 2015. Victor Reyes and Ignacio Araya. Probing-based variable selection heuristics for ncsps. In 

2014 IEEE 26th International Conference on Tools with Artificial Intelligence , pages 16–23. IEEE, 2014. Lara Scavuzzo, Karen Aardal, Andrea Lodi, and Neil Yorke-Smith. Machine learning augmented branch and bound for mixed integer linear programming. Mathematical Programming , Aug 2024. ISSN 1436-4646. doi: 10.1007/s10107-024-02130-y. URL 

https://doi.org/10.1007/s10107-024-02130-y .Hermann Schichl and Arnold Neumaier. Interval analysis on directed acyclic graphs for global optimization. Journal of Global Optimization , 33(4):541–562, 2005. John Greenlees Semple and Geoffrey Thomas Kneebone. Algebraic projective geometry .Oxford University Press, 1998. Oleg Shcherbina, Arnold Neumaier, Djamila Sam-Haroud, Xuan-Ha Vu, and Tuan-Viet Nguyen. Benchmarking global optimization and constraint satisfaction codes. In Inter-national Workshop on Global Optimization and Constraint Satisfaction , pages 211–222. Springer, 2002. Evan C Sherbrooke and Nicholas M Patrikalakis. Computation of the solutions of non-linear polynomial systems. Computer Aided Geometric Design , 10(5):379–405, 1993. Andrew J Sommese, Charles W Wampler, et al. The Numerical solution of systems of polynomials arising in engineering and science . World Scientific, 2005. Volker Stahl. Interval methods for bounding the range of polynomials and solving systems of nonlinear equations . PhD thesis, Johannes Kepler University Linz, 1995. MD Stuber, V Kumar, and PI Barton. Nonsmooth exclusion test for finding all solutions of nonlinear equations. BIT Numerical Mathematics , 50(4):885–917, 2010. 47 Gilles Trombettoni and Gilles Chabert. Constructive interval disjunction. In Principles and Practice of Constraint Programming–CP 2007: 13th International Conference, CP 2007, Providence, RI, USA, September 23-27, 2007. Proceedings 13 , pages 635–650. Springer, 2007. Gilles Trombettoni, Ignacio Araya, Bertrand Neveu, and Gilles Chabert. Inner regions and interval linearizations for global optimization. In Proceedings of the AAAI Con-ference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 25, pages 99–104, 2011. Pascal Van Hentenryck, David McAllester, and Deepak Kapur. Solving polynomial sys-tems using a branch and prune approach. SIAM Journal on Numerical Analysis , 34 (2):797–827, 1997. Jan Verschelde. Polynomial homotopy continuation with phcpack. ACM Communications in Computer Algebra , 44(3/4):217–220, 2011. Jan Verschelde, Pierre Verlinden, and Ronald Cools. Homotopies exploiting newton poly-topes for solving sparse polynomial systems. SIAM Journal on Numerical Analysis , 31 (3):915–930, 1994. doi: 10.1137/0731049. URL https://doi.org/10.1137/0731049 .Joachim Von Zur Gathen and J¨ urgen Gerhard. Modern computer algebra . Cambridge university press, 2003. Xuan-Ha Vu. Rigorous solution techniques for numerical constraint satisfaction problems .PhD thesis, EPFL, 2005. Xuan-Ha Vu, Djamila Sam-Haroud, and Boi Faltings. Enhancing numerical constraint propagation using multiple inclusion representations. Annals of Mathematics and Ar-tificial Intelligence , 55:295–354, 2009a. Xuan-Ha Vu, Hermann Schichl, and Djamila Sam-Haroud. Interval propagation and search on directed acyclic graphs for numerical constraint solving. Journal of Global Optimization , 45(4):499–531, 2009b. Dongming Wang. Solving polynomial equations: Characteristic sets and triangular systems. Mathematics and Computers in Simulation , 42(4):339–351, 1996. ISSN 0378-4754. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0378-4754(96)00008-0. URL https://www. sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0378475496000080 . Sybolic Computa-tion, New Trends and Developments. Bican Xia and Ting Zhang. Real solution isolation using interval arithmetic. Computers & Mathematics with Applications , 52(6-7):853–860, 2006. 48 Juan Xu and Chee Yap. Effective subdivision algorithm for isolating zeros of real sys-tems of equations, with complexity analysis. In Proceedings of the 2019 International Symposium on Symbolic and Algebraic Computation , ISSAC ’19, page 355–362, New York, NY, USA, 2019. Association for Computing Machinery. 49