Title: Not All Subjectivity Is the Same! Defining Desiderata for the Evaluation of Subjectivity in NLP

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.28351v1

Published Time: Tue, 31 Mar 2026 02:01:55 GMT

Number of Pages: 17

Markdown Content:
# Not All Subjectivity Is the Same! Defining Desiderata for the Evaluation of Subjectivity in NLP 

## Urja Khurana , Michiel van der Meer *, Enrico Liscio ∗,Antske Fokkens Pradeep K. Murukannaiah 

## Department of Intelligent Systems, Delft University of Technology 

## Leiden Institute of Advanced Computer Science (LIACS), Leiden University 

## Computational Linguistics and Text Mining Lab, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam 

## {u.khurana, e.liscio, p.k.murukannaiah}@tudelft.nl, m.t.van.der.meer@liacs.leidenuniv.nl, antske.fokkens@vu.nl 

## Abstract 

Subjective judgments are part of several NLP datasets and recent work is increasingly priori-tizing models whose outputs reflect this diver-sity of perspectives. Such responses allow us to shed light on minority voices, which are fre-quently marginalized or obscured by dominant perspectives. It remains a question whether our evaluation practices align with these models’ objectives. This position paper proposes seven 

evaluation desiderata for subjectivity-sensitive models, rooted in how subjectivity is repre-sented in NLP data and models. The desiderata are constructed in a top-down approach, keep-ing in mind the user-centric impact of such models. We scan the experimental setup of 

60 papers and show that various aspects of subjectivity are still understudied: the distinc-tion between ambiguous and polyphonic input, whether subjectivity is effectively expressed to the user, and a lack of interplay between differ-ent desiderata, amongst other gaps. 

## 1 Introduction 

For several NLP tasks, such as answering general knowledge questions, there is a factual or correct 

response that is generally accepted. However, for some tasks, the “truth” depends on the context or in-dividual interpretation. Consider, for example, the task of determining whether an online comment is offensive. There is no universally agreed no-tion of offensiveness or hate speech (Vidgen et al., 2019; Fortuna et al., 2020; Leonardelli et al., 2021; Khurana et al., 2022). Instead, the sociocultural background and experiences of the readers influ-ence their judgments (Sap et al., 2022; Goyal et al., 2022). Similarly, judgments depend on a personal interpretation in many other tasks such as for natu-ral language inference (Pavlick and Kwiatkowski, 2019; Nie et al., 2020), semantic annotation (Som-merauer et al., 2020), and understanding indirect 

> *Equal contribution.

answers (Damgaard et al., 2021). We refer to such tasks that have multiple plausible labels rather than a single valid ground-truth as subjective .As language models are integrated into societal applications, they increasingly engage with subjec-tive concepts such as values, norms, and arguments (Forbes et al., 2020; Lourie et al., 2021; Liscio et al., 2023; Van Der Meer et al., 2024b). There-fore, their behavior must align with varying human preferences (Sorensen et al., 2024) and reflect mul-tiple viewpoints (Cabitza et al., 2023; Plank, 2022). Yet, such models have been shown to collapse to a specific view (Hayati et al., 2024), typically as a consequence of how labels are presented (aggre-gated to a single majority label) or due to preva-lent preference-tuning paradigms (such as RLHF (Ouyang et al., 2022) and DPO (Rafailov et al., 2023)) that optimize for the majority vote or gen-eral preference (Casper et al., 2023). Obfuscating minority or diverging viewpoints is problematic when deploying models in real-world settings, run-ning the risk of further disenfranchising marginal-ized communities (Xu et al., 2021). 

Subjectivity-sensitive models reflect variation in judgment and enable the representation of minority perspectives. As the NLP field pushes for such models (Ovesdotter Alm, 2011; Basile et al., 2021; Plank, 2022; Cabitza et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2025), a critical look at their evaluation practices is necessary. Several aspects affect the evaluation of subjectivity-sensitive models, including the ideals we outline, the extent to which subjective evalua-tion metrics capture overall trends or fine-grained model behavior (Chen et al., 2024; Rizzi et al., 2024), and the type of task (classification vs. gen-eration). To this end, we address the following question: which aspects of subjectivity should evaluation metrics capture? 

To address this question, we first review how subjectivity is represented in the data and incorpo-rated into NLP models, highlighting a previously 1                                        

> arXiv:2603.28351v1 [cs.CL] 30 Mar 2026 Recognize
> when
> Recognize
> which
> Recognize
> why Predict Calibrate Represent Express
> Is “Kermit the frog
> wants his voice back”
> hate speech or not?
> What is the capital
> of The Netherlands?
> polyphonic
> ambiguous
> Kermit the frog
> wants his voice back
> *who is this aimed at?
> **do people consider
> speech impediments as
> targets of hate speech?
> hate
> speech
> not hate
> speech
> density
> vs.
> Depends on the
> context; opinions
> vary! Awould say…
> hate
> speech
> not hate
> speech
> human label
> distribution

Figure 1: The sequential nature of our proposed desiderata for evaluating a subjectivity-sensitive model. 

underexplored aspect: the distinction between am-biguity and polyphony. These insights further drive our top-down approach, in which we propose a set of sequential desiderata to evaluate subjectivity-sensitive models (outlined in Figure 1). We identify aspects not yet addressed in the literature by draw-ing on insights from related fields. Finally, we map these desiderata onto current evaluation practices, revealing gaps and opportunities for future work. Our key contributions are threefold: (1) the desiderata for evaluating subjectivity-sensitive models, (2) the systematic categorization of current evaluation metrics, and (3) the gaps and opportuni-ties we identify. 

## 2 Subjectivity in Data 

To establish a fitting evaluation paradigm, we start by describing how subjectivity and related concepts are interpreted in the NLP field. Next, we discuss what the sources of subjectivity are. Finally, we reflect on the types of information to incorporate in a subjectivity-sensitive dataset. 

2.1 Subjectivity and Related Concepts 

Subjectivity pertains to the existence of multiple valid ground-truths (Vardomskaya, 2018; Rottger et al., 2022; Plank, 2022). NLP literature also dis-cusses other concepts related to subjectivity. Per-spectivism (Cabitza et al., 2023; Frenda et al., 2025) recognizes that the ground-truth depends on indi-vidual perspectives. This has taken shape in the form of a perspectivist framework that enables rep-resenting different perspectives in data; weak when taking multiple perspectives into account only dur-ing the annotation stage and strong when extend-ing this to incorporating multiple perspectives in the model output as well. Subjective interpreta-tions can lead to disagreement (Uma et al., 2021b) when different individuals have opposing views on a specific input. Plank (2022) uses the term 

human label variation to refer to instances with dif-ferent plausible perspectives, since disagreement 

could imply that at least one judgment is incor-rect. Disagreement can also arise in factual matters. This captures annotator errors , either from misun-derstanding (genuine misinformation or misinter-preting explicit annotation guidelines) or attention drifts during annotation. 

2.2 Sources of Subjectivity 

Where do multiple viewpoints or beliefs that lead to disagreement stem from? Aroyo and Welty (2015) suggest three potential sources of subjectivity in their Triangle of Reference framework that maps out the process of interpreting an input: task ambi-guity , input ambiguity , and annotator attitude .1

Task Ambiguity. Imprecise task definitions and annotation guidelines may (un)intentionally leave enough space for an annotator to fill the gaps through their own interpretation (Rottger et al., 2022). For instance, in “ Berlin decided ... ”, the entity Berlin can be annotated as location or or-ganization. Without explicitly guiding annotators in such scenarios (in this case, where a city name is used to refer to a government), unintended dis-agreement can arise. Precise guidelines can still leave some room for personal interpretation, e.g., in Natural Language Inference where implications are debatable or in hate speech where severity is a personal judgment. 

Input Ambiguity. Even when the task is clearly defined, an input can still warrant multiple inter-pretations, e.g., when more context is needed to make an accurate judgment. Consider an input that contains a reclaimed slur; determining whether it is hate speech or not requires the knowledge of who 

is behind the piece of text. 

Annotator Attitude. Factors such as an anno-tator’s demographic, emotional state, and experi-ence can yield different valid judgments (Sap et al., 

> 1

We adopt the terminology for these three sources from Jiang and de Marneffe (2022) and Liu et al. (2023). 

22022). This is particularly the case when there is no universally agreed upon ground-truth. 

2.3 Incorporating Subjectivity in Data 

To train and evaluate models that can handle subjec-tivity, adequate datasets should be available. The conventional approach to building datasets in NLP is to collect n annotations per sample and aggre-gate them into a single “gold” label, e.g., through majority voting. However, when there is variation in annotator response, this results in a loss of in-formation on human disagreement. This has led to calls for the release of raw annotations (Prab-hakaran et al., 2021; Cabitza et al., 2023; Pandita et al., 2025), with recent work showing the impor-tance of having a large number of annotations per sample (Khurana et al., 2024; Gruber et al., 2024). 

Annotators. Beyond the raw annotations, other dimensions are required to model subjectivity ef-fectively. To model the opinion of a specific indi-vidual, for each annotator we would need demo-graphic information (Bender and Friedman, 2018; Prabhakaran et al., 2021) and a sufficient amount of annotated samples. Moreover, disagreement can also stem from annotation mistakes (e.g., due to attention drift), requiring methods (Gordon et al., 2021; Weber-Genzel et al., 2024; Jinadu and Ding, 2024; Ivey et al., 2025) and metrics (Abercrombie et al., 2025) that can distinguish such noise from actual signal. Dumitrache et al. (2018) introduce metrics that capture inter-annotator disagreement in annotation, taking into account the interdepen-dency of the sources of subjectivity. 

Annotator Population. Raw annotations and an-notator information are especially valuable when we are strategic about who is annotating. When subjectivity needs to be captured, carrying out the annotation procedure and choosing the appropriate annotator(s) is an essential task. Smarter sample annotation techniques are needed to get a wider picture of how an input is perceived. This could be accomplished either by ensuring that a specific sample is annotated by a variety of demographics (Van Der Meer et al., 2024a) or by selecting anno-tators of a specific target group (Goyal et al., 2022). Pei and Jurgens (2023) highlight the importance of labeling with a demographically balanced anno-tator pool. Díaz et al. (2022) advocate for a more thoughtful process by providing a framework for annotation collection that takes into account sub-jectivity throughout the multiple annotation stages. 

## 3 Dimensions of Subjective Input 

What do the sources of subjectivity mean for a subjectivity-sensitive model? Where task ambi-guity plays an overarching role when collecting ground-truth labels across multiple samples, input ambiguity and annotator attitude can primarily oc-cur at a sample level. These two sources require the model to handle subjectivity differently, an aspect that has not yet been addressed in previous research. We characterize model behavior when dealing with different sources of subjectivity on two dimensions: 

ambiguity and polyphony (Figure 2). polyphonic                   

> monophonic
> ambiguous non-
> ambiguous
> Wow, they are such
> agreat community! Ihate boomers…
> Iwill take this
> b[*/i]tch out
> Exclude those
> *** from society
> : di ff erent perspectives : disambiguations/clari fi cations : clear ground-truth

Figure 2: Dimensions of sources of subjectivity at a 

sample-level : ambiguity on the x-axis and polyphony 

on the y-axis. For each quadrant, we show the desired model output (as icons) with an example situated in hate speech detection. 

When an input is non-ambiguous and mono-phonic, a model can directly incorporate the ob-jective ground-truth. However, modeling scenarios involving subjective factors is more challenging as the following subsections illustrate. 

3.1 Ambiguous ↔ Non-Ambiguous 

An input is ambiguous when it can warrant differ-ent interpretations because the information (e.g., context) needed to make a judgment is incomplete. Inputs that can be interpreted without filling infor-mation gaps are non-ambiguous .

Ambiguous. When faced with an ambiguous in-put, a model should identify the spectrum of dif-ferent possible interpretations and disambiguations. For instance, in “I will take this b{*/i}tch out ” the ambiguity lies in who the b-word refers to; the slur or the dog. In a multi-turn conversation, the model can engage with the user to increase the informa-tion needed to resolve ambiguity. When a response 3is directly needed, the model can provide the user with the different possibilities accordingly. 

Non-ambiguous. A non-ambiguous input re-moves the requirement for a model to understand the different interpretations. In such a situation, the model can directly give a suitable response based on the exact information outlined in the input. 

3.2 Polyphonic ↔ Monophonic 

Independent of ambiguity, certain inputs may not have an agreed-upon ground truth, allowing for judgments based on an individual’s interpretation. Personal taste, demographics, background, experi-ence, and other factors influence this interpretation. We consider such cases to be polyphonic : different perspectives co-existing. Where there is unanimity, we consider that to be monophonic .

Polyphonic. A polyphonic input is open to mul-tiple valid perspectives, which the model should capture. Take for example the statement “I hate boomers” ; the meaning is clear but the polyphony lies in whether boomers are considered targets of hate speech. A model that can capture polyphony for the right reasons will be able to generalize well in the real world. Thus, the model should recognize 

what aspect(s) of the input enable different perspec-tives and why , e.g., is it the gender or culture that potentially influences the opinion or are there other factors? Not every different perspective has to be attributed to specific demographics, certain devia-tions can also be due to individual differences. 

Monophonic. When an input has a single valid belief, often connected to factuality, the model can directly predict the ground-truth without the need to consider a variety of potential perspectives. For in-stance, the phrase “Exclude those *** from society” 

should not warrant any subjective interpretation due to its overt form of hate speech. 

3.3 Ambiguous and Polyphonic 

Ambiguity and polyphony can be intertwined. Con-sider an input that lacks context and warrants mul-tiple perspectives, e.g., “Wow, they are such a great community” . Here, the ambiguity lies in the sen-timent of the sentence and the polyphony in the gravity of the (potential) negative sentiment. In such a scenario, a model is expected to capture the appropriate disambiguation and clarification questions, and the different possible perspectives. 

## 4 Subjectivity in Models 

How a model expresses subjectivity influences its evaluation. Thus, we discuss ways of expressing and instilling subjectivity in models, considering both classification and free-text generation objec-tives. 

4.1 Expressing Subjectivity 

To move away from rigid responses in line with the majority preference, the model’s output should reflect the spectrum of different perspectives or be aligned to an individual’s perspective. 

Spectrum of Perspectives. A model that reflects diverse perspectives and values is pluralistically aligned . Sorensen et al. (2024) map out two opera-tionalizations of pluralistic alignment that reflect a multitude of viewpoints. (1) In the distributional 

approach, the model outputs the distribution of per-spectives in the generated response, allowing the user to be informed of the presence of a variety of other opinions. This can either be expressed in the logits or softmax distribution of the model, or directly in the generated response (Meister et al., 2025). (2) In the overton approach, the generated response summarizes different reasonable perspec-tives. Determining what is reasonable depends on the individual; thus, it requires (some degree of) personalization. While an autoregressive model would generate a free-text response, an autoencoder can express this through a multi-label setup. 

Individual Preferences. A model that can tailor its response according to the preferences of an in-dividual or a group (where these preferences are shared) is steerable (Sorensen et al., 2024). The model considers a variety of perspectives and val-ues and steers its response to be closest to the per-spective of the user. This is closely related to per-sonalization , where preferences go beyond values and include matters such as textual style or lifestyle 

(e.g., food or films) (Zhang et al., 2025). 

4.2 Instilling Subjectivity 

We distinguish between approaches that introduce the notion of subjectivity at inference, when train-ing or fine-tuning, and when aligning the models. 

Inference-time Strategies. Integrating subjectiv-ity at test time is a more computationally efficient solution than training/fine-tuning, particularly in the case of LLMs. A popular approach is persona prompting (Santurkar et al., 2023; Deshpande et al., 42023), where the model is instructed in a prompt to impersonate a specific persona . This can span different demographics. The persona could either steer the subjectivity toward a specific perspective or provide a spectrum of multiple perspectives. In-stead of a persona, we can also retrieve user history (examples relevant to the task of choice) and in-clude it in the prompt using Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG; Lewis et al., 2020). The model then uses this history to adapt its response. Used for a variety of personalization tasks (Li et al., 2024; Salemi et al., 2024a,b; Mysore et al., 2024; Richard-son et al., 2023), this approach, to our knowledge, has not been applied to pluralistic steering .

Training/Fine-tuning. Different approaches have been devised to enable subjective modeling during the fine-tuning stage. The conventional approach is to use soft labels, i.e., the distribution of class annotations for a single sample (Jamison and Gurevych, 2015; Uma et al., 2021a; Fornaciari et al., 2021; Wu et al., 2023). Instead of optimizing for a single (aggregated) hard label, the goal is to minimize the distance between the estimated distribution and the actual distribution. This is typically done using distance-based loss functions such as cross-entropy , Kullback Leibler-, or 

Jensen-Shannon divergence . Another avenue is learning from individual annotators’ labels to make distributional or single predictions (Rodrigues and Pereira, 2018). Strategies for this include fine-tuning on annotator-specific labels (Deng et al., 2023; Hoeken et al., 2025), ensembling over annotator-specific models (Khurana et al., 2024), multi-task settings (Mostafazadeh Davani et al., 2022), and PEFT-based strategies that provide a cheaper solution than fully fine-tuning autoregressive models (Tan et al., 2024; Ignatev et al., 2025). 

Alignment Methods. Preference tuning methods for large language models are designed primarily to optimize according to the majority preference (Casper et al., 2023). As such, strategies are being developed to create pluralistic alignment methods, i.e., methods that can reflect a multitude of prefer-ences and tailor their responses accordingly (Zhao et al., 2024; Poddar et al., 2024; Jang et al., 2024). 

## 5 Desiderata for Subjective Models 

After outlining the desired model output when fac-ing a subjective input, the natural next step is to evaluate its performance. But what does it mean for a model to perform well on subjective input? 

To answer this question, we propose desiderata for a subjectivity-sensitive model. These desiderata are motivated by three overarching ideals rooted in our preceding discussion of how subjectivity is represented in NLP data and models: (1) represen-tation of all, including minority voices, (2) based on the correct sources of subjectivity in the input, and (3) the representation of subjectivity (in data and models) generalizing to the real world. 

D1. Recognize when subjective modeling is necessary 

As we highlight in Section 2.1, certain inputs have multiple valid perspectives. For a model to make predictions that reflect this diversity, the first step is to recognize when an input needs to be treated subjectively versus objectively. Even when a task is generally considered to be subjective, this step is vital—there will be cases where raters will have consensus, e.g., when dealing with a severe case of hate speech; predicting an aggregate estimate would be sufficient in that case. 

D2. Recognize which type of subjective modeling is needed 

As we describe in Section 3, model behavior de-pends on the type of subjective input. Thus, a model should recognize which type of subjectivity the input contains: ambiguity, polyphony, or both. 

D3. Recognize why there is subjectivity in the input 

Building on the desired model behavior we out-line in Section 3, a model should recognize why 

there is ambiguous or polyphonic subjectivity in the input. Using this information, the model can delineate the different disambiguations, clarifica-tions, or perspectives to resolve. This facilitates better predictions and more reliable generalization to unseen scenarios. 

D4. Predict subjectivity accurately 

After recognizing the source of the subjectivity, a model should predict the subjectivity correctly. A 5model can predict subjectivity in different ways, as we discuss in Section 4.1. 

D5. Calibrate the output with respect to the frequency of opinions 

As we illustrate in Section 4.2, certain models are trained to estimate the distribution of human judgment for an input. Depending on how sub-jectivity is expressed (distributional or overton), the predicted distribution should be calibrated to the actual human judgment distribution. This ap-plies both when a probability distribution is ob-tained directly from the model and when an over-ton response is generated. For an overton response, the linguistic quantifiers should be well-calibrated. This also extends to when a model relies on un-certainty metrics to identify whether it has encoun-tered a subjective input. 

D6. Represent all perspectives 

A subjectivity-sensitive model should account for the minority voices that are usually lost in aggre-gation. The model should represent a range of diverse viewpoints, minimizing bias toward domi-nant perspectives. Relevant perspectives should be decoupled from dominant perspectives. For exam-ple, it should not only echo a Western perspective but also other cultures when the input warrants it. 

D7. Express subjectivity without hampering user experience 

A subjectivity-sensitive model carries with it the responsibility of informing a user of different per-spectives. This mirrors the responsibility of show-ing users explanations of decision-making in the field of explainable AI (XAI). What counts as a “good” explanation depends on the user (Ehsan and Riedl, 2020). In a similar vein, we argue that sub-jectivity should be expressed in a way that does not hamper user experience. Consider a model giving a summary of all the different perspectives. It is of limited use when a response enumerates all po-tential perspectives, 2 making it rather infeasible to grasp the overall view. Here, it should strike a bal-ance between being concise and detailed according to user preference.  

> 2Note that this excludes the setting where the output of the model is distributional .

Practical considerations. Our desiderata can be evaluated sequentially. Note that the model does not have to be explicitly designed to address all of the desiderata, but can capture them implicitly as well (e.g., a model does not have to be explic-itly designed to output binary labels for D1 , it can cover this desideratum implicitly when directly predicting the human judgment distribution). To what extent all the desiderata should be covered by the model also depends on the application, e.g., for an NLI model doing requirement analysis, D6. Represent all perspectives is not of utmost importance. 

## 6 Subjectivity Evaluation Practices 

In Section 5, we formulate the desiderata for a subjectivity-sensitive model in a top-down fash-ion. We now look bottom-up, exploring how these desiderata translate to concrete evaluation practices. We discuss existing metrics and analyze how cur-rent evaluation practices relate to our desiderata in both classification and free-text generation settings. 

6.1 Existing Metrics 

We first discuss metrics used to measure aspects of how well a model captures subjectivity in its pre-dictions. We review related literature and identify the main metrics and evaluation practices. 3

Predicting the full human judgment distribution. 

Determining whether subjectivity is accurately pre-dicted depends on how the model expresses it. When disagreement is represented through soft la-bels, the distance between the original disagree-ment and softmax distribution of the model is mea-sured. Widely used metrics are (variations of) KL-divergence , Jensen-Shannon Divergence , Mean Ab-solute Error , Wasserstein , or Total Variation Dis-tance (Rizzi et al., 2024). Wasserstein distance 

is particularly beneficial when working with ordi-nal labels. To represent whether a single distribu-tion has high or low variation, entropy H is used (Alies et al., 2025). To measure whether the model can capture human disagreement well, Uma et al. (2020) propose measuring the correlation between the entropy of the soft label and the softmax dis-tribution ( Hcorr ). These metrics work in classifi-cation settings but are not applicable when evalu-ating free-text generated responses. In generation 

> 3Our aim is not to provide an exhaustive list of existing metrics, but to provide a snapshot of important metrics and evaluation methods to identify gaps the field can focus on.

6settings, NLI models are used to determine if the generated response covers the different necessary perspectives (Feng et al., 2024; Shetty et al., 2025). 

Single label scenarios. Although not suitable to evaluate soft labels, ACCURACY and F1-SCORE are still used in subjective scenarios, particularly when modeling an individual user (steerable alignment) or evaluating an aggregation of the subjective pre-dictions to a majority label (Mostafazadeh Davani et al., 2022). Additionally, looking at specific mi-norities, such as the worst-off 10% of annotators, may provide insights into performance with respect to the least represented annotators (Van Der Meer et al., 2024a). F1-SCORE can also be used to deter-mine whether a model is good at recognizing sub-jective input or not (Homayounirad et al., 2025), or turned into soft versions (Kurniawan et al., 2025). 

Demographical bias. Certain metrics measure the extent to which a model represents (or is bi-ased toward) specific demographic groups. This can be done by measuring the similarity in re-sponses between a model and a specific country (Durmus et al., 2024) or demographic (Santurkar et al., 2023), or using a linear mixed-effects model for the absolute difference between the model’s de-fault predictions (without prompting for a specific demographic) and a demographic group’s human rating (Sun et al., 2025). Jiang et al. (2025) in-troduce the V ALUE INEQUITY INDEX to measure whether the model’s responses are sensitive to an individual’s demographic or not. 

Reliability. Reliability metrics such as CORRE - 

> LATION

and inter-annotator agreement (IAA) are used for a variety of analyses. IAA is used mainly to measure the agreement between the predictions of the model and the human prediction (Masud et al., 2024; Hoeken et al., 2025). Apart from 

Hcorr , there are a variety of other factors where correlation metrics are used to analyze model per-formance on subjective tasks. Most commonly, such metrics can be used to measure whether the behavior of an LLM globally corresponds to hu-man ratings of items in the dataset (Sap et al., 2022; Ryan et al., 2024; Parappan and Henao, 2025; Chen et al., 2024) or to specific demographics (Giorgi et al., 2024; Pihulski and Koco´ n, 2025). It can also be used for task-specific analyses such as the rank-ing of values between humans and models (Guo et al., 2025), alignment of responses in persona expertise (Luz de Araujo et al., 2025), the relation-ship between performance and amount of annotator training data (Plepi et al., 2022), n-gram usage with persona types (Giorgi et al., 2024), and correlation between model performance and the subjectivity of an input (Homayounirad et al., 2025). For global proximity between the model predicted and the human judgment distributions, DISTANCE CORRE - 

> LATION

(Székely et al., 2007) can be used. 

Calibration. Conventionally a model is consid-ered to be well-calibrated when its confidence scores reflect its empirical performance. For sub-jective tasks, this notion shifts to whether the pre-dicted probabilities reflect the human judgment distribution. While DISTANCE METRICS already capture this, Baan et al. (2022) suggest other cali-bration angles on an instance-level: measuring the difference in entropy between the human judgment distribution and the model’s predicted distribution and whether the class rankings match. 

Other. The following metrics do not fall into the categories above or are too infrequent to be a separate category. Santurkar et al. (2023) pro-pose measuring consistency which verifies whether the model’s default output consistently reflects the same demographic across different topics. V ISU - 

> ALIZING

important dynamics has also gained trac-tion (Wright et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2024), e.g., to plot how the model distribution compares to the human judgment distribution (Chen et al., 2024), or whether personas perform according to the ex-pected dimensions (Wright et al., 2024). Alterna-tively, LLM judges are used to evaluate whether a steered response is better than no steering, rep-resented through the W IN RATE : the proportion of samples for which the steered model is pre-ferred (Chen et al., 2025; Tan and Lee, 2025; Jang et al., 2024). Finally, Samuel et al. (2025) propose 

PersonaScore , a human-aligned score that evalu-ates the generated free-text response according to persona agent-specific tasks. 

6.2 Metrics and Desiderata in Papers 

We analyze how the metrics are used in practice in relation to our desiderata. Based on the metrics we discussed, we distinguish the following categoriza-tion of metrics that are regularly used for evaluating aspects of subjectivity: D ISTANCE METRIC , F1,ACCURACY , R ELIABILITY , and O THER .We searched for papers on subjectivity in NLP through snowballing from key papers and search 70 6 12 18 24 30 36 42 48 54                     

> # Papers
> D1. Recognize when
> D2. Recognize which
> D3. Recognize why
> D4. Predict
> D5. Calibrate
> D6. Represent
> D7. Express
> Desideratum (a) The number of papers that cover each desiderata. 0510 15 20 25 30
> # Papers
> Distance Metric
> F1
> Reliability
> Accuracy
> Other
> Metric Type (b) The number of papers that cover each metric type. 1234
> # Unique
> 0
> 20
> # Papers  Metric Type
> Desiderata
> (c) The number of unique metric types used and desiderata investigated by the amount of papers. 036912 15 18 21 24 27 30
> # Papers
> Single Annotator
> Groups
> All Annotators
> Subjective or Not
> Multilabel
> Separate Label
> Objective
> (d) Number of papers that address a specific evaluation objective.

Figure 3: Statistics from mapping subjective evaluation practices to our desiderata. 

terms such as "subjectivity nlp/llms", "disagree-ment nlp/llms", "perspectivism nlp", "persona prompting". We found 60 papers and annotated them, indicating the category of metrics used (DISTANCE METRIC , F1-variant, RELIABILITY 

metric, ACCURACY -variant, or OTHER ), the eval-uation objective (single annotator/individual, all annotators/population, specific group, subjective as a separate label, multi-label, or subjective or not) and the covered desiderata. 4 Figure 3 shows our mapping. These visualizations are meant to give a general idea of evaluation practices; the distri-butions presented in the figures are based on an indicative (not exhaustive) literature search. 

D1.Recognize when there is subjectivity 

is captured either as a binary classification task (subjective or not) or as a continuous task (how subjective). In the binary scenario, F1 (Wan et al., 2023; Homayounirad et al., 2025) and A CCURACY 

are used (Romberg, 2022). Depending on the repre-sentation of the continuous label, evaluation ranges from using a distance metric (Wan et al., 2023) to the softmax distribution Hcorr (Alies et al., 2025). 

D2.Recognize which type of subjectivity 

is not explicitly evaluated by the papers we consid-ered. We identified a limited number of studies that closely align with this desideratum. These papers compare performance based on the type of subjec-tivity. This is achieved by manually labeling the type of subjectivity per sample (Jiang and de Marn-effe, 2022; Sandri et al., 2023) or by using different 

> 4We will release the complete overview upon acceptance.

datasets designed for specific types of subjectivity (Feng et al., 2024). 

D3.Recognize why the input is subjective 

is only directly investigated in one study that mea-sures whether a model can generate and recog-nize disambiguations in NLI (Liu et al., 2023). For the generation, E DIT -F1 (an F1 variant that also accounts for added and deleted unigrams be-tween the reference and generated disambiguation) was used. ACCURACY was used to determine whether the model can recognize disambiguations. Other papers conducted a qualitative analysis of keywords responsible for the prediction through feature-attribution methods (Wan et al., 2023; Mus-cato et al., 2025) or through manually annotating the data for reasons of subjectivity and compar-ing model performance accordingly (Sandri et al., 2023; Hoeken et al., 2025). 

D4.Predict subjectivity accurately is evaluated through different metric categories, as discussed in Section 6.1. Depending on the eval-uation objective, variants of A CCURACY , F1, RELIABILITY , D ISTANCE METRIC , and O THER 

(V ISUALIZATION or W IN RATE ) are used. 

D5.Calibrate the output with respect to frequency of opinions is mainly evaluated via D ISTANCE METRICS . Some papers evaluate calibration in terms of model confidence match-ing empirical performance (Sorensen et al., 2025; Parappan and Henao, 2025). However, such evalu-ations are not specific to subjectivity. 8D6.Represent all perspectives is evaluated from a variety of angles. D ISTANCE METRICS are used to compare differences in predictions between demographics or to measure similarity between a model’s default output and specific demographics. RELIABILITY metrics are used to investigate the correlation between the model’s default output and a specific perspective and to measure whether the model can represent demographic groups well. A C- 

> CURACY

is used for per-country or demographic performance or V ALUE INEQUITY INDEX to mea-sure the extent to which model performance devi-ates across different demographics. 

In general, we find that the papers in our anal-ysis focused primarily on D4.Predict and did not investigate D7.Express subjectivity at all (Fig-ure 3a). The most prevalent types of metric are DIS -

> TANCE METRIC

, F1, and A CCURACY (Figure 3b). Single annotators are most popular as the evalu-ation objective, followed by representing groups (Figure 3d). Modeling the full human judgment distribution which is not conditioned on a demo-graphic is also well-studied. Most papers consider one to two metric types or desiderata (Figure 3c). 

## 7 Opportunities and Challenges 

We discuss the gaps ( ) we identified that present opportunities ( ) for future work along with criti-cal challenges that require a closer look. Keeping our desiderata in mind, we highlight some key aspects that have been (partially) unex-plored. 

The desideratum D7.Express is unaddressed. 

None of the papers in our analysis studies how to express subjectivity to the user without hamper-ing their experience. Effective modeling of sub-jectivity is of limited value if the outcome is not adequately conveyed to the user. However, this effectiveness is user-specific. As such, we can bor-row insights and metrics from other fields, such as Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) (Ehsan and Riedl, 2020; Benjamin et al., 2022), Affective Com-puting (Kunc et al., 2024), or Computer-Supported Collaborative Work (Lai et al., 2023), to steer the developments of new expression evaluation strate-gies. 

Use insights and metrics from adjacent fields to evaluate D7.Express .

The desiderata D2.Recognize which and 

D3.Recognize why are understudied. Recog-nizing which type of subjectivity ( D2 ) and why the input is subjective ( D3 ) are addressed implic-itly through performance-based analyses. For D3 ,only one paper explicitly evaluates for disambigua-tions (in NLI). Some papers resort to qualitative analyses through feature-attribution methods. In-terpretability or explainability techniques can play a role in identifying key drivers in the input toward the prediction made. We postulate that such meth-ods can be combined with manually annotated data to construct metrics that verify whether the model is making its predictions for the right reasons. 5

To study D2 , the inherent uncertainty surround-ing the input could provide a starting point. Tradi-tionally, neural network uncertainty is decomposed into aleatoric and epistemic uncertainty (Hüller-meier and Waegeman, 2021). Aleatoric uncertainty refers to the uncertainty that lies in the input itself such as inherent ambiguity or noise. Measuring the aleatoric uncertainty of an input can thus help identify ambiguous input. It remains a challenge to measure the uncertainty surrounding the polyphony of an input, and we invite future work to tackle this. 

Design metrics to address D2.Recognize which and D3.Recognize why , potentially through methodologies for uncertainty esti-mation and explainability. 

The entanglement of polyphony and ambi-guity has not been at the forefront yet. These two have been studied in isolation. As illustrated in Section 3, the two types of subjectivity can co-occur and understanding how a model handles this interplay can help in gaining broader insights into the model’s sensitivity to subjective input. 

Study the entanglement of polyphony and ambiguity at a sample-level. 

A multi-faceted and deployment-driven in-vestigation of model behavior is missing. Tak-ing into account all desiderata is challenging due to limited evaluation practices and experimental constraints. Yet, evaluating models on subjective tasks from a variety of angles is necessary. Impor-tantly, these different aspects should not be studied 

> 5The discussion surrounding the faithfulness (Jacovi and Goldberg, 2020) of such techniques should be considered when using these methods.

9in isolation but their interplay must be studied as well. We find that papers do not evaluate the con-sequences of earlier desiderata on the subsequent desiderata (e.g., what is the consequence of the model performing badly on D3.Recognize why 

on D4.Predict ?), while this is crucial for ensuring reliable deployment of such models. 

Study the interplay of desiderata Further, NLP researchers may not know how the model will express subjectivity, particularly in the case of free-text generation scenarios (e.g., overton vs steerable). In general, we notice that current research directions emphasize steering or personalizing a model toward a specific perspective, rather than investigating how the model fares in capturing a wider or even the (full) spectrum of perspectives. Thus, it is essential to evaluate all three operationalizations of pluralistic alignment 

to make informed deployment decisions. 

Evaluate modes of expressing subjectivity. 

Evaluation of D4.Predict in free-text gener-ation scenarios is limited. Most of the metrics are directly applicable in classification scenarios, but demand additional steps for free-text generated responses. 

Design metrics to evaluate how well free-text generation predicts subjectivity. 

Current datasets still fail to meet standards for subjective evaluation. Datasets are increas-ingly being released with disaggregated labels and broad annotator backgrounds (e.g., Sachdeva et al. (2022); Aroyo et al. (2023)), including informa-tion such as annotator confidence ratings (Alacam et al., 2025). However, this might not be suffi-cient to capture the full spectrum of perspectives. Answering questions such as who should annotate 

what requires interdisciplinary efforts, grounding annotation strategies in fields such as intersectional feminism (Klumbytè et al., 2022), moral philoso-phy (Graham et al., 2013), or social science (Zhao, 2021). Future directions include working on met-rics that can measure the diversity of the annotator distribution for a given sample or dataset to en-able the creation of data and annotations that facili-tate high-quality subjective representations in the model and thorough evaluation approaches. 

Develop interdisciplinary approaches to im-prove datasets and annotation strategies. Finally, the impact of pre-training data on the performance of subjectivity-sensitive models re-quires further investigation. An interesting research avenue is to quantify the extent to which the pre-training data already encapsulates subjectivity, un-veiling whether and how pre-trained models are already exposed to multiple viewpoints. 

## 8 Conclusion 

The impactful nature of NLP models in society de-mands that these models be sensitive to subjectivity, representing multiple perspectives in their output. We analyze the current evaluation paradigms of subjectivity-sensitive models. We begin by under-standing subjectivity and how it is represented in NLP data and models, which leads us to define the desiderata for a subjectivity-sensitive model. We take a top-down approach to design seven desider-ata, driven by our ideals for a model to (1) represent all, based on (2) the correct source of subjectivity to (3) generalize to the real world. We then analyze 

60 papers to map evaluation metrics to our desider-ata. This mapping allows us to identify gaps, which can be fruitful directions for future work. Among these gaps, we primarily find that existing work has overlooked nuances in the types of subjectivity: polyphony versus ambiguity, and we argue that this distinction is crucial for effective evaluation. Addi-tionally, current research efforts do not touch on our seventh desideratum: Express , nor the interplay between different desiderata. We finally highlight the importance of interdisciplinary collaboration to facilitate datasets and annotation strategies that can better capture subjectivity, and in turn, improve subjectivity-sensitive model development and eval-uation. 

## Acknowledgments 

This research was (partially) funded by the Hybrid Intelligence Center, a 10-year programme, and Al-goSoc, a collaborative 10-year research program on public values in the algorithmic society, both funded by the Dutch Ministry of Education, Cul-ture and Science under the Gravitation programme (project numbers 024.005.017 and 024.004.022) through the Netherlands Organisation for Scientific Research. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are 10 those of the author(s) and do not necessarily re-flect the views of OCW or those of the AlgoSoc consortium as a whole. The figures and affiliation emojis have been designed using resources from flaticon.com; the chatbot for Express is by Flat Icons, lightbulb + hand by Dewi Sari, and the rest of the emojis by freepik. 

## References 

Gavin Abercrombie, Tanvi Dinkar, Amanda Cer-cas Curry, Verena Rieser, and Dirk Hovy. 2025. Con-sistency is key: Disentangling label variation in nat-ural language processing with intra-annotator agree-ment. In Proceedings of the The 4th Workshop on Per-spectivist Approaches to NLP , pages 63–74, Suzhou, China. Association for Computational Linguistics. Özge Alacam, Sanne Hoeken, Andreas Säuberli, Hannes Gröner, Diego Frassinelli, Sina Zarrieß, and Barbara Plank. 2025. Disentangling subjectivity and uncertainty for hate speech annotation and modeling using gaze. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-ing , pages 28707–28724, Suzhou, China. Association for Computational Linguistics. Richard Alies, Elena Merdjanovska, and Alan Akbik. 2025. Measuring label ambiguity in subjective tasks using predictive uncertainty estimation. In Proceed-ings of the 19th Linguistic Annotation Workshop (LAW-XIX-2025) , pages 21–34, Vienna, Austria. As-sociation for Computational Linguistics. Lora Aroyo, Alex Taylor, Mark Díaz, Christopher Homan, Alicia Parrish, Gregory Serapio-García, Vin-odkumar Prabhakaran, and Ding Wang. 2023. Dices dataset: Diversity in conversational ai evaluation for safety. In Advances in Neural Information Process-ing Systems , volume 36, pages 53330–53342. Curran Associates, Inc. Lora Aroyo and Chris Welty. 2015. Truth is a lie: Crowd truth and the seven myths of human annotation. AI Magazine , 36(1):15–24. Joris Baan, Wilker Aziz, Barbara Plank, and Raquel Fernandez. 2022. Stop measuring calibration when humans disagree. In Proceedings of the 2022 Con-ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 1892–1915, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates. Association for Computational Lin-guistics. Valerio Basile, Michael Fell, Tommaso Fornaciari, Dirk Hovy, Silviu Paun, Barbara Plank, Massimo Poesio, and Alexandra Uma. 2021. We need to consider disagreement in evaluation. In Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on Benchmarking: Past, Present and Future , pages 15–21, Online. Association for Com-putational Linguistics. Emily M. Bender and Batya Friedman. 2018. Data statements for natural language processing: Toward mitigating system bias and enabling better science. 

Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 6:587–604. Jesse Josua Benjamin, Christoph Kinkeldey, Clau-dia Müller-Birn, Tim Korjakow, and Eva-Maria Herbst. 2022. Explanation strategies as an empirical-analytical lens for socio-technical contextualization of machine learning interpretability. Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact. , 6(GROUP). Federico Cabitza, Andrea Campagner, and Valerio Basile. 2023. Toward a perspectivist turn in ground truthing for predictive computing. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence ,37(6):6860–6868. Stephen Casper, Xander Davies, Claudia Shi, Thomas Krendl Gilbert, Jérémy Scheurer, Javier Rando, Rachel Freedman, Tomek Korbak, David Lindner, Pedro Freire, Tony Tong Wang, Samuel Marks, Charbel-Raphael Segerie, Micah Carroll, Andi Peng, Phillip J.K. Christoffersen, Mehul Damani, Stewart Slocum, Usman Anwar, and 13 others. 2023. Open problems and fundamental limita-tions of reinforcement learning from human feedback. 

Transactions on Machine Learning Research . Survey Certification, Featured Certification. Beiduo Chen, Xinpeng Wang, Siyao Peng, Robert Litschko, Anna Korhonen, and Barbara Plank. 2024. “seeing the big through the small”: Can LLMs ap-proximate human judgment distributions on NLI from a few explanations? In Findings of the As-sociation for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2024 , pages 14396–14419, Miami, Florida, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics. Ruizhe Chen, Xiaotian Zhang, Meng Luo, Wenhao Chai, and Zuozhu Liu. 2025. PAD: Personalized alignment at decoding-time. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations .Cathrine Damgaard, Paulina Toborek, Trine Eriksen, and Barbara Plank. 2021. “I‘ll be there for you”: The one with understanding indirect answers. In Pro-ceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Computational Ap-proaches to Discourse , pages 1–11, Punta Cana, Do-minican Republic and Online. Association for Com-putational Linguistics. Naihao Deng, Xinliang Zhang, Siyang Liu, Winston Wu, Lu Wang, and Rada Mihalcea. 2023. You are what you annotate: Towards better models through anno-tator representations. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023 , pages 12475–12498, Singapore. Association for Computa-tional Linguistics. Ameet Deshpande, Vishvak Murahari, Tanmay Rajpuro-hit, Ashwin Kalyan, and Karthik Narasimhan. 2023. Toxicity in chatgpt: Analyzing persona-assigned lan-guage models. In Findings of the Association for 

11 Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023 , pages 1236–1270, Singapore. Association for Computa-tional Linguistics. Mark Díaz, Ian Kivlichan, Rachel Rosen, Dylan Baker, Razvan Amironesei, Vinodkumar Prabhakaran, and Remi Denton. 2022. Crowdworksheets: Account-ing for individual and collective identities underlying crowdsourced dataset annotation. In Proceedings of the 2022 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountabil-ity, and Transparency , FAccT ’22, page 2342–2351, New York, NY, USA. Association for Computing Machinery. Anca Dumitrache, Oana Inel, Lora Aroyo, Benjamin Timmermans, and Chris Welty. 2018. Crowdtruth 2.0: Quality metrics for crowdsourcing with disagree-ment. In 1st Workshop on Subjectivity, Ambiguity and Disagreement in Crowdsourcing, and Short Pa-per 1st Workshop on Disentangling the Relation Be-tween Crowdsourcing and Bias Management, SAD+ CrowdBias 2018 , pages 11–18. CEUR-WS. Esin Durmus, Karina Nguyen, Thomas Liao, Nicholas Schiefer, Amanda Askell, Anton Bakhtin, Carol Chen, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Danny Hernandez, Nicholas Joseph, Liane Lovitt, Sam McCandlish, Orowa Sikder, Alex Tamkin, Janel Thamkul, Jared Kaplan, Jack Clark, and Deep Ganguli. 2024. To-wards measuring the representation of subjective global opinions in language models. In First Confer-ence on Language Modeling .Upol Ehsan and Mark O. Riedl. 2020. Human-centered explainable ai: Towards a reflective sociotechnical approach. In HCI International 2020 - Late Break-ing Papers: Multimodality and Intelligence: 22nd HCI International Conference, HCII 2020, Copen-hagen, Denmark, July 19–24, 2020, Proceedings ,page 449–466, Berlin, Heidelberg. Springer-Verlag. Shangbin Feng, Taylor Sorensen, Yuhan Liu, Jillian Fisher, Chan Young Park, Yejin Choi, and Yulia Tsvetkov. 2024. Modular pluralism: Pluralistic align-ment via multi-LLM collaboration. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 4151–4171, Mi-ami, Florida, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics. Maxwell Forbes, Jena D. Hwang, Vered Shwartz, Maarten Sap, and Yejin Choi. 2020. Social chem-istry 101: Learning to reason about social and moral norms. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) , pages 653–670, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics. Tommaso Fornaciari, Alexandra Uma, Silviu Paun, Bar-bara Plank, Dirk Hovy, and Massimo Poesio. 2021. Beyond black & white: Leveraging annotator dis-agreement via soft-label multi-task learning. In Pro-ceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North Amer-ican Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies , pages 2591–2597, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics. Paula Fortuna, Juan Soler, and Leo Wanner. 2020. Toxic, hateful, offensive or abusive? what are we really classifying? an empirical analysis of hate speech datasets. In Proceedings of the Twelfth Lan-guage Resources and Evaluation Conference , pages 6786–6794, Marseille, France. European Language Resources Association. Simona Frenda, Gavin Abercrombie, Valerio Basile, Alessandro Pedrani, Raffaella Panizzon, Alessan-dra Teresa Cignarella, Cristina Marco, and Davide Bernardi. 2025. Perspectivist approaches to natural language processing: a survey. Language Resources and Evaluation , 59(2):1719–1746. Salvatore Giorgi, Tingting Liu, Ankit Aich, Kelsey Jane Isman, Garrick Sherman, Zachary Fried, João Sedoc, Lyle Ungar, and Brenda Curtis. 2024. Modeling hu-man subjectivity in LLMs using explicit and implicit human factors in personas. In Findings of the Associ-ation for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2024 ,pages 7174–7188, Miami, Florida, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics. Mitchell L. Gordon, Kaitlyn Zhou, Kayur Patel, Tat-sunori Hashimoto, and Michael S. Bernstein. 2021. The disagreement deconvolution: Bringing machine learning performance metrics in line with reality. In 

Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , CHI ’21, New York, NY, USA. Association for Computing Machinery. Nitesh Goyal, Ian D. Kivlichan, Rachel Rosen, and Lucy Vasserman. 2022. Is your toxicity my toxic-ity? exploring the impact of rater identity on toxic-ity annotation. Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact. ,6(CSCW2). Jesse Graham, Jonathan Haidt, Sena Koleva, Matt Motyl, Ravi Iyer, Sean P. Wojcik, and Peter H. Ditto. 2013. Moral Foundations Theory: The Pragmatic Validity of Moral Pluralism. In Advances in Experi-mental Social Psychology , volume 47, pages 55–130. Elsevier. Cornelia Gruber, Katharina Hechinger, Matthias Assen-macher, Göran Kauermann, and Barbara Plank. 2024. More labels or cases? assessing label variation in nat-ural language inference. In Proceedings of the Third Workshop on Understanding Implicit and Underspec-ified Language , pages 22–32, Malta. Association for Computational Linguistics. Hanze Guo, Jing Yao, Xiao Zhou, Xiaoyuan Yi, and Xing Xie. 2025. Counterfactual reasoning for steer-able pluralistic value alignment of large language models. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems .Shirley Anugrah Hayati, Minhwa Lee, Dheeraj Ra-jagopal, and Dongyeop Kang. 2024. How far can we extract diverse perspectives from large language models? In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on 

12 Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing ,pages 5336–5366, Miami, Florida, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics. Sanne Hoeken, Özge Alacam, Dong Nguyen, Massimo Poesio, and Sina Zarrieß. 2025. Not just who or what: Modeling the interaction of linguistic and an-notator variation in hateful word interpretation. In 

Proceedings of the 16th International Conference on Computational Semantics , pages 63–77, Düsseldorf, Germany. Association for Computational Linguistics. Amir Homayounirad, Enrico Liscio, Tong Wang, Catholijn M Jonker, and Luciano Cavalcante Siebert. 2025. Will annotators disagree? identifying subjec-tivity in value-laden arguments. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2025 , pages 15237–15252, Suzhou, China. Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics. Eyke Hüllermeier and Willem Waegeman. 2021. Aleatoric and epistemic uncertainty in machine learn-ing: An introduction to concepts and methods. Ma-chine learning , 110(3):457–506. Daniil Ignatev, Denis Paperno, and Massimo Poesio. 2025. Hypernetworks for perspectivist adaptation. In 

Proceedings of the The 4th Workshop on Perspectivist Approaches to NLP , pages 111–122, Suzhou, China. Association for Computational Linguistics. Jonathan Ivey, Susan Gauch, and David Jurgens. 2025. NUTMEG: Separating signal from noise in annotator disagreement. In Proceedings of the 2025 Confer-ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 2874–2887, Suzhou, China. Asso-ciation for Computational Linguistics. Alon Jacovi and Yoav Goldberg. 2020. Towards faith-fully interpretable NLP systems: How should we define and evaluate faithfulness? In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , pages 4198–4205, On-line. Association for Computational Linguistics. Emily Jamison and Iryna Gurevych. 2015. Noise or additional information? leveraging crowdsource an-notation item agreement for natural language tasks. In Proceedings of the 2015 Conference on Empiri-cal Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 291–297, Lisbon, Portugal. Association for Compu-tational Linguistics. Joel Jang, Seungone Kim, Bill Yuchen Lin, Yizhong Wang, Jack Hessel, Luke Zettlemoyer, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Yejin Choi, and Prithviraj Ammanabrolu. 2024. Personalized soups: Personalized large lan-guage model alignment via post-hoc parameter merg-ing. In Adaptive Foundation Models: Evolving AI for Personalized and Efficient Learning .Liwei Jiang, Taylor Sorensen, Sydney Levine, and Yejin Choi. 2025. Can language models reason about in-dividualistic human values and preferences? In Pro-ceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 6757–6794, Vienna, Austria. Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics. Nan-Jiang Jiang and Marie-Catherine de Marneffe. 2022. Investigating reasons for disagreement in natu-ral language inference. Transactions of the Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics , 10:1357–1374. Uthman Jinadu and Yi Ding. 2024. Noise correction on subjective datasets. In Proceedings of the 62nd An-nual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 5385– 5395, Bangkok, Thailand. Association for Computa-tional Linguistics. Urja Khurana, Eric Nalisnick, Antske Fokkens, and Swabha Swayamdipta. 2024. Crowd-calibrator: Can annotator disagreement inform calibration in subjec-tive tasks? In First Conference on Language Model-ing .Urja Khurana, Ivar Vermeulen, Eric Nalisnick, Mar-loes Van Noorloos, and Antske Fokkens. 2022. Hate speech criteria: A modular approach to task-specific hate speech definitions. In Proceedings of the Sixth Workshop on Online Abuse and Harms (WOAH) ,pages 176–191, Seattle, Washington (Hybrid). Asso-ciation for Computational Linguistics. Goda Klumbytè, Claude Draude, and Alex S. Taylor. 2022. Critical tools for machine learning: Working with intersectional critical concepts in machine learn-ing systems design. In Proceedings of the 2022 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Trans-parency , FAccT ’22, page 1528–1541, New York, NY, USA. Association for Computing Machinery. Dominika Kunc, Joanna Komoszy´ nska, Stanisław Saganowski, Przemysław Kazienko, Karen S. Quigley, and Lisa Feldman Barrett. 2024. Embrac-ing subjectivity in affective research: Naturalistic and controlled settings. In 2024 12th International Conference on Affective Computing and Intelligent Interaction Workshops and Demos (ACIIW) , pages 176–180. Kemal Kurniawan, Meladel Mistica, Timothy Baldwin, and Jey Han Lau. 2025. Training and evaluating with human label variation: An empirical study. Compu-tational Linguistics , pages 1–27. Vivian Lai, Yiming Zhang, Chacha Chen, Q. Vera Liao, and Chenhao Tan. 2023. Selective explanations: Leveraging human input to align explainable ai. Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact. , 7(CSCW2). Elisa Leonardelli, Stefano Menini, Alessio Palmero Aprosio, Marco Guerini, and Sara Tonelli. 2021. Agreeing to disagree: Annotating offensive language datasets with annotators’ dis-agreement. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-ing , pages 10528–10539, Online and Punta Cana, Dominican Republic. Association for Computational Linguistics. 

13 Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal, Hein-rich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rock-täschel, Sebastian Riedel, and Douwe Kiela. 2020. Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks. In Advances in Neural Infor-mation Processing Systems , volume 33, pages 9459– 9474. Curran Associates, Inc. Cheng Li, Mingyang Zhang, Qiaozhu Mei, Weize Kong, and Michael Bendersky. 2024. Learning to rewrite prompts for personalized text generation. In Pro-ceedings of the ACM Web Conference 2024 , pages 3367–3378. Enrico Liscio, Oscar Araque, Lorenzo Gatti, Ionut Con-stantinescu, Catholijn Jonker, Kyriaki Kalimeri, and Pradeep Kumar Murukannaiah. 2023. What does a text classifier learn about morality? an explain-able method for cross-domain comparison of moral rhetoric. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Vol-ume 1: Long Papers) , pages 14113–14132, Toronto, Canada. Association for Computational Linguistics. Alisa Liu, Zhaofeng Wu, Julian Michael, Alane Suhr, Peter West, Alexander Koller, Swabha Swayamdipta, Noah Smith, and Yejin Choi. 2023. We‘re afraid language models aren‘t modeling ambiguity. In Pro-ceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Meth-ods in Natural Language Processing , pages 790–807, Singapore. Association for Computational Linguis-tics. Nicholas Lourie, Ronan Le Bras, and Yejin Choi. 2021. Scruples: A corpus of community ethical judgments on 32,000 real-life anecdotes. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , vol-ume 35, pages 13470–13479. Pedro Henrique Luz de Araujo, Paul Röttger, Dirk Hovy, and Benjamin Roth. 2025. Principled per-sonas: Defining and measuring the intended effects of persona prompting on task performance. In Proceed-ings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 26857–26886, Suzhou, China. Association for Computational Lin-guistics. Sarah Masud, Sahajpreet Singh, Viktor Hangya, Alexan-der Fraser, and Tanmoy Chakraborty. 2024. Hate per-sonified: Investigating the role of LLMs in content moderation. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-ing , pages 15847–15863, Miami, Florida, USA. As-sociation for Computational Linguistics. Nicole Meister, Carlos Guestrin, and Tatsunori Hashimoto. 2025. Benchmarking distributional align-ment of large language models. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference of the Nations of the Americas Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-guistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 24–49, Albuquerque, New Mexico. Association for Computational Linguistics. Aida Mostafazadeh Davani, Mark Díaz, and Vinodku-mar Prabhakaran. 2022. Dealing with disagreements: Looking beyond the majority vote in subjective an-notations. Transactions of the Association for Com-putational Linguistics , 10:92–110. Benedetta Muscato, Lucia Passaro, Gizem Gezici, and Fosca Giannotti. 2025. Perspectives in play: A multi-perspective approach for more inclusive nlp systems. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.20209 .Sheshera Mysore, Zhuoran Lu, Mengting Wan, Longqi Yang, Bahareh Sarrafzadeh, Steve Menezes, Tina Baghaee, Emmanuel Barajas Gonzalez, Jennifer Neville, and Tara Safavi. 2024. Pearl: Personal-izing large language model writing assistants with generation-calibrated retrievers. In Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on Customizable NLP: Progress and Challenges in Customizing NLP for a Domain, Application, Group, or Individual (CustomNLP4U) ,pages 198–219, Miami, Florida, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics. Yixin Nie, Xiang Zhou, and Mohit Bansal. 2020. What can we learn from collective human opinions on nat-ural language inference data? In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) , pages 9131–9143, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics. Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, John Schulman, Jacob Hilton, Fraser Kelton, Luke Miller, Maddie Simens, Amanda Askell, Peter Welinder, Paul F Christiano, Jan Leike, and Ryan Lowe. 2022. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 35, pages 27730–27744. Curran Associates, Inc. Cecilia Ovesdotter Alm. 2011. Subjective natural lan-guage problems: Motivations, applications, charac-terizations, and implications. In Proceedings of the 49th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-tational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies ,pages 107–112, Portland, Oregon, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics. Deepak Pandita, Flip Korn, Chris Welty, and Christo-pher M Homan. 2025. Forest vs tree: The (n, k )

trade-off in reproducible ml evaluation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.03663 .Mohammed Fayiz Parappan and Ricardo Henao. 2025. Learning subjective label distributions via sociocul-tural descriptors. In Proceedings of the 2025 Con-ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 20322–20338, Suzhou, China. As-sociation for Computational Linguistics. Ellie Pavlick and Tom Kwiatkowski. 2019. Inherent disagreements in human textual inferences. Transac-tions of the Association for Computational Linguis-tics , 7:677–694. 

14 Jiaxin Pei and David Jurgens. 2023. When do annota-tor demographics matter? measuring the influence of annotator demographics with the POPQUORN dataset. In Proceedings of the 17th Linguistic Annota-tion Workshop (LAW-XVII) , pages 252–265, Toronto, Canada. Association for Computational Linguistics. Dzmitry Pihulski and Jan Koco´ n. 2025. Language, cul-ture, and ideology: Personalizing offensiveness de-tection in political tweets with reasoning llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.02351 .Barbara Plank. 2022. The “problem” of human label variation: On ground truth in data, modeling and evaluation. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-ing , pages 10671–10682, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates. Association for Computational Linguistics. Joan Plepi, Béla Neuendorf, Lucie Flek, and Charles Welch. 2022. Unifying data perspectivism and per-sonalization: An application to social norms. In Pro-ceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Meth-ods in Natural Language Processing , pages 7391– 7402, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates. Association for Computational Linguistics. Sriyash Poddar, Yanming Wan, Hamish Ivison, Ab-hishek Gupta, and Natasha Jaques. 2024. Person-alizing reinforcement learning from human feedback with variational preference learning. In The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems .Vinodkumar Prabhakaran, Aida Mostafazadeh Davani, and Mark Diaz. 2021. On releasing annotator-level labels and information in datasets. In Proceedings of the Joint 15th Linguistic Annotation Workshop (LAW) and 3rd Designing Meaning Representations (DMR) Workshop , pages 133–138, Punta Cana, Dominican Republic. Association for Computational Linguistics. Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Christo-pher D Manning, Stefano Ermon, and Chelsea Finn. 2023. Direct preference optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 36, pages 53728–53741. Curran Associates, Inc. Chris Richardson, Yao Zhang, Kellen Gillespie, Sudipta Kar, Arshdeep Singh, Zeynab Raeesy, Omar Zia Khan, and Abhinav Sethy. 2023. Integrating sum-marization and retrieval for enhanced personaliza-tion via large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.20081 .Giulia Rizzi, Elisa Leonardelli, Massimo Poesio, Alexandra Uma, Maja Pavlovic, Silviu Paun, Paolo Rosso, and Elisabetta Fersini. 2024. Soft metrics for evaluation with disagreements: an assessment. In Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Perspec-tivist Approaches to NLP (NLPerspectives) @ LREC-COLING 2024 , pages 84–94, Torino, Italia. ELRA and ICCL. Filipe Rodrigues and Francisco Pereira. 2018. Deep learning from crowds. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence , volume 32. Julia Romberg. 2022. Is your perspective also my per-spective? enriching prediction with subjectivity. In 

Proceedings of the 9th Workshop on Argument Min-ing , pages 115–125, Online and in Gyeongju, Repub-lic of Korea. International Conference on Computa-tional Linguistics. Paul Rottger, Bertie Vidgen, Dirk Hovy, and Janet Pier-rehumbert. 2022. Two contrasting data annotation paradigms for subjective NLP tasks. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference of the North American Chap-ter of the Association for Computational Linguis-tics: Human Language Technologies , pages 175–190, Seattle, United States. Association for Computational Linguistics. Michael J Ryan, William Held, and Diyi Yang. 2024. Unintended impacts of LLM alignment on global rep-resentation. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meet-ing of the Association for Computational Linguis-tics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 16121–16140, Bangkok, Thailand. Association for Computational Linguistics. Pratik Sachdeva, Renata Barreto, Geoff Bacon, Alexan-der Sahn, Claudia von Vacano, and Chris Kennedy. 2022. The measuring hate speech corpus: Leverag-ing rasch measurement theory for data perspectivism. In Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on Perspectivist Approaches to NLP @LREC2022 , pages 83–94, Mar-seille, France. European Language Resources Asso-ciation. Alireza Salemi, Surya Kallumadi, and Hamed Zamani. 2024a. Optimization methods for personalizing large language models through retrieval augmentation. In 

Proceedings of the 47th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Infor-mation Retrieval , SIGIR ’24, page 752–762, New York, NY, USA. Association for Computing Machin-ery. Alireza Salemi, Sheshera Mysore, Michael Bendersky, and Hamed Zamani. 2024b. LaMP: When large lan-guage models meet personalization. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,pages 7370–7392, Bangkok, Thailand. Association for Computational Linguistics. Vinay Samuel, Henry Peng Zou, Yue Zhou, Shreyas Chaudhari, Ashwin Kalyan, Tanmay Rajpurohit, Ameet Deshpande, Karthik R Narasimhan, and Vish-vak Murahari. 2025. PersonaGym: Evaluating per-sona agents and LLMs. In Findings of the Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2025 ,pages 6999–7022, Suzhou, China. Association for Computational Linguistics. Marta Sandri, Elisa Leonardelli, Sara Tonelli, and Elis-abetta Jezek. 2023. Why don‘t you do it right? 

15 analysing annotators’ disagreement in subjective tasks. In Proceedings of the 17th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Compu-tational Linguistics , pages 2428–2441, Dubrovnik, Croatia. Association for Computational Linguistics. Shibani Santurkar, Esin Durmus, Faisal Ladhak, Cinoo Lee, Percy Liang, and Tatsunori Hashimoto. 2023. Whose opinions do language models reflect? In In-ternational Conference on Machine Learning , pages 29971–30004. PMLR. Maarten Sap, Swabha Swayamdipta, Laura Vianna, Xuhui Zhou, Yejin Choi, and Noah A. Smith. 2022. Annotators with attitudes: How annotator beliefs and identities bias toxic language detection. In Pro-ceedings of the 2022 Conference of the North Amer-ican Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies , pages 5884–5906, Seattle, United States. Association for Computational Linguistics. Anudeex Shetty, Amin Beheshti, Mark Dras, and Usman Naseem. 2025. VITAL: A new dataset for bench-marking pluralistic alignment in healthcare. In Pro-ceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 22954–22974, Vienna, Austria. Asso-ciation for Computational Linguistics. Pia Sommerauer, Antske Fokkens, and Piek Vossen. 2020. Would you describe a leopard as yellow? eval-uating crowd-annotations with justified and informa-tive disagreement. In Proceedings of the 28th Inter-national Conference on Computational Linguistics ,pages 4798–4809, Barcelona, Spain (Online). Inter-national Committee on Computational Linguistics. Taylor Sorensen, Pushkar Mishra, Roma Patel, Michael Henry Tessler, Michiel A. Bakker, Georgina Evans, Iason Gabriel, Noah Goodman, and Verena Rieser. 2025. Value profiles for encoding human variation. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing ,pages 2047–2095, Suzhou, China. Association for Computational Linguistics. Taylor Sorensen, Jared Moore, Jillian Fisher, Mitchell Gordon, Niloofar Mireshghallah, Christo-pher Michael Rytting, Andre Ye, Liwei Jiang, Ximing Lu, Nouha Dziri, Tim Althoff, and Yejin Choi. 2024. Position: a roadmap to pluralistic alignment. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning , ICML’24. JMLR.org. Huaman Sun, Jiaxin Pei, Minje Choi, and David Ju-rgens. 2025. Sociodemographic prompting is not yet an effective approach for simulating subjective judgments with LLMs. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference of the Nations of the Americas Chap-ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 2: Short Pa-pers) , pages 845–854, Albuquerque, New Mexico. Association for Computational Linguistics. Gábor J. Székely, Maria L. Rizzo, and Nail K. Bakirov. 2007. Measuring and testing dependence by cor-relation of distances. The Annals of Statistics ,35(6):2769–2794. Bryan Chen Zhengyu Tan and Roy Ka-Wei Lee. 2025. Unmasking implicit bias: Evaluating persona-prompted LLM responses in power-disparate social scenarios. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference of the Nations of the Americas Chapter of the Asso-ciation for Computational Linguistics: Human Lan-guage Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 1075–1108, Albuquerque, New Mexico. Association for Computational Linguistics. Zhaoxuan Tan, Qingkai Zeng, Yijun Tian, Zheyuan Liu, Bing Yin, and Meng Jiang. 2024. Democratizing large language models via personalized parameter-efficient fine-tuning. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-guage Processing , pages 6476–6491, Miami, Florida, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics. Alexandra Uma, Tommaso Fornaciari, Anca Dumi-trache, Tristan Miller, Jon Chamberlain, Barbara Plank, Edwin Simpson, and Massimo Poesio. 2021a. SemEval-2021 task 12: Learning with disagreements. In Proceedings of the 15th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval-2021) , pages 338– 347, Online. Association for Computational Linguis-tics. Alexandra Uma, Tommaso Fornaciari, Dirk Hovy, Sil-viu Paun, Barbara Plank, and Massimo Poesio. 2020. A case for soft loss functions. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Human Computation and Crowdsourcing , 8(1):173–177. Alexandra N Uma, Tommaso Fornaciari, Dirk Hovy, Sil-viu Paun, Barbara Plank, and Massimo Poesio. 2021b. Learning from disagreement: A survey. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research , 72:1385–1470. Michiel Van Der Meer, Neele Falk, Pradeep K. Mu-rukannaiah, and Enrico Liscio. 2024a. Annotator-centric active learning for subjective NLP tasks. In 

Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 18537–18555, Miami, Florida, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics. Michiel Van Der Meer, Piek Vossen, Catholijn Jonker, and Pradeep Murukannaiah. 2024b. An empirical analysis of diversity in argument summarization. In 

Proceedings of the 18th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-guistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 2028–2045, St. Julian’s, Malta. Association for Computational Linguistics. Tamara Nikolaevna Vardomskaya. 2018. Sources of subjectivity . The University of Chicago. Bertie Vidgen, Alex Harris, Dong Nguyen, Rebekah Tromble, Scott Hale, and Helen Margetts. 2019. 

16 Challenges and frontiers in abusive content detec-tion. In Proceedings of the Third Workshop on Abu-sive Language Online , pages 80–93, Florence, Italy. Association for Computational Linguistics. Ruyuan Wan, Jaehyung Kim, and Dongyeop Kang. 2023. Everyone’s voice matters: Quantifying anno-tation disagreement using demographic information. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 37, pages 14523–14530. Xiaolong Wang, Yuanchi Zhang, Ziyue Wang, Yuzhuang Xu, Fuwen Luo, Yile Wang, Peng Li, and Yang Liu. 2025. Perspective transition of large lan-guage models for solving subjective tasks. In Find-ings of the Association for Computational Linguis-tics: ACL 2025 , pages 9686–9704, Vienna, Austria. Association for Computational Linguistics. Leon Weber-Genzel, Siyao Peng, Marie-Catherine De Marneffe, and Barbara Plank. 2024. VariErr NLI: Separating annotation error from human label varia-tion. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Vol-ume 1: Long Papers) , pages 2256–2269, Bangkok, Thailand. Association for Computational Linguistics. Dustin Wright, Arnav Arora, Nadav Borenstein, Sr-ishti Yadav, Serge Belongie, and Isabelle Augenstein. 2024. LLM tropes: Revealing fine-grained values and opinions in large language models. In Find-ings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2024 , pages 17085–17112, Miami, Florida, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics. Ben Wu, Yue Li, Yida Mu, Carolina Scarton, Kalina Bontcheva, and Xingyi Song. 2023. Don‘t waste a single annotation: improving single-label classi-fiers through soft labels. In Findings of the Associ-ation for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023 ,pages 5347–5355, Singapore. Association for Com-putational Linguistics. Albert Xu, Eshaan Pathak, Eric Wallace, Suchin Guru-rangan, Maarten Sap, and Dan Klein. 2021. Detoxi-fying language models risks marginalizing minority voices. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-nologies , pages 2390–2397, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics. Zhehao Zhang, Ryan A. Rossi, Branislav Kveton, Yi-jia Shao, Diyi Yang, Hamed Zamani, Franck Der-noncourt, Joe Barrow, Tong Yu, Sungchul Kim, Ruiyi Zhang, Jiuxiang Gu, Tyler Derr, Hongjie Chen, Junda Wu, Xiang Chen, Zichao Wang, Subrata Mitra, Nedim Lipka, and 2 others. 2025. Personalization of large language models: A survey. Transactions on Machine Learning Research . Survey Certification. Kino Zhao. 2021. Sample representation in the social sciences. Synthese , 198(10):9097–9115. Siyan Zhao, John Dang, and Aditya Grover. 2024. Group preference optimization: Few-shot alignment of large language models. In The Twelfth Interna-tional Conference on Learning Representations .

17