Title: Noncommutative Cluster Varieties and Moduli Spaces of Local Systems

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.27284v1

Published Time: Fri, 28 Aug 2026 01:29:15 GMT

Number of Pages: 133

Markdown Content:
NONCOMMUTATIVE CLUSTER VARIETIES AND MODULI SPACES OF LOCAL SYSTEMS 

ZACHARY GREENBERG, DANI KAUFMAN, MERIK NIEMEYER, AND ANNA WIENHARD 

Abstract. In this article, we construct noncommutative cluster varieties, AR,S , for each reduced root system R and marked surface S simultaneously generalizing the cluster varieties of Fock-Goncharov, Li, Goncharov-Shen, Berenstein-Retakh, Goncharov-Kontsevich, and our previously introduced polygonal cluster algebras. Additionally, we define a large class of algebraic groups, we call Jordan split groups. Given a reduced root system R and a family of Jordan algebras, the Lie algebra for G is constructed by unifying the Tits-Kantor-Koecher construction for a single Jordan algebra with the construction of a split Lie algebra. The notion of Jordan split groups is closely related to a grading of its Lie algebra by the root system R. We show that these gradings are usually induced by a choice of standard parabolic subalgebra pΘ and we classify R-graded pairs (G, Θ) via a condition depending only on the subset Θ ⊂ ∆ of the set of simple roots, providing many groups to which our results apply. Jordan split groups can be pinned using Jordan algebras, similarly to the pinnings of classically split groups. This allows us to develop a corresponding root system calculus. Using this, we compare the Weyl groups of R and G, study properties of the PΘ-Bruhat decomposition, give a Lusztig style parameterization of the unipotent subgroup UΘ based on words in the Weyl group W (R), study decomposition relations between group elements, and define the noncommutative cluster varieties AR,S .We define Jordan algebra points of AR,S which parameterize G-local systems on S with boundary decoration related to cosets G/U Θ when G is Jordan split of type R. The cluster modular group ΓR,S considered by Goncharov-Shen, which in particular contains the mapping class group of S, acts on this noncommutative cluster variety by noncommutative quasi-cluster automorphisms. When S is a disk, points of AR,S parameterize configurations of decorated flags. We use this to give noncommutative cluster structures on the double R-Bruhat cells of 

G, generalizing the cluster algebras of Berenstein-Fomin-Zelevinsky. When each Jordan algebra is formally real, we say that G has a positive structure with respect to Θ. We define positive semigroups U >0Θ ⊂ UΘ and G>0Θ ⊂ G. For real algebraic groups, the pairs (G, Θ) which have positive structures are exactly those which admit a positive structure as defined by Guichard-Wienhard. As a consequence, our cluster structure gives explicit positivity tests, and can be used to give algebraic proofs of many of the properties of positive configurations of flags and of positive representations. D.K. was supported by the Danish National Research Foundation (CPH-GEOTOP-DNRF151) and the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation. Z.G., M.N. and A.W. were supported by the European Research Council under ERC-Advanced Grant 101018839. A.W. thanks the Hector Fellow Academy for support. Part of this work was done at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, and at the Erwin Schrödinger International Institute for Mathematics and Physics. We would also like to thank Max Riestenberg, Clarence Kineider, Kaitao Xie, Linhui Shen, and Alexander Goncharov for many helpful discussions. 

1arXiv:2608.27284v1 [math.RT] 27 Aug 2026 2 ZACHARY GREENBERG, DANI KAUFMAN, MERIK NIEMEYER, AND ANNA WIENHARD 

Contents 

1. Introduction 41.1. Jordan split Lie groups and their structure theory 51.2. Non-commutative cluster varieties and applications 71.3. Structure of the paper 11 

Part 1. Root-graded Lie Algebras and Algebraic Groups 12 2. Quadratic Jordan algebras 12 2.1. The inner structure group 13 2.2. Real Jordan algebras 13 2.3. Isotopy and norm maps 15 2.4. Tits-Kantor-Koecher Lie algebra 16 3. Lie algebras graded by root systems 16 3.1. Preliminaries 17 3.2. Root Grading 19 3.3. Recognition theorems 20 3.4. A1-grading 23 3.5. Larger gradings 26 3.6. Grading by folding 28 3.7. Identifying Jordan factors 29 3.8. Noncommutative Lie algebras over Jordan algebras 31 3.9. Weyl groups 32 4. Jordan split groups 36 4.1. A1-graded groups 36 4.2. Jordan pinning 40 4.3. Jordan weights 42 4.4. Lifts of the grading Weyl group 44 4.5. R-Bruhat decomposition 45 4.6. Root system calculus 47 

Part 2. Noncommutative Cluster Varieties 48 5. Classic cluster algebras 48 5.1. Quivers and seed mutation 48 5.2. Cluster algebras from surfaces 50 5.3. Key properties 51 6. Polygonal cluster algebras 51 6.1. 2-colored and ordered quivers 51 6.2. Decorated polygons 53 6.3. Seed group and angles 55 6.4. Jordan algebra points 57 6.5. Mutation in special cases 59 7. Noncommutative networks 60 

Part 3. Cluster-like Coordinates on Decorated Flag Varieties 63 8. Setup and strategy 63 8.1. Pairs of flags 64 8.2. General strategy 64 8.3. Opposition involution 66 8.4. L-distance revisited 66 9. From Conf × 

> 3

(AΘ) to elementary configurations 69 9.1. Interpolating sequence 69 9.2. Elementary configurations and their partial potential 70 10. Cluster Coordinates on elementary configurations of Θ-flags 73 10.1. Partial potentials in noncommutative rank 1 73 NONCOMMUTATIVE CLUSTER VARIETIES AND MODULI SPACES OF LOCAL SYSTEMS 3

10.2. Elementary seeds in lower noncommutative rank 74 10.3. Elementary networks in higher noncommutative rank 75 11. Triples of Θ-flags 77 11.1. Amalgamating 77 11.2. Cluster charts 78 11.3. Changing reduced expression 80 11.4. Rotation 81 11.5. Changing orientations 82 12. Tuples of Θ-flags 82 12.1. Flip 84 13. Noncommutative rank 1 detailed examples 87 13.1. Type A1 87 13.2. Type Bp 91 13.3. Type G2 101 14. Higher noncommutative rank 106 14.1. Type Ap 106 14.2. Type Cp 108 14.3. Exceptional Groups 111 

Part 4. Applications 111 15. Cluster-like coordinates on groups 111 15.1. Group elements as configurations of flags 111 15.2. Parabolic subgroups 113 15.3. Full group 114 15.4. Gauss decompositions 114 15.5. Generalized double R-Bruhat cells 115 16. Positivity 115 16.1. Positive Θ-pinnings 116 16.2. Positive semigroups 116 16.3. Configurations of Flags 117 16.4. Positive elements as configurations of flags 119 17. Decorated twisted local systems 120 17.1. Marked surfaces 120 17.2. Decorated twisted local systems 121 17.3. Cluster coordinates 122 17.4. Computing holonomies 125 17.5. LΘ-action at marked points and potentials 126 17.6. Action of the cluster automorphism group 127 17.7. Spectral description of types Ap or Cp 129 17.8. Positivity 130 References 131 4 ZACHARY GREENBERG, DANI KAUFMAN, MERIK NIEMEYER, AND ANNA WIENHARD 

1. Introduction 

Split real semisimple Lie groups are the simplest among all real semisimple Lie groups. One of their key features is that they can be elegantly assembled from special three dimensional subgroups that arise from the sl (2) -subalgebras associated to a set of positive simple roots. This leads to a characterization of split real Lie groups by their Dynkin diagrams, which in turn are classified by type An, B n, C n, D n, E 6, E 7, E 8, F 4, or G2. The property that split real Lie groups are built up from SL 2(R)’s plays a key role in their structure theory and underlies many interesting developments in recent years. Some examples are (1) Decomposition theorems generalizing the Gauss decomposition of matrices. (2) The structure theory of totally positive semigroups by Lusztig [Lus94], their cluster structure and explicit positivity criteria developed in [BFZ05]. (3) Parameterizations of configuration spaces of flags and applications to cluster coordinates on higher Teichmüller spaces [FG06, GS19]. In this paper, we show that when we allow more general building blocks, many real semisimple Lie groups, and more generally semisimple algebraic groups, can be built up in a similar way. This allows us to draw interesting conclusions on their structure theory and give vast general-izations of the above mentioned applications to a broad family of real semisimple Lie groups. In particular, this includes all real semisimple Lie groups which admit a positive structure relative to a subset of simple roots Θ as introduced in [GW25]. To motivate the basic building blocks we use, let us consider the simplest split real simple Lie group, SL 2(R), which is the building block for split real semisimple groups. SL 2(R) is itself built from more elementary pieces; two abelian additive groups, or “root groups”, glued together along a multiplicative group, or a “torus”. This manifest as the decomposition of a generic element g

in SL 2(R) as: 

g =

a bc d



=

 1 0

ca −1 1

  a 00 a−1

  1 a−1b

0 1



= [ g]−[g]0[g]+.

This is called the Gauss decomposition. The matrices on the left and right sides belong to the root groups, while the matrix in the middle is in the torus. The root groups are isomorphic to the additive group (R, +) , while the torus is the multiplicative group (R×, ·). The torus acts on the root groups by conjugation: 

a 00 a−1

  1 b

0 1

  a−1 00 a



=

1 a2b

0 1



.

There is one essential symmetry of SL 2(R) which swaps the two root groups; it is realized via conjugation by a special group element s =

0 −11 0



. If the entry a is zero, then we cannot take the Gauss decomposition of g. However, in this case the element gs admits a Gauss decomposition, a fact related to the Bruhat decomposition. The symmetry s allows to define a map from an open subset of the root group to the torus: 

ι

 1 b

0 1

 

=

b 00 b−1



,

which is inspired by the calculation: 

1 b

0 1

  0 −11 0



=

b −11 0



=

 1 0

b−1 1

  b 00 b−1

  1 −b−1

0 1



.

The map ι in fact provides a quadratic action of the root group on itself given by ι(a)( b) = a2b.This structure of SL 2(R) can be generalized in a much broader context, since we used very few properties of R. In particular we did not even use that R is commutative. The key structure is the map ι and the quadratic action it defines of R on itself. There is a well known generalization of this structure called a quadratic Jordan algebra .A quadratic Jordan algebra is given by a triple J = ( V, ι, 1) of a vector space V , a map ι : V →

End( V ) and a special element 1 ∈ V which is sent to the identity. The image of ι generates a subgroup of GL( V ) called the structure group of J denoted by Γ( J). An example is the vector space of k × k matrices over a field K with 1 being the identity matrix and ι given NONCOMMUTATIVE CLUSTER VARIETIES AND MODULI SPACES OF LOCAL SYSTEMS 5

by ι(A)( B) = ABA . In this case, the structure group is a subgroup of GL k × GL k. Given a quadratic Jordan algebra J, the Tits-Kantor-Koecher construction creates a Lie algebra sl 2(J),from which we obtain an associated group SL 2(J). This group can be thought of as two copies of the vector space V , replacing the root groups of SL 2, glued along the (noncommutative) structure group, replacing the torus of SL 2.These SL 2(J)’s are the basic building blocks we use. We call the groups which are built from these building blocks in the same way as split groups are built from SL 2’s Jordan split groups .We show that many semisimple algebraic groups can be realized as Jordan split groups, e.g. any semisimple algebraic group with a reduced root system is a Jordan split group. Viewing them this way provides interesting new structure on these groups and allows us to construct generalizations of the above mentioned features. In particular we obtain: (1) Decomposition theorems generalizing the Gauss decomposition. (2) Non-commutative cluster structures on particular double Bruhat cells of G generalizing those of [BFZ05]. (3) A cluster structure and explicit positivity criteria for groups admitting a positive struc-ture with respect to Θ as defined in [GW25]. (4) Parameterizations of configuration spaces of flags via non-commutative cluster struc-tures, generalizing at the same time [FG06, Le19, GS19] as well as [GK24]. (5) Non-commutative cluster parameterizations of moduli spaces of G local systems. In particular, this gives a cluster parametrization of higher Teichmüller spaces for all groups admitting a positive structure with respect to Θ and a characterization of them as Jordan positive points. In the following we describe the results of this paper in more detail, starting with the structure theory of Jordan split groups G, describing the cluster structure and its applications for config-urations spaces of flags, for the group G and its special unipotent subgroup UΘ, and finally on the moduli spaces of decorated local systems on a surface S.1.1. Jordan split Lie groups and their structure theory. In the first part of the paper we develop the structure theory of semisimple algebraic groups defined over Jordan algebras. Given G, a semisimple algebraic group over a field K, and Θ ⊂ ∆, a subset of the set of positive simple roots ∆, we consider the associated parabolic subgroup PΘ, its Levi subgroup 

LΘ and unipotent subgroup UΘ along with their associated Lie algebras pΘ, lΘ and uΘ. The action of the center, zΘ, of lΘ on uΘ decomposes uΘ into weight spaces, giving rise to the parabolic root system associated to Θ.We say that a pair (G, Θ) induces a root system grading when this parabolic root system is a reduced root system R, whose Dynkin diagram we denote by ∆R. The parabolic Weyl group 

W (R) = N (ZΘ)/C(ZΘ), where ZΘ is the center of LΘ is the Weyl group of this reduced root system. The Lie algebras with an R-grading have been classified in [BM92, BZ96]. If (G, Θ) induces a root system grading with |Θ| = 1 then the Lie algebra g has an A1 grading which implies that UΘ is abelian. Lie algebras with an A1-grading are exactly the Lie algebras 

sl 2(J) which are built by applying the Tits-Kantor-Koecher construction to a Jordan algebra. In this situation, the vector space uΘ is the vector space underlying the Jordan algebra J. The group SL 2(J) is the simply connected algebraic group over K with Lie algebra sl 2(J). The list of Dynkin diagrams of reduced restricted root systems and choices of Θ which give such an A1

grading is given in Figure 3. Our first result is a classification of those (G, Θ) which induce root system gradings via a condition on the subset Θ. To state the classification, we introduce the following notion. Asubset Θ ⊂ ∆ is Jordan compatible if for each root β in Θ the connected subdiagram of 

∆ \ Θ ∪ { β} containing β is one of the diagrams associated to an A1-grading (see Figure 3). This in fact associates a Jordan algebra to each element of Θ.

Theorem 1.1. A pair (G, Θ) induces a root system grading if and only if Θ is Jordan compatible. 

Note that in particular (G, ∆) always induces a root system grading when G has a reduced root system. In this case each root space is associated with a Jordan division algebra, i.e. a6 ZACHARY GREENBERG, DANI KAUFMAN, MERIK NIEMEYER, AND ANNA WIENHARD 

Jordan algebra where every nonzero element of V is mapped by ι to an automorphism. If 

∆R is not equal to ∆, then ∆R has to be of type Ap, B p, C p, F 4 or G2. In Theorem 3.35, we identify the possible classes of Jordan algebras that can appear in each type by studying the Jordan compatible subsets. For example, in type Ap with p > 2 each root corresponds to the same associative Jordan algebra. In type Bp, the short roots are assigned commutative Jordan algebras and the unique long root has a Jordan algebra of Clifford type. This is a reinterpretation of the results of [BM92, BZ96] in the classification of R graded Lie algebras. Next we reverse perspective, and initiate the study of groups (G, Θ) , for Θ Jordan compatible, as “split groups” defined over a family of Jordan algebras. For this we consider the root systems 

R as the scaffold that gives a prescribed way to “plug in” a collection of Jordan algebras {Ji}

which recreate a Lie algebra in a similar fashion to the Tits-Kantor-Koecher construction. Each 

R gives very strict rules for what collections {Ji} can be used in this construction, as outlined in Theorem 3.35. We call these groups Jordan split of type R and we define a Jordan pinning as a collection of homomorphisms SL 2(Ji) → G such that the image of the vector space of Ji lands in Uβi . We investigate the algebraic structure of Jordan pinnings and establish the following theorem. 

Theorem 1.2. The key algebraic relations among the images of Jordan pinnings depend only on the type of R and not the particular set of Jordan algebras {Ji}.

We call these algebraic relations the root system calculus for any Jordan split group G

of type R. In particular, we establish commutation and redecomposition relations among root systems and actions of the Weyl group both on the Levi and the root spaces. This is key for later applications. The pinning also identifies the parabolic subgroup PΘ with unipotent radical UΘ as the subgroup generated by the images of the positive roots. Furthermore, we deduce properties of the Bruhat decomposition of G with respect to PΘ, which mirror properties of the standard Bruhat decomposition with respect to the minimal parabolic subgroup. Here, the Weyl group 

W (R) gives the organizing principle. For example we prove: 

Theorem 1.3. For each word w ∈ W (R), there is a unique cell in the PΘ-Bruhat decomposition of G, PΘwP Θ. Moreover if w1, w 2 are two words in W (R) whose lengths add, 

PΘw1PΘw2PΘ = PΘw1w2PΘ .

We further explore the action of W (R) on the full Levi subgroup LΘ. For example we prove: 

Theorem 1.4. Fix a Jordan pinning of G by {Ji}. This induces coroot maps ˇβi : Γ( Ji) →

LΘ ⊂ G generating LΘ and lifts ς1 · · · ςp ∈ G of the simple reflections generating W (R). When 

Ji is commutative and i is connected to j in ∆R the action of W (R) on LΘ is given by 

ςi

  ˇβj (A) := ς−1 

> i

ˇβj (ι(A)) ςi = ˇβi(N (A)) ˇβj (A)

ςj

  ˇβi(a) := ς−1 

> j

ˇβi(ι(a)) ςj = ˇβi(a) ˇβj (a1j )

Here N : Jj → K is a norm map defined from the R-grading which has degree 1, 2 or 3

matching the connection between i and j. This realizes the asymmetry of a non simply laced uniformly across the choice of Jj .In the split case, the longest word in the Weyl group can be used to give a parametrization of an open and dense set in the unipotent radical of the Borel subgroup. This map was used prominently by Lusztig to give a parametrization of the totally positive unipotent semigroup. Here we give a Lusztig style parameterization of the unipotent subgroup UΘ using the longest word in W (R). For i a reduced expression of the longest word in W (R), the Lusztig map 

Fi : Ji1 × · · · JiN → UΘ

sends a list of invertible elements of the Jordan algebras onto an open dense subset of UΘ.This map is inspired by the parametrization of the positive unipotent semigroup with respect to a subset Θ ⊂ ∆ in the generalization of Lusztig’s total positivity introduced in [GW25]. Although the root system calculus and Jordan pinning only depend on the type of the root system, our later constructions will depend on the choice of Jordan algebras. We introduce NONCOMMUTATIVE CLUSTER VARIETIES AND MODULI SPACES OF LOCAL SYSTEMS 7

the noncommutative rank of Jordan split groups G of type R, which is the number of Ji

which are noncommutative Jordan algebras. The noncommutative rank is 0 precisely the split or quasi-split groups which were previously studied. It turns out there is an important distinction between higher noncommutative rank (greater than or equal to 2) and noncommutative rank 1. Noncommutative rank 1 will share many structural properties with rank 0 and we refer to the combined cases as lower noncommutative rank. We prove that non-quasi-split G are noncommutative rank 1 if and only if ∆R ≃ A1, B p, or G2 and higher non-commutative rank if and only if ∆R ≃ Ap, C p, or F4.The framework we develop gives a strong connection between groups of lower noncommutative rank and positive structures in Lie groups. When each Ji is a formally real Jordan algebra we say that G has a positive structure with respect to R. Given a Jordan pinning by formally real Jordan algebras, we define positive semigroups U >0Θ ⊂ UΘ as the image of the positive cones in each Ji under a Lusztig map for any reduced expression of the longest word in W (R). When 

K = R the pairs (G, Θ) which induce a positive structure on G with respect to some root system 

R are exactly those pairs (G, Θ) which admit a positive structure with respect to Θ as introduced in [GW25]. The positive semigroups are the very same positive semigroups as the ones defined in [GW25] and studied in [GW26a]. Our approach here gives several new insights, which we discuss in more detail below. 1.2. Non-commutative cluster varieties and applications. In the second part of the paper we use the structure theory of Jordan split groups of type R and a marked surface S to construct a noncommutative cluster variety AR,S . This noncommutative space is obtained by gluing together a collection of cluster charts. Each cluster chart consists of a noncommutative group of functions called the seed group along with some extra combinatorial data. The seed group is a free group modulo some simple relations among a set of distinguished monomials called angles .The seed group takes the place the ring of functions on a classical torus used to define a classic cluster variety. These cluster charts are glued together via mutations which are defined to have the property that the pullback of each angle is a (formal) sum of angles. These mutations are best understood via the Jordan points of the cluster variety AR,S . The restriction on the collection {Ji}

imposed by R identifies a single Jordan algebra J which contains each Ji. Then, a Jordan point of a cluster chart is a map from the seed group to the structure group Γ( J) of this Jordan algebra so that every angle Ai is mapped to ι(vi) for some vi ∈ V . Then the mutation of Jordan points is defined so that μ∗(A′) = ι(P vk). In this way, a Jordan point consist of elements of the group 

Γ( J), but the addition appearing in the mutation happens in the vector space V .Abelianinzing our construction recovers the A-cluster varieties of Fock and Goncharov [FG06] and of Goncharov and Shen [GS19]. In the Ap case this is the noncommutative cluster variety of Goncharov and Kontsevich [GK24] with some minor modification. In the Bp case this gives the noncommutative cluster variety structure conjectured in our previous work [GKNW26], while the G2 case is a small variation of this. The Cp case is entirely new, and we describe it by realizing it as a symmetric folding of the A2p−1 case. The F4 case and some exceptional cases are entirely new as well, and we do not explore all of their properties here. For any allowable choice of Jordan algebras {Ji}, AR,S has Jordan algebra points which parametrize G-local systems on Σ which preserve decorated Θ-flags, i.e. cosets in G/U Θ at the marked points. Considering the non-commutative cluster varieties for particularly simple surfaces, give us noncommutative cluster structures on G and the unipotent group UΘ. When 

(G, Θ) induces a positive structure, this cluster structure allows us to draw important conclu-sions. It can be used to give algebraic proofs of many of the properties of positive semigroups relative to Θ, and of positive configurations of flags. Moreover it gives us explicit positivity test, generalizing the well known positivity test from split real Lie groups [FG06, BFZ05]. Applied to the space of decorated G-local systems on Σ, the non-commutative cluster structures we define provide a unifying perspective of the A-theory of Fock and Goncharov for all groups admitting a positive structure, and thus for all (known) higher Teichmüller spaces associated to positive representations. 8 ZACHARY GREENBERG, DANI KAUFMAN, MERIK NIEMEYER, AND ANNA WIENHARD 

1.2.1. Flag varieties, configuration spaces, and cluster coordinates. The noncommutative cluster varieties AR,S associated to a Jordan-split type R and a marked surface S rely on the study of flag varieties and their configuration spaces as demonstrated in [FG06] and [GS19]. Given a Jordan split group G over a root system R there is an associated unipotent subgroup, UΘ,corresponding to the positive roots of R. We consider the decorated flag variety A := G/U Θ

and the configuration space Conf × 

> n

(A ) of pairwise transverse n-tuples of flags. The key point is to develop appropriate coordinate systems on Conf × 

> n

(A ).Many special cases of Jordan split groups have already been studied. For G = SL n(R) and 

R of type An−1, Fock and Goncharov [FG06] developed a set of coordinates for Conf × 

> n

(A ).General split real Lie groups G were studied in [GS19], where the authors describe a family of coordinate systems depending on a series of choices involving data from the root system. They then prove that these choices are a result of the cluster structure of Conf × 

> n

(A ).The case of G = Sp 2n(R) with an A1-grading given by the parabolic associated Θ = {αn},the unique long root, was studied in [AGRW21]. The case of G = SL kn with an An−1-grading induced by Θ = {k, 2k, · · · , (n − 1) k} was studied in [GK24]. In both these cases, a generalized noncommutative cluster structure was developed to describe the coordinates. However, the gen-eralizations appear very different, [AGRW21] are a realization of the noncommutative surfaces introduced by Berenstein and Retakh [BR18], while Goncharov and Kontsevich [GK24] used noncommutative plabic graphs. When the noncommutative rank is less than or equal to 1, the coordinates have the structure of a polygonal cluster algebra developed in [GKNW26]. Both the usual cluster algebra and noncommutative surface cluster algebras are special cases of polygonal cluster algebras. We review and slightly extend the notion of polygonal cluster algebra developed in [GKNW26] in Section 6. Polygonal cluster algebras come with a Weyl type, which can be A1, Bp, or G2, and a parameter r which can be any natural number for A1, has to be r = 2 for Bp and r = 3 for 

G2.In higher noncommutative rank, a different generalization is needed which we call grounded wiring networks . These networks are introduced in Section 7 and they include the networks used in [GK24]. We summarize our results in the following theorem. 

Theorem 1.5. Let K be a field which is not of characteristic 2 or 3. Let (G, Θ) be a Jordan split semisimple algebraic group over K with |∆R| =: p. Let Conf ×(AΘ) be the configuration space of decorated flags. Then there are cluster coordinates on Conf ×(AΘ), whose structure depend on the noncommutative rank of (G, Θ) .(1) When (G, Θ) is of non-commutative rank 0, the cluster coordinates are obtained by evaluating the commutative cluster varieties of [GS19] in field extensions of K.(2) When (G, Θ) is of non-commutative rank 1, the cluster coordinates are given by evalua-tions of non-commutative polygonal cluster algebras with general r for A1, r = 2 for Bp

and r = 3 for G2 in Jordan algebras. (3) When (G, Θ) is of higher non-commutative rank and of type Ap or Cp the cluster coor-dinates are given by evaluations of cluster algebras of grounded wiring networks of type 

Ap and Cp in Jordan algebras. 

1.2.2. Cluster structure on G, Gauss decompositions and positivity tests. When G is a split group and Θ = ∆ , Berenstein, Fomin and Zelevinsky described a cluster structure on double Bruhat cells in [BFZ05]. For two elements w1, w 2 ∈ W of the Weyl group, the double Bruhat cell is given by 

Cw1,w 2 := P∆w1P∆ ∩ P opp ∆ w2P opp ∆ .

The group G decomposes as a disjoint union of these cells. Moreover, if w0 ∈ W is the longest element, the cell 

Ce,w 0 = P∆ ∩ P opp ∆ w0P opp ∆

is open and dense in P∆. Thus, the cluster coordinates on Ce,w 0 describe an open dense subset of P∆. As explained in [Le19, Gil21] the cluster structure on Conf × 

> 3

(A ) is an extension of the cluster structure on P∆, and we have 

Conf × 

> 3

(A ) ∼= Ce,w 0 × H, NONCOMMUTATIVE CLUSTER VARIETIES AND MODULI SPACES OF LOCAL SYSTEMS 9

where H = L∆ is a Cartan group. Of course, the same construction can be carried out for the cell Cw0,e , which is open dense in P opp ∆ . As P∆, P opp  

> ∆

are semidirect products of H and U∆,resp. U opp  

> ∆

, these correspondences can glued as in Figure 1.  

> 1
> HU+
> 1
> HU−
> amalgamate
> 11
> U−
> U+
> H

Figure 1. Relating parabolic subgroups and configurations of 3 decorated flags; using cluster amalgamation to relate an open dense subset of G to con-figurations of 4 decorated flags. Using cluster amalgamation, we obtain charts on an open dense subset G0 of G as indicated in Figure 1: Namely, there is a map 

G0 = U opp ∆ HU ∆ ⊃ Cw0,e Ce,w 0 → Conf 4(A )

Thus the cluster coordinates on the configuration space Conf × 

> 3

(A ) and on Conf × 

> 4

(A ) provide cluster coordinates on an open dense set of the unipotent group U∆, the parabolic group P∆

and the group G. The decomposition of the quadrilateral on the right hand side in Figure 1 corresponds to the Gauss decomposition. A flip of the diagonal in this quadrilateral gives the opposite Gauss decomposition. Writing the flip as a sequence of cluster mutations thus provides an explicit way to compute the opposite Gauss decomposition. When (G, Θ) is Jordan split of type R, the cluster structure we develop allows us to give a generalization of this picture, where the relevant decompositions are now the Bruhat decompo-sitions with respect to PΘ instead of P∆.

Theorem 1.6. Let (G, Θ) be Jordan split of type R. Let A = G/U Θ be the associated space of decorated flags. Then (1) There are embeddings of open dense subsets UΘ,0 of UΘ and PΘ,0 of PΘ into Conf × 

> 3

(A )

which induce noncommutative polygonal cluster structure on UΘ,0 respectively on PΘ,0.An analogous statement holds for U opp Θ and P opp Θ .(2) There is an embedding of an open dense subset G0 = U opp  

> Θ

LΘUΘ into Conf × 

> 4

(A ), which induces a noncommutative cluster structure on G0, which can be depicted in a similar way as in Figure 1. An analogous statement holds for Gopp 0 = UΘLΘU opp Θ

(3) The flip in the quadrilateral is a sequence of cluster mutations. This gives an explicit way to compute the change of coordinates then writing an element g ∈ G0 ∩ Gopp 0 in the opposite Gauss decomposition. (4) More generally for (u, v ) ∈ W (R) × W (R) there is noncommutative cluster structure on the double R-Bruhat cell PΘuP Θ ∩ P opp Θ vP opp Θ .

Note that also the multiplication of two elements in G0 can be interpreted in terms of the cluster structure, see Figure 2. 

Figure 2. Product on a group using cluster amalgamation. 10 ZACHARY GREENBERG, DANI KAUFMAN, MERIK NIEMEYER, AND ANNA WIENHARD 

When (G, Θ) admits a positive structure with respect to R, one can observe that these structures are compatible with the positive structure, which gives us the following theorems as corollaries. 

Theorem 1.7. The positive semigroup U >0Θ is contained in UΘ,0. The semigroup U >0Θ can be characterized as the set of positive J-points of the noncommutative polygonal cluster structure on UΘ,0. Moreover (1) Each cluster seed gives a precise set of positivity conditions, which are expressed as generalized minors of the group G of type R over the Jordan algebra J.(2) There is a sequence of cluster mutations, which give an explicit way to compute the change of coordinates between different Lusztig parameterizations of U >0Θ .Remark 1.8 . Note that getting explicit expression for the change of parameterizations without the cluster structure is quite hard in general. In [GW26b], explicit polynomial type equations are derived following the approach of Berenstein-Zelevinsky [BZ97] using the universal enveloping algebra, and formulas for change of coordinates were obtained with a computer assisted proof. 

Theorem 1.9. The positive semigroup G>0Θ can be characterized as the set of positive J-points of the noncommutative cluster structure on G0. Moreover (1) Each cluster seed gives a precise set of positivity conditions, which are expressed as generalized minors of the group G of type R over the Jordan algebra J.(2) There is a sequence of cluster mutations for the flip of the quadrilateral, this implies in particular that G>0Θ = U >0Θ L◦

> Θ

U opp,> 0Θ = U opp,> 0Θ L◦

> Θ

U >0Θ , and gives an explicit way to compute the change of coordinates from one Gauss decomposition to the opposite one. (3) This also gives an independent proof that the set U >0Θ L◦

> Θ

U opp,> 0Θ is a semigroup. 

For the detailed formulas we refer the reader to Section 13. The generalized minors that appear in the positivity conditions are precisely the same as for the split case, interpreted in the right way when looking at G as group of type R over {Ji}.Whereas there is a lot of work on the nonnegative semigroups U ≥0 and G≥0 in the split case, much less is known for the nonnegative semigroups U ≥0Θ and G≥0Θ (see [Wie25] for some discus-sion). We expect the cluster parametrization to help understand the nonnegative semigroups. 1.2.3. Cluster structure on moduli spaces of flat bundles and higher Teichmüller spaces. The cluster structure on the configuration spaces of n-tuples of flags, allow us to deduce a cluster variety structure on certain moduli spaces of local systems on the surface S of negative Euler characteristic with marked points and punctures. This goes back to Penner’s work on decorated Teichmüller space [Pen87], but has been pioneered by Fock and Goncharov [FG06] in the case of split real Lie groups. They introduced a pair of positive varieties, the A-variety and the 

X -variety, and showed that their positive points correspond to higher Teichmüller spaces. We adapt their strategy to the situation of Jordan split groups G, focusing on the A-variety side of the story. We further explain that when G carries a positive structure these local systems are related to positive representations [GLW21, BGL +24]. Given a surface S with k-punctures and Jordan split group G of type R with associated parabolic subgroup PΘ, we consider the space of decorated (twisted) local systems on S, which depends on a representation ρ : π1(S) → G, with a decoration by an affine flag Ak, i.e. an element of G/U Θ for any puncture, which is fixed by the holonomy around this puncture. Building on the cluster structure on the space of configuration spaces, we build a cluster variety structure AR,S whose points parameterize the space of decorated local systems. 

Theorem 1.10. The Jordan points of the cluster variety AR,S parametrize an open and dense set of the space of decorated local systems. When G of type R carries a positive structure, the set of positive Jordan points, A>0 

> R,S

, of AR,S is independent of all choices and corresponds to the space of decorated positive representations of π1(S).

The cluster structure on the space of decorated local systems has strong consequences. (1) Given a curve γ on S, the holonomy along γ can be written explicitly in terms of the cluster coordinates. NONCOMMUTATIVE CLUSTER VARIETIES AND MODULI SPACES OF LOCAL SYSTEMS 11 

(2) When G of type R is of non-commutative rank 1 and carries a positive structure, for any decorated local system in A>0 

> R,S

, the holonomy around any non-peripheral curve γ

is conjugate to an element in G>0Θ .(3) Since the mapping class group action on triangulations of S is generated by sequences of flips, the generalized mutations of the cluster structure gives explicit realizations of the action of the mapping class group. Expanding on this last point, we further consider the subgroup of the cluster modular group defined in [GS19]. This group, which we denote by ΓR,S , depends on the marked surface and the Jordan split type R of G; it is isomorphic to the group associated to the moduli space of decorated local systems for a split group of type R. It contains (1) The mapping class group of S.(2) The outer automorphisms of G which arise from automorphisms of the Dynkin diagram of R.(3) For each puncture on S, a copy of the Weyl group W (R).(4) For each boundary component, a copy of a sub-quotient of the Artin-Tits Braid group of type R.In the commutative setting, the first three actions act by usual cluster automorphisms, i.e. maps which send cluster variables to cluster variables, while the last acts by what are called clus-ter quasi-automorphisms, i.e. a cluster automorphism followed by a monomial transformation by frozen cluster variables. We define a noncommutative quasi-cluster automorphism to be a map which sends cluster variables to cluster variables followed by a noncommutative monomial transformation by frozen cluster variables. We show in Section 17.6 the following: 

Theorem 1.11. The group ΓR,S acts on AR,S by noncommutative (quasi) cluster automor-phisms. 

Fixing a noncommutative ring R, Goncharov and Kontsevich [GK24] give a spectral de-scription of the moduli space of fully twisted decorated rank m local systems on S. They show that this space is birationally equivalent to the space of twisted decorated local rank 1 local systems on a more complicated surface called the spectral surface which is associated to a particular plabic graph embedded on S.The noncommutative cluster charts we construct for Jordan split groups of type Ap are a natural generalization of those considered by Goncharov and Kontsevich, although there is a small difference in signs. This sign difference amounts to an untwisting of the local systems on the spectral surface. To this end we have: 

Theorem 1.12. The space AR,S is birationally equivalent to the moduli space of untwisted twisted rank 1 local systems on the spectral surface. 

When R is Cp, there is a spectral description of the the space AR,S in terms of local systems which are invariant under a natural symmetry of the spectral surface. 1.3. Structure of the paper. In Part 1, we discuss the structure of Lie algebras and Lie groups with a root system grading. This begins with a review of the theory of quadratic Jordan algebras in Section 2. In Section 3 we classify which choices of Θ induce root system gradings and compare the Weyl group of the grading to the original Weyl group of the restricted root system. Finally in Section 4, we introduce the notion of a Jordan pinning which we use to study the Θ-Bruhat decomposition and develop a “root system calculus” for computing in any group with a Jordan pinning. In Part 2, we provide the noncommutative generalizations of cluster varieties needed to pa-rameterizes configurations of flags and moduli spaces of local systems. We begin in Section 5 with a review of classic cluster algebra theory. In Section 6 we review the construction of polyg-onal cluster algebras we previously developed in [GKNW26]. Finally in Section 7, we introduce the notion of a grounded wiring network which provides the noncommutative cluster varieties in higher noncommutative rank. 12 ZACHARY GREENBERG, DANI KAUFMAN, MERIK NIEMEYER, AND ANNA WIENHARD 

In Part 3, we describe the construction of noncommutative cluster varieties which parameter-ize configurations of flags. Section 8 outlines the strategy from [GS19] and describes the basic invariant of a pair of decorated flags, the L-distance. Following the general strategy, Section 9 describes how to break a configuration of a triple of flags into elementary configurations. Then in Section 10, we construct noncommutative cluster varieties for any elementary configuration. The construction depends on the noncommutative rank of the Jordan-split group, noncommutative rank less than 1 is discussed in Section 10.2 and higher noncommutative rank in Section 10.3. In Section 11, we build the cluster varieties for triples of flags and in Section 12 we extend the construction to arbitrary tuples. In Section 13, we carefully apply the theory in each noncom-mutative rank 1 example ( A1, B p, G 2-gradings). Section 14 is the analogous section for higher noncommutative rank ( Ap, Cp, F4-gradings). In Part 4, we explore the natural applications of theory. First, we produce cluster-like coor-dinates on the algebraic groups themselves and their double Bruhat cells in Section 15. Next, in Section 16, we explore positivity and the natural semigroup structures that arise when all the Jordan algebras are Euclidean (formally real). In Section 17, we describe how to extend the cluster varieties for tuples of flags to decorated twisted local systems. The positive points of these systems are closely related to the higher Teichmüller spaces of surfaces. 

# Part 1. Root-graded Lie Algebras and Algebraic Groups 

In this part we develop the theory of Jordan split groups. First, we provide the necessary background on quadratic Jordan algebras. 2. Quadratic Jordan algebras 

Let K be a field, not of characteristic 2 (usually we take R or C). 

Definition 2.1. A quadratic Jordan algebra , J = ( V, ι, 1), consists of a vector space V over 

K, a quadratic map ι : V → End( V ), and a special element 1 ∈ V such that (1) ι(1) is the identity transformation, (2) ι ι(a)( b) = ι(a)ι(b)ι(a),and defining ι(a, b )( c) :=  ι(a + c) − ι(a) − ι(c)(b),(3) ι(x)ι(y, x ) = ι(x, y )ι(x).That ι is quadratic means by definition that the map bι : V × V → End( V ), defined by 

bι(v, w ) := ι(v + w) − ι(v) − ι(w)

is bilinear. This implies that ι(·, ·) is a bilinear map (which actually maps to End( V )), and thus induces a linear map V ⊗ V → End( V ).

Lemma 2.2. The map ι(·, ·) determines the map ι.Proof. Using that K is not characteristic 2 we find 

ι(a)( c) = 12 ι(a, c )( a) .

□

Remark 2.3 . A classical Jordan algebra over K is a vector space over K with a commutative but non associative product V ◦ V → V satisfying some axioms. The classical Jordan product is recovered from the quadratic definition as a ◦ b := 12 ι(a, b )( 1). On the other hand, the classical product determines the map ι by 

ι(a)( b) = 2 a ◦ (a ◦ b) − (a ◦ a) ◦ b. 

Thus the two theories are the same when the characteristic of the underlying field K is not 2. NONCOMMUTATIVE CLUSTER VARIETIES AND MODULI SPACES OF LOCAL SYSTEMS 13 

Example 2.4 . Let R be a (possibly noncommutative) K-algebra. We denote by J(R) the Jordan algebra with vector space given by R, ι(a)( b) = aba and 1 = 1 R. We call such a Jordan algebra 

associative type .If R is equipped with an anti-involution † : R → R then R† denotes the subset of elements fixed by the anti-involution. There is a Jordan subalgebra H(R, †) ⊂ J(R) with vector space 

R† ⊂ R , and ι(a)( b) = aba †. We call these Jordan algebras Hermitian type .

Example 2.5 . Let R be a commutative K-algebra and M be an R-module with a bilinear form 

b : M ⊗M → R . Define rw(v) = 12 b(w, w )v −b(v, w )w and fix an element e ∈ M with b(e, e ) = 1 .We define a Jordan algebra J(M, b, e ) by ι(m)( n) = rm(re(n)) . One easily checks that e acts as the identity element and ι satisfies the axioms for a Jordan algebra. We call these Jordan algebras Clifford type as they are subalgebras of the associative Jordan algebra made from the Clifford algebra associated to (M, b ).

Example 2.6 . Let O be an octonion algebra over K, e.g. made from the Cayley-Dickson con-struction [Dic19]. Let H3(O) be the Jordan algebra with V given by Hermitian 3 × 3-matrices over O, ι defined most easily by using the classical Jordan product a ◦ b = 12 (ab + ba ) and Remark 2.3, and 1 given by the identity matrix. Such a Jordan algebra is called an Albert algebra and is 27-dimensional over K.

Definition 2.7. A Jordan algebra is called special if it is isomorphic to a subalgebra of J(R)

for some ring R. We call a Jordan algebra commutative if it is special with R commutative and noncommutative otherwise. When J is special there is a minimal specializing ring which contains it called the universal specializing envelope .A proof of the following theorem is given in [McC04, Appendix B]. 

Theorem 2.8 (Shirshov–Cohn) . Any Jordan algebra with 2 generators is special. 

All Jordan algebras are special, other than the 27-dimensional exceptional Albert algebras. Over an algebraically closed field there is one exceptional Albert algebra. 2.1. The inner structure group. Definition 2.9. An element a ∈ V is called invertible if its image ι(a) is invertible and there exists b ∈ V such that ι(a)b = a. We write V × for the subset of invertible elements. When all nonzero elements are invertible, the Jordan algebra is called a Jordan division algebra .The element a−1 := b is unique when it exists. 

Definition 2.10. The inner structure group Inn( J) is the subgroup of GL( V ) generated by the image of ι(V ×). The inner automorphism group Aut( J) is the subgroup of Inn( J) which fixes 1 ∈ V .Generally, the map ι is clearly not injective since ι(a) = ι(−a). However, we can construct a group Γ( J) which is a covering Γ( J) → Inn( J), so that there exists a map eι : V × → Γ( J) that extends ι and is injective, we will see this in Section 4.1. When J is special, there is an action of the group R× × R × on R by (a, b ) · r = arb −1.The elements {(z, z )|z ∈ Z(R)} act trivially. The inner structure group is the subgroup of 

R× × R ×/Z (R) which is generated by the image of ι(v) = ( v, v −1) for v ∈ V ×.

Definition 2.11. The structure involution , σ : Inn( J) → Inn( J), is the anti-involution defined on generators by σ(ι(v)) = ι(v) so that if g = ι(v1) . . . eι(vr ) we have σ(g) = eι(vr ) . . . eι(v1).One checks that this anti-involution is well-defined. Notice that the structure involution satisfies that for A ∈ Inn( J) we have ι(A(v)) = Aι (v)σ(A).For special algebras, the structure involution is induced by σ(a, b ) = ( b−1, a −1).2.2. Real Jordan algebras. The Jordan algebras over K = R are classified using the classifi-cation of finite dimensional algebras over R. We recall the classification here. We denote by D any of the rings R, C, the quaternions H, the split complex numbers, Cspl ,or the split quaternions, Hspl .14 ZACHARY GREENBERG, DANI KAUFMAN, MERIK NIEMEYER, AND ANNA WIENHARD 

Theorem 2.12 ([McC04]) . A simple real Jordan algebra belongs (up to isotopy) to (at least) one of the following families: 

• (Associative type ) J is isomorphic to Mn(D), the Jordan algebra of n × n-matrices. 

• (Hermitian type ) J is isomorphic to Hn(D), the Jordan algebra of Hermitian matrices. Note that when D = H or Hspl , there are two involutions which can be used to identify the set of Hermitian matrices, standard conjugation and (a+bi+cj+dk)∗ = ( a+bi+cj−dk).We write H∗

> n

(H) for the Jordan algebra with the second form. 

• (Albert type ) J can be isomorphic to H3(O) or H3(Ospl ), Hermitian matrices over the octonions or split-octonions. 

• (Clifford type ) For s > 0 and r ≥ 0, J can be isomorphic to J(s, r ) the Jordan algebra of Clifford type whose vector space has a signature (s, r ) quadratic form. 

These real Jordan algebras serve as key examples in the remainder of the paper, so it is critical to understand their structure. First, we observe the connection between the structure groups of Hermitian and associative type Jordan algebras. When there is no confusion, we will refer to M1(D) simply by D. For 

Hn(D), the vector space is the set of n × n matrices over D which are fixed by an involution 

†. The structure group can be identified with GL n(D) which acts on V by M 7 → AM A †. The structure involution is simply † in this case. The corresponding associative type algebra Mn(D) has structure group S(GL n(D) × GL n(D)) 

⊂ GL n(D) × GL n(D). To compare the structure group, we embed GL n(D) in GL n(D) × GL n(D)

via A 7 → (A, A −† ). This preserves the action of GL n(D) on Hn(D) when viewed as a sub-Jordan algebra of Mn(D).Next we observe that when n ≤ 2, the Hn(O) and Hn(Ospl ) are actually isomorphic to algebras in the other families: 

H1(O) ≃ R, H1(Ospl ) ≃ R, H2(O) ≃ J(1 , 9) , H2(Ospl ) ≃ J(5 , 5) .

Therefore, these Jordan algebras are special. However, for n = 3 the Albert type algebras are not special and their inner structure group is different from the other cases. Instead the inner structure groups are related to central extensions of the real Lie groups E(−26) 6 or E(6) 6

respectively. There are several other exceptional isomorphisms between small members of each family. 

Example 2.13 . There are several examples involving the split division algebras, Cspl and Hspl :

Hn(Cspl ) ≃ Mn(R), H∗

> n

(Hspl ) ≃ H2n(R), Mn(Hspl ) ≃ M2n(R).

The first isomorphism is given by sending a matrix M ∈ Mat n(R) to the Hermitian matrix N

with entries 

Nkℓ =

 

> 12

(Mkℓ (1 − i) + Mℓk (1 + i)) k < ℓ Mkk k = ℓ 

> 12

(Mkℓ (1 + i) + Mℓk (1 − i)) l > ℓ. 

The last two isomorphisms follow from the fact that Hspl ≃ Mat 2(R).Finally we focus on the real Jordan algebras of Clifford type, J(s, r ). We consider a real vector space V equipped with a quadratic form q of signature (s, r ) with s > 0. We write 

q(v, w ) = 12 (q(v + w) − q(v) − q(w)) for the associated inner product. Let e ∈ V such that 

q(e) = 1 . Then J(s, r ) is defined to be J(V, q, e ) using the construction in Example 2.5. It is easier to understand J(s, r ) as a subalgebra of the even part of the Clifford algebra 

Cl 0(s, r ). Let σ be the involution given by the Clifford algebra transpose followed by conjugation by e. Then the vector space V sits inside the fixed points of σ in Cl 0(s, r ) via v 7 → ve . Using this construction, we see that the inner structure group is a quotient of the even Clifford group, 

Γ0(s, r ).There are many exceptional isomorphisms of Clifford type algebras with other families: 

J(2 , 0) ≃ C

J(1 , 2) ≃ H2(R)

J(1 , 1) ≃ Cspl 

J(1 , 3) ≃ H2(C)

J(4 , 0) ≃ H

J(1 , 5) ≃ H2(H)

J(2 , 2) ≃ Hspl 

J(3 , 3) ≃ H2(Hspl ) .NONCOMMUTATIVE CLUSTER VARIETIES AND MODULI SPACES OF LOCAL SYSTEMS 15 

2.3. Isotopy and norm maps. We will generally be interested in a slightly weaker notion of isomorphism of Jordan algebras called isotopy .

Definition 2.14. Let u be an invertible element of J = ( V, ι, 1). The u-isotope of J is the Jordan algebra J(u) = ( V, ι (u), u −1) where ι(u)(x) = ι(x)ι(u). We write J ∼ J′ if there is an isotopy J to J′.Isotopy is different from isomorphism, which requires that the identity element is sent to the identity element. If u has a square root, u 12 , then the the element of the inner structure group 

ι(u− 12 ) provides an isomorphism J → J(u). However, if u does not have a square root then there is no isomorphism between J and its u-isotope. 

Definition 2.15. The twisted forms of J are the isotopy classes of J modulo isomorphism. For a vector space V , let Sym r (V ∗) denote the rth symmetric power of the dual vector space. 

Definition 2.16. We say a quadratic Jordan algebra has a norm map of degree r if it is equipped with a map N : V → K which satisfies (1) N (v) = eN (v, . . . , v ) for some eN ∈ Sym r (V ∗),(2) N (1) = 1 ,(3) v ∈ V × if and only if N (v)̸ = 0 ,(4) N (ι(v)( w)) = N (v)2N (w) .In Section 4.1, we will see the norm map lifts to a character of a cover of Inn( J) defined on generators by N (ι(v)) = N (v).

Proposition 2.17 ([McC65]) . Every (finite dimensional) Jordan algebra is normed of degree r

for some r.Proof. In [McC65], they construct a generic norm for any finite dimensional Jordan using a generic minimal polynomial. □

Note that in the u-isotope, we have N (u)(x) = N (x)N (u).

Definition 2.18. Every degree r normed Jordan algebra has an adjugate map , τ : V × → V ×

defined by τ (v) = v−1N (v).The adjugate gives an anti-involution on (a cover of) Inn( J), defined on generators by 

τ (ι(v)) = N (v)ι(v)−1 .

Example 2.19 .

• For J = Mn(R) a norm of degree n is given by the determinant. 

• If J = J(s, r ) is a real Jordan algebra of Clifford type, a norm of degree 2 is given by the quadratic form q. On the inner structure group Inn( J) = Γ 0(s, r )/±1 the norm can be expressed as v1 · · · vk 7 → q(v1) · · · q(vk), using that any element in the Clifford group can be written as a product of vectors. Using the defining relation of the Clifford algebra, 

vv = q(v), the adjugate map is given by the Clifford transpose, τ (v1 · · · vk) = vk · · · v1.

Remark 2.20 . The adjugate map can be extended to a map on all of V satisfying ι(v)( τ v ) = 

N (v)v. We will not need to take the adjugate of non-invertible elements in which case the definition via the norm is sufficient. When K is formally real we can define a notion of a positivity on a Jordan algebra. 

Definition 2.21. A positive structure on a quadratic Jordan algebra over a formally real field K is a subset V >0 ⊂ V × called the positive cone which is compatible with the Jordan algebra structure as follows: (1) V >0 is closed under addition and scalar multiplication by positive elements of K.(2) V >0 contains 1 and is preserved by the action of Inn( J).(3) V >0 ⊂ V ×.(4) V >0 is closed under inverse. 16 ZACHARY GREENBERG, DANI KAUFMAN, MERIK NIEMEYER, AND ANNA WIENHARD 

Definition 2.22. An ideal of a Jordan algebra J is a subset I ⊂ V which satisfies ι(V )( I) ⊂ I.A Jordan algebra is called simple if it has no nontrivial ideals. The simple finite dimensional real Jordan algebras with positive structure are also known as 

Euclidean Jordan algebras .

Proposition 2.23 (Jordan-von Neumann-Wigner Classification) . The finite dimensional simple real Jordan algebras with positive structure are given by the following list: Algebra Hn(R) Hn(C) Hn(H) J(1 , n ) H3(O)

Degree n n n 2 3

Proof. This is Fundamental Theorem 2 in [JvNW34]. □

The classification of simple real and complex Jordan algebras is well known. After extending scalars to C, each real simple Jordan algebra becomes a simple complex Jordan algebra. We remark that each simple complex Jordan algebra has a unique real form (up to isotopy) which is Euclidean. 2.4. Tits-Kantor-Koecher Lie algebra. Let gJ denote the Lie algebra of the inner structure group Inn( J). It is called the inner structure Lie algebra and is spanned by the elements 

ι(a, b ) for a, b ∈ V . Since gJ ⊂ gl (V ), we can combine two copies of the vector space with the inner structure algebra gJ to obtain a new (−1, 0, 1) graded Lie algebra. 

Definition 2.24 (Tits-Kantor-Koecher Construction) . The Tits-Kantor-Koecher-Lie alge-bra sl 2(J) associated to the Jordan algebra J is the graded Lie algebra V−1 ⊕ gJ ⊕ V1 with Lie brackets 

[A(0) , v (1) ] = A(v)(1) [A(0) , v (−1) ] = −σ(A)( v)(−1) [v(1) , w (−1) ] = ι(v, w )(0) .

Lemma 2.25. If J is special, then sl 2(J) is a subalgebra of End 2(R).Proof. We embed the generators of sl 2(J) in End 2(R) as follows: 

v(1) =

0 v

0 0



, v(−1) =

0 0

v 0



and ι(a, b )(0) =

ab 00 −ba 



.

It remains to verify the bracket relations in End 2(R), for example 

[ι(a, b )(0) , c (1) ] = 

ab 00 −ba 

  0 c

0 0



−

0 c

0 0

  ab 00 −ba 



=

0 abc + cba 

0 0



=  ι(a, b )( c) 

> (1)

.

□

Lemma 2.26 ([Koe67] Theorem 3) .

(1) If J is isotopic to J′ then sl 2(J) ≃ sl 2(J′).(2) If J is simple, then sl 2(J) is a simple Lie algebra. 

Our philosophy is that the Lie algebra sl 2(J) encodes all of the properties of J which are invariant under isotopy. In Section 3.4, we will give a combinatorial classification for which Lie algebras can be realized as sl 2(J) for some Jordan algebra. 3. Lie algebras graded by root systems 

We now describe an additional structure on a Lie algebra, called a grading by a root system, which allows us to realize the algebra as a “split algebra” over a smaller root system. The simplest case, an A1 grading, is equivalent to realizing the algebra as sl 2(J) for some Jordan algebra. NONCOMMUTATIVE CLUSTER VARIETIES AND MODULI SPACES OF LOCAL SYSTEMS 17 

3.1. Preliminaries. We first provide some background on abstract root systems, see [Kna96]. Let E be a Euclidean space with inner product denoted (·, ·). We define for v, w ∈ E

⟨v, w ⟩ := 2 (v, w )(w, w ) .

Recall the definition of a root system: 

Definition 3.1. A finite subset R ⊂ E \ { 0} is called a root system if (1) R spans E.(2) For α ∈ R, the reflection sα defined by sα(v) = v − ⟨ v, α ⟩α, leaves R invariant. (3) For α, β ∈ R, ⟨β, α ⟩ ∈ Z.We call dim( E) =: rk( R) the rank of the root system R. The subgroup of GL( E) generated by the reflections sα for α ∈ R is called the Weyl group of R. The root system R is called 

reduced if the only scalar multiples of a root α which are contained in R are α and −α.A subset ∆ = {α1, · · · , α p} ⊂ R is called a set of simple roots if it is a basis of E such that any element α ∈ R can be written as a linear combination with integer coefficients all of which are ≥ 0 or all of which are ≤ 0. It is a standard fact that a root system admits a set of simple roots. This defines sets of positive and negative roots, depending on the sign of the coefficients. We use the notation [α : αi] for the coefficient of αi in the decomposition of α so that α = P[α : αi]αi.

Definition 3.2. Given a set of simple roots, every other root α has a well defined height given by P[α : αi]. There is a unique root with maximum height called the highest root , αM .The highest root is also the maximum element under the partial order given by α > β if and only if α − β is a nonnegative sum of simple roots. This further implies that for every simple root αi and root α, [αM : αi] ≥ [α : αi]. The simple roots are the minimal positive roots under this order. 

Lemma 3.3. For each simple root i, there is an (non-unique) ascending chain of roots αi =

β1, · · · , β k = αM such that βj − βj−1 is a simple root. Moreover if β0 = 0 , each simple root α

appears [αM : α] many times as βj − βj−1.Proof. The chain can be built inductively. By [Kac84, Proposition 4.9], the highest root is the unique root such that αM + αi is not a root for any αi. So for each βj there is some simple root 

α so βj+1 = βj + α is a root. We observe that at step j, the coefficient, [βj : αi] is the number of times αi was used. Applying this to the final step, βk = αM proves the final statement. □

The reflections in the simple roots generate the Weyl group. The length of an element w in the Weyl group is the minimal number of simple reflections required to write w. The longest word in the Weyl group, w0 is the unique element with maximal length. It sends all positive roots to negative roots. The action of −w0, fixes the set of simple roots and is called the 

opposition involution .Finally, if we fix a set of simple roots ∆ = {α1, . . . , α p}, we obtain a p × p-matrix C with entries 

cij = ⟨αi, α j ⟩

which is called the Cartan matrix of R. This defines the coroots ˇαi ∈ E∗ in the dual of E

via the condition 

ˇαi(αj ) = cij .

The Weyl group acts on E∗ via the dual maps of the reflections sα, and we thus obtain the dual root system ˇR ⊂ E∗. In particular, we obtain a coroot associated to any root, not just the simple ones. Importantly, root systems are used to study Lie algebras: Let G be a reductive group over 

K and g its Lie algebra. Let T be a maximal split K-torus in G, t its Lie algebra. The adjoint action of t, or equivalently T , decomposes g into root spaces as 

g = g0 ⊕ M

> α∈R

gα18 ZACHARY GREENBERG, DANI KAUFMAN, MERIK NIEMEYER, AND ANNA WIENHARD 

for some subset R ⊂ t∗, called the restricted root system of (G, T ). For any t ∈ t and x ∈ gα,we have [t, x ] = α(t)x. The subset R is an abstract root system in t∗ where the inner product comes from endowing t with the Killing form. The Weyl group of (G, T ) is defined as W (G, T ) := NG(T )/CG(T ) where NG(T ) is the normalizer of T in G, CG(T ) is the centralizer. This acts by conjugation on T , and via the induced action on t by reflections on R. In fact W (G, T ) is isomorphic to the Weyl group of the abstract root system. For the subsequent discussion it is useful to interpret the roots as characters of T , i.e. as ele-ments of Hom( T, K×), rather than as linear maps t → K. The latter arise simply as differentials of the former at the identity in T .For each root α we write Tα ⊂ T for the kernel of the root α, Gα := CG(Tα) for the centralizer of Tα, and Sα := [ Gα, G α] is its derived subgroup. Sα ∩ T is the image of the coroot 

ˇα : K× → G. Just like the roots, the coroots can be viewed in different ways: If we interpret the roots as elements of t∗, the coroots are elements of t or equivalently of Hom( K, t). Viewing the roots as characters of T instead, the coroots should be thought of as cocharacters, i.e. elements of Hom( K×, T ), which is the perspective we will usually take. If we pick a set of simple roots 

{a1, . . . , α r }, the simple coroots are defined by 

αi ◦ ˇαj = ( k 7 → kcji ) ∈ Aut( K×) .

Fix a choice of simple roots ∆ and write R+ for the set of positive roots. To each choice 

Θ ⊂ ∆ we associate a standard parabolic subgroup PΘ. It is the subgroup whose Lie algebra is given by 

pΘ := g0 ⊕ M

> α∈R+

gα

M

> α∈Span(∆ \Θ) ∩R+

g−α .

The opposite standard parabolic P opp Θ is obtained by switching the roles of the positive and negative roots. The Levi subgroup , LΘ, is defined to be PΘ ∩ P opp Θ . The center of the Levi subgroup is denoted ZΘ. The unipotent subgroups UΘ and U opp Θ are the unipotent radicals of PΘ and P opp Θ respectively. We have PΘ ≃ UΘ ⋊ LΘ.The subgroups defined above are called standard; any other parabolic subgroup is conjugate in G to some PΘ.

Example 3.4 . Consider the special linear group G = SL n(R). Its Lie algebra g is the set of traceless n × n-matrices. A maximal split torus is the set T of diagonal matrices of determinant 1. The corresponding root system is of type An−1 with the Weyl group acting by permuting the entries of the elements of T . Let us fix the set ∆ = {α1, . . . , α n−1} of simple roots such that 

gαi = REi,i +1 is spanned by the matrix with a 1 in the ith entry of the upper off-diagonal. That means that the roots, written as characters, are given by 

αi

 diag( t1, . . . , t n) = ti

ti+1 

with corresponding coroots 

ˇαi(t) := diag  1, . . . , 1, t 

> i

, t −1

> i+1

, 1, . . . , 1 .

The standard parabolic subgroups which are specified by Θ ⊂ ∆ are block upper triangular with the size of the blocks determined by Θ. For instance, when n = 4 , we have the following parabolic subgroups: 

P{α1} =

 ∗ ∗ ∗ ∗    

> 0∗ ∗ ∗
> 0∗ ∗ ∗
> 0∗ ∗ ∗

 

,P{α1,α 2} =

 ∗ ∗ ∗ ∗    

> 0∗ ∗ ∗
> 0 0 ∗ ∗
> 0 0 ∗ ∗

 

,P{α2} =

 ∗ ∗ ∗ ∗ ∗ ∗ ∗ ∗   

> 0 0 ∗ ∗
> 0 0 ∗ ∗

 

,P{α1,α 3} =

 ∗ ∗ ∗ ∗    

> 0∗ ∗ ∗
> 0∗ ∗ ∗
> 0 0 0 ∗

 

,P{α3} =

 ∗ ∗ ∗ ∗ ∗ ∗ ∗ ∗ ∗ ∗ ∗ ∗  

> 0 0 0 ∗

 

,P{α2,α 3} =

 ∗ ∗ ∗ ∗ ∗ ∗ ∗ ∗   

> 0 0 ∗ ∗
> 0 0 0 ∗

 

and also P∅ = G and the minimal parabolic P∆, the set of upper triangular matrices. Write p = |Θ|. For each root αi write Ai for the set of positive roots for which have [α : αi] > 0

but [α : αj ] = 0 for any other αj ∈ Θ. The unipotent subgroup UΘ is generated by abelian subgroups Uβ1 . . . , U βp Where Uβi := exp( uβi ) = exp( L 

> α∈Ai

gα). These subgroups are abelian and the quotient UΘ/[UΘ, U Θ] is isomorphic to Q 

> i

Uβi .NONCOMMUTATIVE CLUSTER VARIETIES AND MODULI SPACES OF LOCAL SYSTEMS 19 

In the next section we will understand when the groups uβi behave like the simple root spaces of a root space decomposition of different root system than the one of (G, T ).3.2. Root Grading. We have seen that the adjoint action of a maximal split torus on a Lie algebra decomposes it into root spaces. We now consider a similar decomposition, where we start with an abstract root system. 

Definition 3.5. Let R be a reduced root system. A Lie algebra g is graded by R if it has a decomposition 

g = M

> β∈R∪{ 0}

gβ

such that (1) g is generated as a Lie algebra by gβ for β ∈ R. In particular every element of g0 is given by a sum of iterated brackets of elements in the other graded summands. (2) The split Lie algebra gspl with root system R is a subalgebra of g such that there is a choice of a split Cartan subalgebra h ⊂ gspl such that gspl  

> β

⊂ gβ for all β ∈ R ∪ { 0}.(3) The adjoint of action of h on gβ is the diagonal action with eigenvalue given by β.Symbolically, 

∀h ∈ h ⊂ g0, ∀g ∈ gβ , [h, g ] = β(h) · g . R-graded Lie algebras were introduced in [BM92], who classified all Lie algebras which can be graded by simply laced root systems of rank at least 2. Later, [BZ96] extended this classification to all reduced finite root systems and beyond. Given a choice of Chevalley generators for gspl , we obtain an element 1β ∈ gβ with the following property: If z ∈ gγ then 

[1−β , 1β ], z  = 2 ⟨γ, β ⟩⟨β, β ⟩ z , 

where ⟨· , ·⟩ is the inner product for the root system R. Conversely a choice of identity elements for each β ∈ R along with [1−β , 1β ] generate a split subalgebra with root system R [Neh96]. 

Proposition 3.6. For any Jordan algebra J, the Tits-Kantor-Koecher Lie algebra, sl 2(J) is 

A1-graded. Proof. By construction sl 2(J) = V−1 ⊕ gJ ⊕ V1 already splits into three pieces indexed by the roots of an A1-root system with g0 = gJ. Property (1) holds since the inner structure algebra is spanned by elements of the form ι(v, w )0 = [ v(1) , w (−1) ]. In order to verify Property (2), we observe the elements (1(1) , [1(1) , 1(−1) ], 1(−1) ) form an sl 2-triple. This gives an embedding of the split A1-Lie algebra, sl 2(K), into sl 2(J). This identifies the rank 1 split Cartan subalgebra h

as K · ι(1, 1)0. To verify Property (3), we check the action of h on arbitrary elements v(1) ∈ g(1) 

and w(−1) ∈ g(−1) is by the +1 or −1 root. This calculation takes place in the two generator Jordan algebra generated by v and w which is special by Theorem 2.8. We compute 

[ι(1, 1), v (1) ] = ι(1, 1)( v)(1) =  (v + 1)2 − 1 − v2 

> (1)

= 2 v(1) ,

[ι(1, 1), w (−1) ] = −σ(ι(1, 1))( w)(−1) = −2w(−1) .

□

One source of a root system grading comes from a choice of a standard parabolic subalgebra pΘ.

Definition 3.7. Let pΘ be a parabolic subalgebra of g. Let zΘ be the center of the associated Levi subalgebra lΘ. We say pΘ induces a root system grading if the simultaneous eigen-decomposition of the action of tΘ = zΘ ∩ t is a root system grading. 

Lemma 3.8. Let Θ ⊂ ∆ be a subset of simple roots. Then 

tΘ = \

> α∈∆\Θ

ker( α) .

Moreover, the simultaneous eigenspaces of tΘ are the union of root spaces whose roots agree when restricted to the span of Θ. Equivalently the eigenspaces are indexed by the possible lists of coefficients of ([ β : α]) α∈Θ.20 ZACHARY GREENBERG, DANI KAUFMAN, MERIK NIEMEYER, AND ANNA WIENHARD 

Proof. The expression for tΘ is shown in [GW25, Section 2.9]. This implies, for t ∈ t{α} and β

any root, 

[t, gβ ] = β(t)gβ = X

> α∈∆

[β : α]α(t)

!

gβ = X

> α∈Θ

[β : α]α(t)

!

gβ .

Therefore any roots which agree on the span of Θ belong to the same eigenspace as claimed. 

□

Example 3.9 . Let g = sl 4(R) with restricted root system of type A3. We choose the simple roots so that P∆ is the set of upper triangular matrices. Let Θ = {α2} the middle simple root. We will see pΘ induces an A1 grading on G. We have 

lΘ =



∗ ∗∗ ∗∗ ∗∗ ∗



tΘ = zΘ =



λ1

λ1

λ2

λ2



with λ1 +λ2 = 0 . Then action of zΘ on g has two nonzero weights β = λ1 −λ2 and −β = λ2 −λ1.The corresponding weight spaces are 

gβ =



∗ ∗∗ ∗



g0 =



∗ ∗∗ ∗∗ ∗∗ ∗



g−β =

∗ ∗∗ ∗



We check Property (2) of an A1-grading, that gspl ≃ sl 2(R) is contained as a subalgebra with 

0 10 0



7→



0 11 0

1 00 −1



7→



1 00 1

−1 00 −1

0 01 0



7→

0 11 0

 .

The matrices above are a choice of Chevalley generators and so define the elements 1β and 1−β .This also identifies h with zΘ, verifying property (3) that h acts correctly on all of gβ not just 

gspl  

> β

. Property (1) that g0 is generated by iterated brackets in gβ and g−β is a linear algebra exercise. Even when a root system grading is not induced by a parabolic subalgebra, the root system grading identifies a parabolic subalgebra. 

Definition 3.10. Let g be a simple Lie algebra graded by a root system R. We can chose the maximal split torus t defining the restricted root system to be in g0 so the restricted root system of g refines the root system grading. Choosing a set of simple roots for g induces a decomposition of R into positive root R>0 and R<0.The associated parabolic subalgebra , pΘ, and associated opposite parabolic subal-gebra , popp Θ are given by 

pΘ = g0 ⊕ M

> β∈R>0

gβ popp Θ = g0 ⊕ M

> β∈R<0

gβ .

These parabolic subalgebras are standard and so the index Θ can be interpreted as the associated subset of simple restricted roots of g.The associated Levi subalgebra , lΘ = pΘ ∩ popp Θ = g0.When the root system grading on g is induced by a parabolic subalgebra, pΘ, the associated parabolic subalgebra recovers pΘ. Thus there is no conflict in notation. 3.3. Recognition theorems. In [BM92, BZ96] the authors proved a recognition theorem 

for each finite simple Weyl type. These theorems show that each Lie algebra with an R-grading is “built” out of copies of a fixed algebra A organized by the root system R. As the Dynkin diagram for R becomes more complicated, there are more restrictions on the algebras used to build it. NONCOMMUTATIVE CLUSTER VARIETIES AND MODULI SPACES OF LOCAL SYSTEMS 21 

Theorem 3.11. [BZ96] Any Lie algebra with an A1-grading is (a central extension of ) sl 2(J)

for some quadratic Jordan algebra J.

This implies that every A1-graded Lie algebra is essentially given by the Tits-Kantor-Koecher construction (Definition 2.24). In Table 1 we see all simple real Lie algebras with an A1-grading, the corresponding Jordan algebra J and the type of the restricted root system ∆.

g sl 2n(R) sl 2n(C) sl 2n(H) sp 2n(R) su (n, n ) so ∗(4 n) sp (2 n, 2n)

J Mn(R) Mn(C) Mn(H) Hn(R) Hn(C) Hn(H) H∗

> n

(H)∆ A2n−1 A2n−1 A2n−1 Cn Cn Cn Cn

g so (p + 1 , p + 1) so (p + 1 , q + 1) sl 4n(R) sl 2n(R) so (2 n, 2n)

J J(p, p ) J(p, q ) Mn(Hspl ) Hn(Cspl ) Hn(Hspl )∆ Dp+1 Bp+1 A4n−1 A2n−1 D2n

g so (2 p + 1) (C) sp 2n(C) so (2 p)(C) e(−25) 7 e(7) 7 e(C)7

J J(2 p − 1) Hn(R)(C) J(2 p − 2) H3(O) H3(Ospl ) H3(O(C))∆ Bp Cp Dp C3 E7 E7

Table 1. Simple real Lie algebras with an A1-grading. 

Theorem 3.12 ([BM92]) . Any Lie algebra with an A2-grading is a (central extension of ) sl 3(D)

for some alternative unital algebra D.

As an example of this theorem, we present Table 2 of all real Lie algebras with an A2-grading. 

g sl 3n(R) sl 3n(C) sl 3n(H) sl 3n(Cspl ) sl 3n(Hspl ) e(−26) 6 e(6) 6 e(C)6

D Mn(R) Mn(C) Mn(H) Mn(Cspl ) Mn(Hspl ) O Ospl O(C)

∆ A3k−1 A3k−1 A3k−1 A3k−1 × A3k−1 A6k−1 A2 E6 E6

Table 2. Simple real Lie algebras with an A2-grading. 

Theorem 3.13 ([BM92]) . Any Lie algebra with an Ap-grading for p > 2 is (a central extension of ) sl p+1 (D) for some associative unital algebra D.

Theorem 3.14 ([BM92]) . Any Lie algebra with a Dp, E6, E7, or E8-grading (for p > 4) is (a central extension of ) G ⊗ A, with G the split algebra of corresponding type over K and A acommutative associate unital K-algebra. 

The recognition theorems for gradings by root systems with Dynkin diagrams which are not simply laced are slightly more complicated, as they impose more interesting conditions on the underlying algebra. 

Theorem 3.15 ([BZ96]) . Any Lie algebra with a Cp-grading for p ≥ 4 is (a central extension of ) the algebra sp 2p(R, σ ) where R is a unital associative algebra with an anti-involution σ : R → R .When p = 3 , the assumption that R is associative can be reduced to the assumption that only the fixed points of σ associate. When p = 2 , any C2 graded Lie algebra is (a central extension of ) to sp 2(J) for J a quadratic Jordan algebra whose identity element is contained in a sub-Jordan algebra isomorphic to H2(R).

Once again, we observe Table 3 of all simple real Lie algebras with a C3-grading. 

g sp 6k(R) su (3 k, 3k) so ∗(12 k) so (6 k, 6k) sp (6 k, 6k) E(−25) 7 E(7) 7

R Mk(R) Mk(C) Mk(H) Mk(Hspl ) M∗

> k

(H) O Ospl 

Rσ Hk(R) Hk(C) Hk(H) Hk(Hspl ) H∗

> k

(H) R R

∆ C3k C3k C3k D6k C6k C3 E7

Table 3. Simple real Lie algebras with a C3-grading. 22 ZACHARY GREENBERG, DANI KAUFMAN, MERIK NIEMEYER, AND ANNA WIENHARD 

For p ≥ 4, the real simple Lie algebras with a Cp-grading are given in Table 4. 

g sp 2pk (R) su (pk, pk ) so ∗(4 pk ) so (2 pk, 2pk ) sp (2 pk, 2pk )

R Mk(R) Mk(C) Mk(H) Mk(Hspl ) M∗

> k

(H)

Rσ Hk(R) Hk(C) Hk(H) Hk(Hspl ) H∗

> k

(H)∆ Cpk Cpk Cpk D2pk Cpk 

Table 4. Simple real Lie algebras with a Cp-grading, p ≥ 4.In order to recognize the Lie algebras for types Bp, F4, or G2, Benkart and Zelmanov con-structed a Lie algebra using what they call the generalized Tits construction [BZ96]. This construction produces a Lie algebra, T (R, J), from an alternative algebra R and a Jordan alge-bra J. The construction is inspired by a construction of the exceptional Lie algebra e8 by Tits as e(8) 8 = T  Ospl , H3(Ospl ).

Theorem 3.16 ([BZ96]) . Any Lie algebra with a G2-grading is (a central extension of ) the algebra T (Ospl , J) where J is a degree 3 Jordan algebra. 

The simple real Lie algebras with a G2-grading are given in Table 5. 

g f (4) 4 e(2) 6 e(6) 6 e(−5) 7 e(7) 7

J H3(R) H3(C) H3(Cspl ) H3(H) H3(Hspl )∆ F4 F4 E6 F4 E7

g e(−24) 8 e(8) 8 so (p + 3 , p + 4) so (p + 3 , p + 3) g(2) 2

J H3(O) H3(Ospl ) R ⊕ J(p, p + 1) R ⊕ J(p, p ) R

∆ F4 E8 Bp+3 Dp+3 G2

Table 5. Simple real Lie algebras with a G2-grading. 

Theorem 3.17 ([BZ96]) . Any Lie algebra with an F4-grading is (a central extension of ) the algebra T  R, H3(Ospl ) where R is an alternative algebra with a trace map satisfying the degree 2 Cayley Hamilton equation. 

Over R, the common examples of alternative algebras are composition algebras. These al-gebras have a norm compatible with multiplication. The simple real Lie algebras with an 

F4-grading are as follows. 

g f (4) 4 e(2) 6 e(6) 6 e(−5) 7 e(7) 7 e(−24) 8 e(8) 8

R R C Cspl H Hspl O Ospl 

∆ F4 F4 E6 F4 E7 F4 E8

Table 6. Simple real Lie algebras with a F4-grading. 

Theorem 3.18 ([BZ96]) . Any Lie algebra with a Bp-grading is (a central extension of ) the algebra T  J(p, p + 1) , J where J is a degree 2 Jordan algebra over a commutative associative 

K-algebra A.

Over R there are two choices of commutative associative algebras, A = R or A = C. The following table shows all possible simple real Lie algebras with a Bp-grading. 

g so (p + r, p + 1 + q) so (p + r, p + r) so  2( p + r) + 1 C so  2( p + r)C

J J(r, q ) J(r, r − 1) J(2 r) J(2 r − 1) ∆ Bp+r Dp+r Bp+r Dp+r

Table 7. Simple real Lie algebras with a Bp-grading. In the next section, we will see that most of these gradings are induced by a choice of parabolic subalgebra. NONCOMMUTATIVE CLUSTER VARIETIES AND MODULI SPACES OF LOCAL SYSTEMS 23 

3.4. A1-grading. There is a simple classification of A1-gradings. We will show in Theorem 3.25 that all A1 gradings are induced by a parabolic subgroup P{α} for some simple root α as in Definition 3.7. Moreover, there are explicit necessary and sufficient conditions on α for P{α}

to induce an A1-grading. All possible choices of α that result in an A1-grading are shown in Figure 3 by the circled node. 

A2n−1 : n − 1 n − 1

Bn : Cn : Dn :

D∗ 

> 2n

: E7 :

Figure 3. Choice of Θ = {α} giving an A1-grading. First, we classify 3-graded simple Lie algebras, which are almost A1-graded. 

Definition 3.19. A Lie algebra g is 3-graded if g decomposes as g−1 ⊕ g0 ⊕ g1 such that 

[g0, gi] ⊂ gi, [g1, g1] = 0 , [g−1, g−1] = 0 , [g1, g−1] ⊂ g0 .

A 3-grading gives the appropriate decomposition for an A1-grading, but does not guarantee the existence of a “good” split A1-subalgebra satisfying Property 3 of a root grading. 

Lemma 3.20. Let g be a simple Lie algebra. Then g is 3-graded if and only if there is a simple root α such that the parabolic subgroup P{α} induces the grading. Moreover the coefficient of α

in the longest root, [αM : α] = 1 .Proof. We first show that when [αM : α] = 1 , P{α} induces a 3-grading. By Lemma 3.8, the eigenspaces of the decomposition are indexed by the possible coefficients of α for any root. Since 

[αM : α] = 1 , there are three options {− 1, 0, 1}, splitting g = g−1 ⊕g0 ⊕g1. Lemma 3.8 also states that each gi further splits into root spaces, so it suffices to understand the brackets between root spaces to check the bracket relations for 3-grading. For example, to check [g1, g1] = 0 it suffices to consider the bracket between gβ ⊂ g1 and gγ ⊂ g1. The coefficient [β + γ : α] = [ β :

α] + [ γ : α] = 2 and so β + γ is not a root and [gβ , gγ ] = 0 as needed. The remaining bracket relations follow from analogous calculations of coefficients of α among root spaces living in the corresponding graded pieces. For the converse, suppose that g = g−1 ⊕ g0 ⊕ g1 is a 3-grading. We can choose the maximal split torus, t, to be contained in g0 so that the root space decomposition refines the 3-grading. Therefore we can choose a set of simple roots so that the subalgebra p = g0 ⊕ g1 is a standard parabolic subalgebra. Let Θ be the subset of simple roots which do not vanish uniformly on t ∩ z. Since g1 is nonempty, Θ is nonempty as well. If |Θ| > 1 then let α1, α 2 be distinct simple roots in Θ.Consider a chain from α1 to the highest root αM . Since [αM , α 2] > 0 there is a positive root on the chain α′ with [α′ : α2] = 0 and α′ + α2 a root. The root space gα′ is in g1 and has nontrivial bracket with gα2 ⊂ g1 contradicting the 3-grading. Similarly if [αM : α] > 1, there is a positive root on the chain from α1 to αM with [α′ : α1] = 1 and α′ + α1 a root. The same contradiction applies in this case. Therefore the 3-grading is induced by p{α} with [αM : α] = 1 

as claimed. □

In order to extend the classification of 3-gradings to A1-gradings, we need to build a good sl 2

triple in g compatible with the 3-grading. This requires some explicit computations using the highest root in a finite root system. The coefficients of the highest root in a root system R are related to a special labeling for the nodes of the Dynkin diagram of the associated affine root system , eR. This Dynkin diagram for eR can be obtained by adding one node, called the extending node , and edges to the Dynkin diagram for R. We refer to [Kac84] for details about affine root systems and this labeling. 

Lemma 3.21 ([Kac84], Proposition 4.7) . The Dynkin diagrams of an affine root system are characterized by the existence of a labeling of the nodes by positive integers such that the smallest 24 ZACHARY GREENBERG, DANI KAUFMAN, MERIK NIEMEYER, AND ANNA WIENHARD 

label is 1 and twice each label is the sum of the adjacent labels “with multiplicity.” Equivalently, there is a positive integer vector (d1, · · · , d p) in the cokernel of the Cartan matrix of eR whose minimal entry is 1, P cij di = 0 .

eAn :11 1 1 1

eBn : 11 2 2 2 2

eCn : 1 2 2 2 2 1

eDn : 11 2 2 11

eE6 :1122 3 2 1

eE7 : 1 223 4 3 2 1

eE8 : 1234 6 5 4 3 2

eF4 : 1 2 3 4 2

eG2 : 1 2 3

Figure 4. Affine Dynkin diagrams and labeling as in Lemma 3.21. The Dynkin diagrams and labelings are shown in Figure 4. Removing a node labeled 1 from the Dynkin diagram of eR results in a labeled Dynkin diagram for R. Let di be the label of the node corresponding to αi. This is independent of the choice of node labeled 1 to remove. 

Lemma 3.22 ([Kac84], Remark 4.9) . The coefficient [αM : αi] of the highest root is equal to the label di.

We now decompose the longest word in the Weyl group, w0, into commuting reflections about positive roots. This decomposition will help build the split A1-subalgebra inside g. Recall from Definition 3.1, that each root, α, defines a reflection , sα, by sα(v) = v − ⟨ v, α ⟩α.

Lemma 3.23. Let X be a reduced root system and r be the number of orbits of simple roots under the opposition involution. There exists a family of r strongly orthogonal roots δ1, · · · , δ r

such that w0 = Q sδi and δi is the highest root of a connected subdiagram of Xi.Proof. We begin with δ1 = P diαi the highest positive root. The other δi will be constructed inductively as the highest roots of subdiagrams fixed by reflection in all previous roots. Now we consider the action of δ1 on αj an arbitrary simple root, 

sδ1 αj = αj − ⟨ αj , δ 1⟩δ1 = αj − ⟨ δ1, α j ⟩ (αj , α j )(δ1, δ 1) δ1 = αj − X

> i

cij di

!

(αj , α j )(δ1, δ 1) δ1 .

By Lemma 3.21, when j is not adjacent to the extending node P cij di = 0 and αj is fixed by 

δ1. Otherwise P cij di > 0 and we obtain a negative root. We now consider the strict subdiagram of nodes fixed by sδ1 . By case by case observation, we see the nonfixed nodes form a single orbit of the opposition involution. This leaves r − 1

orbits in the subdiagram, whose longest word inductively splits into a product of c − 1 strongly orthogonal reflections about δ2, · · · , δ r . Furthermore each δi for i > 1 is a sum of nodes fixed by δ1 and thus is strongly orthogonal to δ1 as well. Note that when the fixed diagram of δ1 is disconnected the highest roots in each subdiagram are strongly orthogonal and so should both be chosen to obtain r roots. □

Example 3.24 . The longest word in W (E7) is given by reflections in the following roots 

δ1 = 2234321 δ2 = 1012221 δ3 = 0000001 δ4 = 1012100 δ5 = 1000000 δ6 = 0010000 δ7 = 0000100 .

Here we graphically labeled the nodes of the Dynkin diagram by the coefficient of the simple root. So δ1 = 2 α1 + 2 α2 + 3 α3 + 4 α4 + 3 α5 + 2 α6 + α7 using the indexing for E7 in [Kna96]. 

Theorem 3.25. Let g be a simple Lie algebra. Then g is A1-graded if and only if there is a root α such that P{α} induces the grading. Moreover, α is fixed by the opposition involution and has [αM : α] = 1 .Proof. We begin by showing that whenever α is fixed by the opposition involution and [αM :

α] = 1 , the parabolic P{α} induces an A1 grading. By Lemma 3.20, we know P{α} induces a 3-grading, g = g−1 ⊕ g0 ⊕ g1. In order to upgrade to an A1-grading we need to check the remaining three properties. NONCOMMUTATIVE CLUSTER VARIETIES AND MODULI SPACES OF LOCAL SYSTEMS 25 

First we check g0 is generated by iterated brackets in g1 and g−1. It suffices to hit every simple root space in g0 as these generate simple Lie algebras. Let β̸ = α be a simple root and consider a chain from α to the highest root αM . At some point there is a root α′ with [α′ : β] = 0 

and α′ + β a root. Moreover [α′ : α] = 1 so gα′+β ∈ g1 and g−α′ ∈ g−1. Then [gα′+β , g−α′ ] = gβ

as needed. Next we check there is a good split A1 subalgebra in g satisfying Properties 2 and 3. Con-cretely, we find an sl 2 triple (E, F, H ) with E ∈ g1, F ∈ g−1, and H ∈ t ∩ z{α} ⊂ g0. We build 

E using the root spaces corresponding to the set of strongly orthogonal roots, {δi} constructed in Lemma 3.23. First relabel the roots such that the roots containing α are the first c roots and that for i < j < c , δi > δ j in the root partial order. This is possible since each δi is the highest root for some nested subdiagram. For i = 1 , · · · , c , chose a nonzero Ei ∈ gδi and complete it to an sl 2-triple (Ei, F i, H i = ˇδi). Then E = P Ei, Fi = P Fi and H = P Hi. Since the δi are strongly orthogonal, for i̸ = j, [Ei, F j ] = [ Hi, E j ] = [ Hi, F j ] = 0 and we have 

[E, F ] = 



> c

X

> i=1

Ei, X

> j=1 c

Fj

 =

> c

X

> i=1
> c

X

> j=1

[Ei, F j ] = 

> c

X

> i=1

Hi = H . 

Thus (E, F, H ) is an sl 2 triple which gives an embedding of a split A1-Lie algebra into g respect-ing the 3-grading. It remains to check that H acts correctly on all of g1 (and g−1), in other words, H ∈ t ∩ z{α}. By Lemma 3.8 it suffices to check that all simple roots other than α vanish on H.We now verify this fact in each case. Let αj be a simple root and compute 

αj (H) = αj

> c

X

> k=1

ˇδk

!

=

*

αj ,

> c

X

> k=1

δk

+

= X (αj , δ k)(δk, δ k) .

By construction δk is the highest root for a subdiagram Xk. Thus there are two possible cases for (δk, α j ) to be nonzero: αj is the extending node of Xk or αj is adjacent to Xk. These two cases are related in the construction of the set of highest roots; whenever αj is the extending node for some Xk′ it is then adjacent to Xk′+1 . Moreover, each node can only be the extending node of a subdiagram Xk at most once. Next, we analyze each of the finitely many cases of α that are fixed by the opposition involution and have [αM : α] = 1 that are shown in Figure 3. For each αj̸ = α that is the extending node for Xk′ , we observe that Xk′+1 is the only diagram adjacent to αj . So k′ and k′ + 1 are the only times (δk, α j )̸ = 0 . Moreover we compute in each case that 

(αj , δ k)(δk, δ k) = − (αj , δ k+1 )(δk+1 , δ k+1 ) .

and that (αj , δ ′

> k

) = −(αj , δ k′+1 ). This implies that αj (H) = 0 for all αj̸ = α that are the extending node for some Xk′ . If αj̸ = α is never an extending node, then (αj , δ k) = 0 for all k

and αj (H) vanishes as needed. Finally we consider the case αj = α. In this case, δc = α and the only nonzero pairing is 

(α, δ c) = 2 as needed. For illustration, we give the explicit calculation for the two possible cases in D6 and D∗ 

> 6

as in Figure 3. The set of orthogonal roots from Lemma 3.23 is 

1222 11 10000 00 0012 11 0000 01 0000 10 0001 11 .

When α is 1000 00 as in case D6, the δ used to build E are 

δ1 = 1222 11 δ2 = 10000 00 .

The only interesting simple root is α2 = 0100 00. Since (δ1, δ 1) = ( δ2, δ 2) it suffices to compute 

(δ1, α 2) = 1 and (δ2, α 2) = −1.When α = 0000 01 as in case D∗ 

> 6

, the δ used to build E are 

δ1 = 1222 11 δ2 = 0012 11 δ3 = 0000 01 .

In this case there are two interesting simple roots α2 = 0100 00 and α4 = 0100 00. To check the result we compute (δ1, α 2) = 1 , (δ2, α 2) = −1 and (δ2, α 4) = 1 , (δ3, α 4) = −1 as needed. 26 ZACHARY GREENBERG, DANI KAUFMAN, MERIK NIEMEYER, AND ANNA WIENHARD 

For the opposite direction we assume that g is A1-graded. Then in particular, g is 3-graded and so there is a simple root α with [αM : α] = 1 and P{α} induces the 3-grading. We can take the split torus t which induces the root system grading to include h, the Cartan subalgebra of the split A1 subalgebra of the root grading. Next let G be a algebraic group with Lie algebra g and chose a lift s of the unique generator of the Weyl group of the split A1 subalgebra to G. By definition, the adjoint action of s conjugates 

P opp  

> {α}

to P{α}. Similarly, a lift w0 of the longest word in the full Weyl group conjugates P opp 

> {α}

to P{− w0α}. This implies that P{α} and P{− w0α} are conjugate and thus are the same standard parabolic. So α = −w0α and α is fixed by the opposition involution as needed. □

Remark 3.26 . This classification of A1-gradings is very similar to the classification of Hermitian symmetric domains of tube type proved in [Del79]. 3.5. Larger gradings. Let g be a simple Lie algebra of Weyl type X with simple roots ∆ = 

{α1, · · · , α n} and let Θ = {αi1 , · · · αip } ⊂ ∆. We label the simple Θ-root corresponding to the 

αij -space by βj . For each αij ∈ Θ, let Fj be the connected component containing αij of the Dynkin diagram given by removing αik for k̸ = j.

Definition 3.27. We say that Θ is Jordan compatible if for each αij ∈ Θ, the root αij

satisfies the condition to induce an A1-grading in Fj , i.e is labeled 1 and fixed by the opposition involution for Fj .

An(p, k ) : k k k Cn(p, k ) : k k k Bn(p) : 

Dn(p) : 

D∗

> 2n

(n, 1) : D∗

> 2n

(p, k ) : k k k − 2 E6(2) : E∗ 

> 6

(2) : 

E7(1) : E7(2) : E7(3) : E7(4) : 

E8(2) : E8(4) : F4(2) : 

Figure 5. Jordan compatible choices of Θ.Figure 5 shows all possible Jordan compatible choices of Θ, other than Θ = ∆ . The roots in Θ are circled, and the × labeled k denotes an Ak-subdiagram with no circled nodes. This list is obtained by combining the definition with the classification of A1-gradings as shown in Figure 3. 

Theorem 3.28. Let Θ ⊂ ∆ be a subset of simple roots and pΘ the associated parabolic subalge-bra. Then the grading induced by pΘ is a grading by a root system of some type Y if and only if Θ is Jordan compatible. Proof. First we assume that pΘ induces a root grading of type Y . Consider the subalgebra generated by the roots in the subdiagram Fi corresponding to βi. The restriction of PΘ to this subalgebra induces an A1-grading and thus is given by a parabolic associated to a root γi with 

[αMi : γi] = 1 for αMi the highest root in Fi and γi fixed by the opposition involution in Fi.Moreover this parabolic is the restriction of PΘ and so γi = βi as needed for Θ to be Jordan compatible. We now show the converse. Assume Θ is Jordan compatible and thus that each diagram Fj

has an induced A1-grading. This gives elements 1±βj for each simple root in Θ as the element 

E constructed from a sum of strongly orthogonal root spaces as in Theorem 3.25. The parabolic 

pΘ divides g into the union of root spaces which agree on h = zΘ ∩ t. Thus each graded piece is labeled by a Y -root, the projection the restricted root space onto the subspace spanned by Θ.It remains to check this decomposition satisfies the three properties of a root grading. Property 1 of being Y -graded follows directly from the A1-grading on each subdiagram. The sums of iterated brackets of 1±βj generate the part of the Levi subgroup corresponding to each diagram. Therefore all of the Levi ( g0) is generated by brackets in the proposed Y -roots. NONCOMMUTATIVE CLUSTER VARIETIES AND MODULI SPACES OF LOCAL SYSTEMS 27 

Property 2 is the bulk of the proof and requires a case by case check that the subalgebra generated by the identity elements 1±βj is a split Lie algebra of type Y . This subalgebra will have Cartan subspace h.Property 3 is then an easy consequence of the parabolic grading. The action of the split torus, h, acts by the Y -roots on each restricted root space, not only on K1β as needed. We now focus on Property 2 and check the identity elements generate a split subalgebra. In order to determine the type of the split subalgebra we focus on the subdiagram Fij = Fi ∪ Fj

for two simple roots βi and βj . There are only a few possibilities for Fij :(0) Fij is disconnected. (1) Fij is An(2 , k ) or E∗ 

> 6

(2) .(2) Fij is Bn(2) , C n(2 , k ), D n(2) , or D∗

> 2n

(2 , k ).(3) Fij is F4(2) , E 6(2) , E 7(2) , or E8(2) .The Dynkin diagram for Y is constructed by examining Fij for each pair of roots in Θ and assigning k edges between node i and j when Fij is in case (k). It suffices to show the Serre relations hold for each subalgebra generated by 1±βi and 1±βj for the groups of type A1 ×

A1, A 2, B 2, G 2 is each case. The case (0) for A1 × A1 is trivial as the disconnected diagrams result in commuting A1

subalgebras. For the remaining cases we start by verifying that [hi, 1βj ] = ⟨βi, β j ⟩1βj with hi = [ 1βi , 1−βi ].By construction, the element hj = [ 1βj , 1−βj ] = Pcj

> k=1

(ˇδk)j for the set {(δk)j } of strongly orthogonal roots with [( δk)i : αij ] > 0 constructed in Theorem 3.25. Generically we have 

[h1, 1β2 ] = 

" c1X

> k=1

(ˇδk)1,

> c2

X

> l=1

1(δl)2

#

=

> c1

X

> k=1
> c2

X

> l=1

⟨(δl)2, (δk)1⟩(δl)2 .

We will compute the final sum, using the explicit family of roots δk in each case. We begin by examining the choices of Fij which we claim result in an A2-grading. In Table 8, we present the strongly orthogonal roots which decompose 1β1 and 1β2 . Each root is encoded by writing the coefficient of each positive root over the respective node of the Dynkin diagram of the original restricted root system. The underlined entries correspond to the choice of Θ. The roots in Table 8 are organized so the only nontrivial pairing is among roots in the same row. 

β1 β2

An(2 , k )11 · · · 11111 · · · 11000 · · · 00 000 · · · 00000 · · · 00100 · · · 00 01 · · · 11111 · · · 10000 · · · 00 000 · · · 00000 · · · 01110 · · · 00 

... ...

00 · · · 01110 · · · 00000 · · · 00 000 · · · 00001 · · · 11111 · · · 10 00 · · · 00100 · · · 00000 · · · 00 000 · · · 00011 · · · 11111 · · · 11 

E∗ 

> 6

(2) 112210 000001 010000 102211 

Table 8. Decompositions of simple roots for A2-gradings For example, we consider An(2 , k ). The set of orthogonal roots for β1 are α[1 ,2k+1] , α[2 ,2k],· · · ,

α[k,k +2] ,αk+1 where α[i,j ] = Pjℓ=i αℓ. Similarly the roots for β2 are α2k+2 , α[2 k+1 ,2k+3] ,· · · 

α[k+3 ,3k+1] , α[k+2 ,3k+2] . Since the pairing ⟨α, β ⟩ is nonzero if and only if α ± β is a root, we check the only nonzero pairing is across rows of Table 8. For the choices of Fij with a B2-grading, Table 9 shows the analogous sets of strongly or-thogonal roots. In this case, two roots decomposing β1 can have nontrivial pairing with a root of β2. When this occurs, the roots decomposing β2 are placed between the rows for nontrivial paired roots decomposing β1 in Table 9. All pairings outside these “rows” are trivial. In this case the pairing between β1 and β2 is asymmetric, [h1, 1β2 ] = −21β2 while [h2, 1β1 ] = 

−1β1 . In type Cn(2 , k ) the asymmetry in the pairing comes from the asymmetry of the un-derlying pairing ⟨δi, δ j ⟩. In every other case the asymmetry comes from the fact that the root 28 ZACHARY GREENBERG, DANI KAUFMAN, MERIK NIEMEYER, AND ANNA WIENHARD 

β1 decomposes into twice as many root spaces as β2. Each root of β2 pairs nontrivially with two roots of β1 with value −1. The asymmetry in sizes results in [h1, 1β2 ] = −21β2 while 

[h2, 1β1 ] = −1β1 as needed. The final case is the subdiagrams which generate a G2 subsystem. As before, Table 10 shows the strongly orthogonal roots used to construct 1β1 and 1β2 . In each case, 1β2 decomposes into a single root space which pairs nontrivially with each space in 1β1 . As in B2, this asymmetry of dimensions corresponds to the required asymmetry of pairing. The finiteness of the Serre relation, ad( 1βi )−⟨ βj ,β i⟩+1 (1βj ) = 0 , is clear by observing the coefficients of the nodes in Θ in the highest root. In each connected case, the coefficients of 

(β1, β 2) are (1 , 1) , (2 , 1) , or (3 , 2) when the subdiagram is type A2, B 2 or G2 respectively. Since the adjoint action maps root spaces to root spaces, the maximum numbers of times ad( 1βi ) can be nonzero is the coefficient, [αM : βi]. Moreover, [αM : βi] is the coefficient of the highest root in a root system of type Y . For example, in F4(2) , the highest root is αM = 23 ⇒ 43 = 2α1 + 3 α2 + 4 α3 + 2 α4. Then β1 = 10 ⇒ 00 and [αM : β1] = 2 and β2 = 01 ⇒ 00 has 

[αM : β2] = 3 matching G2 as needed. Moreover these coefficients match the coefficients of the highest root of the relevant root system. This implies that these final Serre relations match the proposed root system. 

□

3.6. Grading by folding. There are several gradings which arise from an alternate construc-tion, a folding of the Dynkin diagram. Recall that each non-simply laced diagram can be obtained by folding a simply laced diagram via a symmetry of the diagram as follows: 

A2p−1 ↣ Cp, Dp+1 ↣ Bp, E6 ↣ F4, D4 ↣ G2 .β1 β2

Bn(2) 012 · · · 2 ⇒ 2 10 · · · 0 ⇒ 0010 · · · 0 ⇒ 0

Cn(2 , k )11 · · · 11111 · · · 11 ⇐ 0 00 · · · 00000 · · · 00 ⇐ 101 · · · 11111 · · · 10 ⇐ 0 00 · · · 00000 · · · 02 ⇐ 1

... ...

00 · · · 01110 · · · 00 ⇐ 0 00 · · · 00002 · · · 22 ⇐ 100 · · · 00100 · · · 00 ⇐ 0 00 · · · 00022 · · · 22 ⇐ 1

Dn(2) 010 · · · 000 100 · · · 000012 · · · 211

D∗

> 2n

(2 , 2k)11 · · · 1111 · · · 110 00 · · · 00000 · · · 001

01 · · · 1111 · · · 100

... ...

00 · · · 01110 · · · 000 00 · · · 00012 · · · 211

00 · · · 00100 · · · 000

Table 9. Decompositions of simple roots for B2-gradings 

β1 β2

F4(2) 01 ⇒ 22 10 ⇒ 00 01 ⇒ 20 01 ⇒ 00 

E6(2)  

> 011111 100000 001110 000100

β1 β2

E7(2)  

> 1012221 0100000 1012100 0010000

E8(2)  

> 22343210 00000001 10122210 00000010

Table 10. Decompositions of simple roots for G2-gradings NONCOMMUTATIVE CLUSTER VARIETIES AND MODULI SPACES OF LOCAL SYSTEMS 29 

There is one special folding of B3 onto G2, which does not arise from an automorphism of the diagram. Instead, the symmetry identifies the root spaces corresponding to the two ends. This makes sense as it “finishes” the folding of D4 onto G2 that began by folding D4 onto B3.

Proposition 3.29. Let R be a root system which folds onto a root system R′. Then any Lie algebra which is R-graded is also R′-graded. Proof. The root spaces of the folded algebra are given by the orbits of the symmetry used to fold it. Thus, the R′-grading is given by identifying the pieces of the R-grading under the folding symmetry. □

Proposition 3.30. Every R-grading of a simple Lie algebra comes from a grading by a parabolic subgroup possibly followed by a folding. Proof. Suppose g is simple and R-graded. By the recognition theorems (Section 3.3) we can assume that g has a reduced restricted root system (i.e. is not of type BC ), as otherwise it would not be graded by a reduced root system. Denote by R+ the set of positive roots in R. Consider the associated parabolic subalgebra 

p = L 

> β∈R+∪{ 0}

gβ . We wish to prove that p induces a grading by a root system R′ which comes with a folding R′ → R. Write z for the center of g0. We have h ⊂ z where h is the Cartan subgroup of the split group coming from the R-grading. Consider a simple R-root space gβ .The action of z on it decomposes it into gβ = L 

> i

gγi , since gβ is abelian these commute with each other. As p is a parabolic subalgebra, each γi corresponds to a root αi of g.Elements of the normalizer of h must map g0 into itself, and hence must map z into itself as well. Therefore the W (R) action respects the decomposition of gβ by z, i.e. any root space for a root in the W (R) orbit of β also decomposes into the same number of z-root spaces. In particular g−β decomposes into L 

> i

g−γi . Since these commute with each other, we have that 

[gγi , g−γj ] = 0 for i̸ = j as well. Now we observe that the projection of the identity elements 1±β into the g±γi give sl 2-triples in gγi ⊕ g−γj ⊕ [gγi , g−γj ]. This implies that these subalgebras are A1-graded and hence the collection of roots αi must be Jordan compatible so that this parabolic induces a root grading 

R′.The folding from R′ to R is given by grouping all the simple γj whose root spaces are contained in the same gβ . □

3.7. Identifying Jordan factors. Our classification of Jordan compatible subsets of roots of a Dynkin diagram (Theorem 3.28) recovers most of the features of the recognition theorems given in Section 3.3. In particular, if g is a simple Lie algebra over K and the parabolic subalgebra associated to a subset Θ ⊂ ∆ induces an R-grading we obtain restrictions on the possible Jordan algebras associated to the roots in R.First, we reinterpret what we have established about A1-graded algebras to give a classification analogous to the classification of Jordan algebras over an algebraically closed field given in [McC04, Renaissance Structure Theorem]. 

Proposition 3.31. Let g be an A1-graded simple Lie algebra over an algebraically closed field 

Kalg . Then g = sl 2(J) and belongs to one of the following cases: 

• Associative type: sl 2(J) is type A2n−1(1) and J ∼ Mn(Kalg ).

• Clifford type: sl 2(J) is type Bn(1) /D n(1) and J ∼ J(V, b ),for V a 2n − 1 or 2n − 2 dimensional vector space and b a nondegenerate form on V .

• Symmetric Hermitian type: sl 2(J) is type Cn(1) and J ∼ Hn(Kalg ).

• Quaternionic Hermitian type: sl 2(J) is type D∗

> 2n

(1) and J ∼ Hn(D),for D the split quaternions over Kalg .

• Exceptional Type: sl 2(J) is type E7(1) and J ∼ H3(O),for O the split octonions over Kalg .Proof. By Proposition 3.30, every A1-grading is induced by a parabolic subgroup. This parabolic subgroup corresponds to an isotopy class of Jordan algebras over Kalg . Since Kalg is algebraically closed, there is one simple Lie algebra for each Dynkin diagram in our classification of parabolic subgroups which induce A1-gradings (Theorem 3.25). □30 ZACHARY GREENBERG, DANI KAUFMAN, MERIK NIEMEYER, AND ANNA WIENHARD 

In order to extend the result to non algebraically closed K we need to recall the classification of simple Lie algebras by the Satake-Tits Index :

Definition 3.32. Suppose g is a Lie algebra over K with restricted root system ∆. We write 

∆alg for the Dynkin diagram of galg := g ⊗K Kalg over the algebraic closure Kalg . There is a subset ∆• ⊂ ∆alg of roots whose restriction to the maximal torus of g is trivial. There is also an induced action, ⋄, of the Galois group Gal( Kalg /K) on the non trivial roots, ∆◦ := ∆ alg \ ∆•.The triple (∆ alg , ∆◦, ⋄) is called the Satake-Tits index of g.

Lemma 3.33. Suppose g has restricted root system A1. Then g ≃ sl 2(J) for J a division Jordan algebra over K. Also, the Satake-Tits index is such that ∆alg is a product of identical copies of identical A1 graded diagrams, ∆◦ is the set of A1 grading nodes, and ⋄ acts transitively on ∆◦.Proof. The fact that J is a division Jordan algebra is proved later by analyzing the Θ-Bruhat decomposition of g. Since g has restricted root system A1, we will see that the corresponding Jordan algebra has capacity 1 (see Definition 3.43) and so every nonzero element is in the top Bruhat cell by Proposition 4.14. Then Proposition 4.39 will show that all of these elements are invertible. For the second part, first assume that ⋄ acts trivially. In this case ∆◦ must be one element, its easy to see from the definition of the Tits index that this induces an A1-grading on galg .If the ⋄ action is nontrivial, we can first pass to the smallest extension of K which makes the 

⋄ action trivial, denote it by K′. The number of embeddings of this field into Kalg gives the number of copies of this A1 graded diagram which are permuted by the ⋄ action. □

We call J associative, Clifford, Hermitian, or exceptional type depending on the corresponding type of the Jordan algebra Jalg obtained by extending scalars. 

Lemma 3.34. If ∆ is a reduced root system, then galg is also ∆-graded. Moreover Θ = ∆ ◦ is a Jordan compatible subset of ∆alg . The ⋄ action descends to ∆alg Θ , folding by this action gives the ∆-grading. Proof. Since · ⊗ K Kalg commutes with direct sum, the ∆-grading on galg is given by applying 

· ⊗ K Kalg to each graded piece of g. The definition of the Satake-Tits index implies that the center of the Levi of the parabolic subgroup determined by Θ contains the maximal split torus of g. We can see that the maximal split torus is exactly the fixed points of the Galois group. Thus if the star action is trivial, then each node in ∆◦ corresponds directly to a node in ∆, each of which correspond to A1 graded subalgebras, which implies that ∆◦ is Jordan compatible. In the case that the ⋄ action is nontrivial, each orbit must correspond to a number of copies of the same A1 graded subalgebras. This gives a folding of ∆alg Θ . □

The previous lemma allows us to prove an “identification theorem” for any R-graded algebra which identifies which Jordan algebras can appear in each type. 

Theorem 3.35 (Identification) . Let g be a semisimple R-graded Lie algebra over K. The grading identifies a Jordan algebra for each simple root αj of R, with the following restrictions given by the Dynkin type of the simple factor containing αj :

Ap: We identify p copies of an associative Jordan algebra, one for each simple root. When p = 2 we could instead identify two copies of an octonion algebra over K′, where K′

is a finite field extension of K.When p = 1 , we can additionally identify any semisimple Jordan algebra over K.

Bp: We identify p − 1 copies of K′ and one copy of a Clifford type algebra over K′.

Cp: We identify p − 1 copies of J(R) associated to each short root and one copy of H(R, ⋆ ) to the unique long root, for R a finite-dimensional algebra over K′.When p = 3 , we could instead identify two copies of an octonion algebra over K′ for each short root and a copy of K′ for the long root. 

F4: We identify 2 copies of K′ associated to the long roots and 2 copies of C, a Cayley-Dickson algebra over K′ associated to the short roots. 

G2: We identify one copy of K′ for the long root. The short root either identifies a copy of 

H3(C) or a semisimple Jordan algebra consisting of K′ plus a Clifford type algebra. NONCOMMUTATIVE CLUSTER VARIETIES AND MODULI SPACES OF LOCAL SYSTEMS 31 

Dp: We identify p copies of K′, one for each simple root. 

E6, E7, E8: We identify a copy of K′ for each simple root. Proof. The key idea is that the Dynkin diagrams which occur in the Satake-Tits index are in the same category of diagram as the original restricted root system. So the classification of the Jordan algebra associated to each node can be read from either the restricted root system or the Satake-Tits index. For example consider the case Ap. By Lemma 3.34, the subset ∆◦ ⊂ ∆alg is Jordan compatible with an associated Ap grading. There are only two possible choices for this: 

An(p, k ) and E∗ 

> 6

(2) . In the first case, each Jordan algebra has the same Dynkin diagram and is associative type. The other case can only occur when p = 2 , and g is a form of the algebra 

e6 over Kalg . To see that the Jordan algebras are octonion algebras over a field extension of K,we observe the Jordan algebras must be 8-dimensional with a product that respects a quadratic norm. Another interesting case is type Cp. As before the Satake-Tits index must be one of: Cn(p, k ),

D∗

> 2n

(p, k ), or E7(3) with trivial ⋄ action, or An(2 p − 1, k ) via folding. In both, Cn(p, k ) and 

D∗

> 2n

(p, k ), we see p − 1 roots are the same associative type Jordan algebra and the last is Hermitian type given by the fixed points of an involution on the associative type Jordan algebra. Similarly the folding on An(2 p − 1, k ) identifies the paired nodes with an associative type Jordan algebra and the unpaired node with the Hermitian type given by the fixed points of the folding. When p > 3, these are the only cases, but when p = 3 there is also the case E7(3) . Two roots correspond to the exceptional A2 and identify octonion algebras over K′ and the last root is identified by the fixed point under conjugation, the base algebra K′.The final case we consider explicitly is type G2. The Satake-Tits index must be one of F4(2) ,

E6(2) , E7(2) , or E8(2) with no folding or a folding of a B3 or D4-graded diagram. The first cases straightforwardly identify K′ for the long root and H3(K′), H3(Cspl  

> K′

) ≃ M3(K′), H3(Hspl  

> K′

), or 

H3(Ospl  

> K′

) respectively for the short root. These are all H3(C) for some Cayley-Dickson algebra as claimed. In the folded cases, we observe the singleton orbit, (which becomes the long root) is always identified to be K′. In type B3, the other orbit consists of a node identified to be K′ and Clifford type algebra which are combined to be the Jordan algebra of the short root. In type 

D4, three copies of K′ are combined identifying the short root as K′ ⊕ K′ ⊕ K′ ≃ K′ ⊕ J(1 , 1) as claimed. 

□

Remark 3.36 . Regardless of Dynkin-type, the Jordan algebra for K′, a finite field extension of 

K can be identified for every simple root. For example, in type Ap, K′ is an associative Jordan algebra or in type Bp, K′ is a one dimensional Clifford algebra over K′.This identification theorem is equivalent to the recognition theorems for simple graded Lie algebras. It is interesting to compare the identification theorem with the recognition theorem in type C2/B 2. In the identification theorem, we separated the Lie algebras into two families 

B2 : K′ ⇐ J(VK′ , b ) and C2 : J(R) ⇒ H(R, ⋆ ).

When R⋆ ≃ K′ is commutative, these families agree as x 7 → xx ⋆ defines a quadratic form on R

realizing J(R) as a Clifford type Jordan algebra. However when R⋆ is noncommutative these families are distinct. This helps to explain the complications in the C2-recognition theorem (Theorem 3.15). 3.8. Noncommutative Lie algebras over Jordan algebras. In the previous sections, we have started with a simple Lie algebra, g, and classified the possible root systems R which can grade g. This classification identified an isotopy class of Jordan algebras for each node of the Dynkin diagram for R and gave restrictions on the types of Jordan algebras that appear. We now reverse the process and begin with a simple root system R and a compatible family of Jordan algebras {Ji}. Each Jordan algebra determines a Satake-Tits index of type A1 which can be glued to obtain the Satake-Tits index of an R-graded Lie algebra, g, which identifies the chosen Ji.32 ZACHARY GREENBERG, DANI KAUFMAN, MERIK NIEMEYER, AND ANNA WIENHARD 

Definition 3.37. We write T (R, {Ji}) for the (adjoint form) of Lie algebra with R-grading and the collection {Ji} of Jordan algebras assigned to its nodes. If g is a finite central extension of 

T (R, {Ji}), we call it a Jordan split algebra of type R over the Jordan algebras {Ji}.

T (R, {Ji}) is a unification of the Tits construction and the Tits-Kantor-Koecher construction which spells out the dependence on the Jordan algebras associated to each root space. 

Remark 3.38 . Gradings by folding correspond to using non-simple Jordan algebras in T (R, {Ji}).For example, the F4 grading of e(6) 6 is given by T (F4, {Ji}) with J1 = J2 = R and J3 = J4 = Cspl .Similarly there is a G2-grading of so (p + 3 , p + 4 + q) given by T (G2, {Ji}) with long root space J1 = R, and short root space R ⊕ J(p, p + 1 + q). This folds the B3-grading given by 

T (B3, {R, R, J(p, p + 1 + q)}).

Definition 3.39. Let g be Jordan split of type R, so that g ≃ T (R, {Ji}). The number of noncommutative Jordan algebras in {Ji} is the noncommutative rank or NC Rank of g

with respect to R.By the identification theorem Theorem 3.35, there are at most two different isotopy classes of Jordan algebras in the collection {Ji}. Each of these isotopy classes is assigned to a short or long root. 

Proposition 3.40. We have the following classification of simple Jordan split g of type R by noncommutative rank: (1) NC Rank = 0 : g is split or quasi-split and R is the root system of g.(2) NC Rank = 1 : R is type A1, Bp, or G2 and not split or quasi-split. (3) NC Rank > 1: R is type Ap, Cp, with p > 1, or F4 and not split or quasi-split. Proof. First, if g is split or quasi-split, then by definition there is a Borel subalgebra in g, this means that the structure groups of all of the Jordan algebras appearing when we choose Θ = ∆ 

are abelian, which means they are commutative Jordan algebras. For the second statement, we look at the conditions for Bp and G2 and see that in either case a commutative Jordan algebra must be assigned to the long roots of the root system. Since there is only one short root remaining in each type, the non split or quasi-split type A1, Bp,and G2 have noncommutative rank 1. There is a slight ambiguity since B2 ≃ C2, but we will consider NC rank 1 groups of this type as B2 and higher NC rank groups as C2.For the last part we only have to consider the Cp case and see that the Hermitian type algebra is the fixed points of an involution on the associative type algebra, meaning that if the associative algebra is commutative, then all are and we are back in the quasi-split case. Since 

p > 2 this implies that the NC rank is bigger than 1. Every possible simple root system is covered by these cases, so the classification is complete. 

□

Example 3.41 . Over the real numbers, the noncommutative rank 0 Jordan split Lie algebras are the split real Lie algebras, the complex Lie algebras viewed as real Lie algebras and the real forms su (n, n ), so (n, n + 2) and e(2) 6 .3.9. Weyl groups. When g is graded by a root system R there are two Weyl groups that act on G, the Weyl group of R, W (R), and the Weyl group of the restricted root system of g. Let 

∆ be a choice of simple restricted roots for g and let W (∆) be the Weyl group of the restricted root system. In this section we define two injections W (R) → W (∆) allowing us to understand 

W (R) using W (∆) .

Convention. We use s1, . . . , s n for the generators of W (∆) , and ς1 . . . , ς p for those of W (R).

Definition 3.42. For w ∈ W (∆) we denote by ℓ(w) the length of w in the generators si.For F ⊂ ∆, any subset of simple roots, we denote by wF the longest element of the Weyl group W (F ) < W (∆) generated by F . We will denote by w0 the longest element of W (R).NONCOMMUTATIVE CLUSTER VARIETIES AND MODULI SPACES OF LOCAL SYSTEMS 33 

We begin by assuming the R-grading on g is induced by the associated parabolic subalgebra 

pΘ for some Θ ⊂ ∆. For 1 ≤ i ≤ p we denote by Fi the subset of ∆ consisting of the connected component of ∆ \ Θ ∪ βi containing βi as in Section 3.5. Now suppose that g is A1-graded and so Θ = {β} has one element. In this case we decompose 

w∆ = sδ1 . . . s δc . . . s δr where the δi are strongly orthogonal roots and δ1, . . . , δ c are the roots which contain β as in Lemma 3.23. We write ς(j) = Qji=1 sδi .

Definition 3.43. The number of δi with [δi : β] > 0 denoted by c above is called the capacity 

of the Jordan algebra J.

Remark 3.44 . This capacity is actually the same as the capacity defined as the maximal number of orthogonal idempotent elements you can write the identity element as a sum as, see [McC04]. 

Proposition 3.45. Let Θ = {β} be a single element. The double cosets 

[w] ∈ W (∆ \ Θ) \W (∆) /W (∆ \ Θ) 

are indexed by the elements ς(j) for 0 ≤ j ≤ c.Proof. We calculate the double cosets of W (∆) by the subgroup generated by the reflections 

sαj for αj̸ = β in each possible finite Weyl type in Figure 3. In type A2n−1 and Cn, W (∆) is a subgroup of S2n, with the Cn Weyl group acting by symmetric permutations. For f ∈ S2n, let |f | = |{ 1 ≤ i ≤ n | f (i) > n }| , be the number of the left half of indices which are mapped to the right half by f . Then f, g are in the same double coset if and only if |f | = |g|. The maximum value of |f | is n which is the capacity, c. Since 

|ς(i)| = i, each ς(i) is in a distinct double cosets and they cover all possible cosets. For the D∗ 

> 2n

case, we realize the Weyl group as a subgroup of (Z/2Z)2n ⋊ S2n where sβ is the element  (1 , . . . , 1, −1, −1) , (2 n − 1 2 n) and the other sj act only as permutations. Therefore, the invariant of a double coset is the number of ones in the (Z/2Z)2n factor. The elements ς(i)

have 2i minus ones and thus are in distinct double cosets. Moreover every coset contains some 

ς(i) because the number of minus ones is an even integer, 2k, between 0 and 2n and the capacity 

c is equal to n in this case. Next we consider the cases Dn+1 and Bn where β = s1. In both cases the capacity is 2 and the set of strongly orthogonal roots are δ1 = αM and δ2 = α1. The Weyl group for Bn is realized by taking the realization of Weyl group of Dn+1 and “folding” the generators for the tails sn and 

sn+1 into one generator. Concretely, the Weyl group for Bn is the subgroup of (Z/2Z)n+1 ⋊Sn+1 

generated by the simple transpositions s1, · · · sn−1 and sn =  (1 , · · · , 1, −1, −1) , ()) . There is an injective map W (Bn) → W (Dn+1 given by sending si 7 → si for i < n and sn 7 → snsn+1 . This map remains injective after taking the double quotient so we can study the cosets in Dn and pullback the result to Bn.The three cosets are identified by the sign/image of 1: the identity coset has image +1 , the coset of s1 has image ±k for k̸ = 1 and the coset for w0 has image −1. We then compute ς(0) is the identity and is in the coset for +1 . Next, ς(1) =  (−1, −1, · · · , 1, 1) , (12)  and so send 1 to 

−2 is in the second coset. Finally, ς(2) =  (−1, −1, · · · , 1, 1) , ()  which sends 1 to −1 and is in the coset of w0 as claimed. The final case is for E7 with β = s7. It has capacity 3 with δ1, δ 2, δ 3 the first 3 orthogonal roots from Example 3.24. The double cosets can be computed in two steps. First we identify 

W (∆) /W (δ \ Θ) with the orbit of the fundamental weight φβ , dual to β. This orbit contains 56 elements. The full double cosets can then be identified by computing the left action of W (∆ \ Θ) 

on these points, resulting in 4 orbits. The “angle” ⟨φβ , wφ β ⟩ is well defined on each double coset and takes a different value on each of the four orbits. So it suffices to check that ⟨φβ , ς (i)⟩ takes four distinct values to prove the theorem. □

Note that ς(c) is in the same double coset as w∆. There is a second distinguished element 

ςred in this double coset defined by the equation 

w∆ = ςred w∆\Θ .34 ZACHARY GREENBERG, DANI KAUFMAN, MERIK NIEMEYER, AND ANNA WIENHARD 

This element satisfies ℓ(w∆) = ℓ(ςred ) + ℓ(w∆\Θ) and is the minimal length element in the coset of w∆ in W (∆) /W (∆ \ Θ) [BT72, GW25]. Now suppose that Θ is an arbitrary Jordan compatible subset. We have elements ς(j) 

> i

∈ W (∆) 

for each βi obtained by applying the above construction to Fi ⊂ ∆. We denote by ci the capacity of βi.

Proposition 3.46. We have an injective group homomorphism defined by 

ϕ : W (R) → W (∆) 

ςi 7 → ς(ci) 

> i

.

Proof. This follows from the fact that g is graded by a root system with Dynkin diagram ∆Θ.Our explicit embedding of the split Lie algebra gΘ satisfies that the simple root spaces of gΘ are mapped to the sum of orthogonal root spaces. Simultaneous reflection about these root spaces in the Weyl group W (∆) gives the element ϕ(ςi) for each simple root space βi. □

Lemma 3.47. For any w ∈ W (R), ϕ(w) normalizes W (∆ \ Θ) . Moreover, ϕ(w0) is in the same coset as w∆ in W (∆) /W (∆ \ Θ) .Proof. We check that this is true for every generator ςi. Conjugation by ϕ(ςi) acts by the opposition involution on Fi and trivially on the other connected components of ∆ \ Θ, which normalizes W (∆ \ Θ) since βi is fixed by the opposition involution on Fi. The second statement follows since both ϕ(w0) and w∆ act the same way on the split torus of gΘ. □

Corollary 3.48. Let w ∈ W (R). The product of the double cosets of ϕ(w) and any other word 

s ∈ W (∆) is the double coset of ϕ(w)s.Proof. Chose representatives u1ϕ(w)u2 and u3 ˙su 4 for the double cosets of ϕ(w) and s. Then since ϕ(w) normalizes W (∆ \ Θ) , ϕ(w)u2u3 = u′ϕ(w) for some u′ ∈ W (∆ \ Θ) and we calculate 

u1ϕ(w)u2 · u3su 4 = u1u′ ϕ(w)s u 4 ∈ [ϕ(w)s] .

□

Next we will construct a second injection W (R) → W (∆) . The image will land in the same double coset as the previous map, but will be better behaved with respect to the length of words. For each subdiagram Fi, we define a reduced word ςred  

> i

via the following equation 

wFi = ςred  

> i

wFi\{ βi} .

Lemma 3.49. The element ςred  

> i

satisfies ℓ(ςred  

> i

) + ℓ(wFi\{ βi}) = ℓ(wFi ) and is the minimal length element in the coset of wFi in W (∆) /W (∆ \ F ). Furthermore ςred  

> i

is order 2 in W (∆) 

and normalizes W (∆ \ Θ) .Proof. The statements about the length are proved in [BT72, GW25]. From this we know that 

ϕred (ςi) is the shortest representative of wFi in W (Fi)/W (Fi \{ βi}). But since all nodes in ∆\Θ

which are not in Fi \ { βi} are not connected to Fi, ϕred (ςi) has to be the shortest representative of wFi in W (∆) /W (∆ \ Θ) as claimed. The remaining statements are also proved by restricting to the A1 case by considering Fi ⊂ ∆:First observe that the elements ςred  

> i

and wFi\{ βi} commute. Namely, we can move wFi\{ βi}

past ςred  

> i

letter by letter at the cost of applying the opposition involution of Fi. But since the opposition involution fixes βi and the longest element of Fi \ { βi} is unique, the elements commute as claimed. Since the longest elements wFi and wFi\{ βi} are unique, they must be of order 2, and thus ςred  

> i

is order 2. To see that ςred  

> i

normalizes W (∆ \ Θ) it suffices to show that it normalizes W (Fi \ { βi}). But this is clear: 

ςred  

> i

W (Fi \ { βi}) = wFi W (Fi \ { βi}) = W (Fi \ { βi})wFi = W (Fi \ { βi})ςred  

> i

.

Again, we have used that the opposition involution of Fi fixes βi. □NONCOMMUTATIVE CLUSTER VARIETIES AND MODULI SPACES OF LOCAL SYSTEMS 35 

Proposition 3.50. We have an injective group homomorphism defined by 

ϕred : W (R) → W (∆) 

ςi 7 → ςred  

> i

.

This homomorphism satisfies that ℓ(ϕred (w1w2)) = ℓ(ϕred (w1)) + ℓ(ϕred (w2)) for wi ∈ W (R) for which w1w2 is a reduced word in W (R).Proof. We first prove that the image of the longest element w0 ∈ W (R) is reduced. By definition 

ϕ(ςi), ϕred (ςi) and wFi are in the same coset in W (∆) /W (∆ \ Θ) . Using Lemma 3.49 we find that ϕred (w0) is in the same coset as ϕ(w0) which is in the same coset as w∆ in W (∆) /W (∆ \ Θ) 

by Lemma 3.47. Moreover the minimal length element in this coset has length ℓ(w∆) − ℓ(w∆\Θ).Pick a reduced expression w0 = ςi1 . . . ς iN . We will compute the sum P 

> j

ℓ ϕred (ςij ) and check that this is equal to the minimal possible length ℓ(w∆) − ℓ(w∆\Θ). Then 

ℓ ϕred (w0) ≤ X

> j

ℓ ϕred (ςij ) = ℓ(w∆) − ℓ(w∆\Θ) ≤ ℓ ϕred (w0)

which implies that ϕred (w0) is reduced. We will leave its explicit calculation to the end of the proof. To show that ϕred is a homomorphism, we just need to show that it satisfies the braid relations. This follows by realizing that the braid relations are exactly different expressions of 

w0 when p = 2 . But clearly these are satisfied since the image of w0 does not depend of the choice of reduced expression we took. The calculation that shows P 

> j

ℓ(ϕred (ςij )) = ℓ(w∆) − ℓ(w∆\Θ) can be done easily in each case. First we recall the length of the longest word in each root system: Type An Bn Cn Dn E6 E7 E8 F4 G2

ℓ(w0) n(n + 1) /2 n2 n2 n(n − 1) 36 63 120 24 6

Next we calculate all possible values of ℓ(ϕred (ςij )) depending on the type of Fij . These are given by the following table. Type A2k+1 (1 , k ) Bn(1) Ck+1 (1 , k ) Dn(1) D∗

> 2k

(1 , 2k − 1) E7(1) 

ℓ(ϕred (ςij )) (k + 1) 2 2n − 1 (k + 1)( k + 2) /2 2n − 2 k(2 k − 1) 27 

Finally we proceed case by case to compute the sum: 

Case An(p, k ): Recall that in this case we have (p + 1)( k + 1) = n + 1 since n − k = p(k + 1) .In addition, for each i, ℓ(ϕred (ςi)) = ( k + 1) 2. So 

ℓ(w∆) − ℓ(w∆\Θ) = n(n + 1) 2 − (p + 1) k(k + 1) 2= p(p + 1)( k + 1) 2

2 =

> p(p+1) /2

X

> j=1

ℓ(ϕred (ςij )) .

Case Bn(p): In this case, ∆Θ is type Bp and any reduced expression of the longest word consists of p(p−1) reflections about long simple roots with ℓ(ϕred (ςi)) = 1 and p reflections about the short simple root with ℓ(ϕred (ςp)) = 2( n − p) + 1 . Thus 

ℓ(w∆) − ℓ(w∆\Θ) = n2 − (n − p)2 = 2 np − p2

= p (p − 1) + (2( n − p) + 1)  = X

> j

ℓ ϕred (ςij ) .

Case Cn(p, k ): In this case, n = ( k + 1) p and ∆Θ is a Cp diagram, with long root labeled p.Then, 

n2 − p k(k + 1) 2 = n(n − k/ 2) = p(p − 1)( k + 1) 2 + p(k + 1)( k + 2) /2 .

Case Dn(p): In this case ∆Θ is type Bp and the calculation is analagous to the Bn(p) case. 

n(n − 1) − (n − p)( n − p − 1) = 2 np − p2 − p = p



(p − 1) +  2( n − p + 1) − 2

.36 ZACHARY GREENBERG, DANI KAUFMAN, MERIK NIEMEYER, AND ANNA WIENHARD 

Case D∗

> 2n

(p, 2k − 1) : In this case, 2kp = 2 n and ∆Θ is a Cp diagram, with the long root labeled 

p. Then 

ℓ(w∆) = 2 n(2 n − 1) 

ℓ(w∆\Θ) = pk (2 k − 1) = n(2 k − 1) ℓ ϕred (ςi) =

(

4k2 i̸ = pk(2 k − 1) i = p . 

In a reduced expression of w0, there are p2 terms total and p terms which are ςp. This means we have 

(p2 − p)(4 k2) + pk (2 k − 1) = 4 n2 − 4nk + 2 nk − n = 2 n(2 n − 1) − n(2 k − 1) 

as desired. 

□

Lemma 3.51. For any reduced word w ∈ W (R) and any reduced word s ∈ W (∆ \ Θ) , ϕred (w)s

is a reduced word in W (∆) . In particular if wς i is reduced in W (R), then ϕred (w)ς(j) 

> i

is reduced for any 1 ≤ j ≤ ci.Proof. We can complete w to w0 by w′w = w0 and s to w∆\Θ by ss ′ = w∆\Θ. Since 

ϕred (w0)w∆\Θ is reduced this proves the result. For the second statement we notice that 

ϕ(ςi) = ς(ci) 

> i

= ϕred (ςi)s for some s ∈ W (∆ \ Θ) . Now we apply the first part to wς i to see that ϕred (wς i)s = ϕred (w)ς(ci) 

> i

is reduced, and finally see that ϕred (w)ς(j) 

> i

is reduced since it is a subword of ϕred (w)ς(ci) 

> i

. □

Finally we return to the case of arbitrary R-gradings. By Proposition 3.30, at worst the associated parabolic pΘ induces an R′-grading on g with R′ folding onto R. The simple roots of 

R′ that are grouped by the folding have commuting reflections and so we have a natural injective map W (R) → W (R′) sending ςRβ to Q ςRαi. Post composing with the injections for R′ define the required injections for any grading. 4. Jordan split groups 

We now focus on the structure of algebraic groups with Lie algebra graded by a root system 

R. We identify a “good” set of generators to understand G via the root system R in analogy to a choice of Chevalley basis of a split group. These generators have simple relations which can be used to lift the Weyl group of R to G and compute the Gauss decomposition of products of elements. Finally we generalize the fundamental weights of a root system to functions which take values in the Jordan algebras. These Jordan weights will provide the coordinate functions needed to define cluster structures in Part 3. 

Definition 4.1. An algebraic group G is Jordan split of type R if its Lie algebra is (a central extension of) T (R, {Ji}) for some collection of Jordan algebras {Ji}.Since Lie algebras can be graded by root systems of several types, the same group G can be Jordan split in several ways. 

Example 4.2 .

(1) The group SL 6(R) is Jordan split in three ways. Its Lie algebra sl 6(R) is isomorphic to 

T (A5, {R, R, R, R, R}), T (A3, {M2(R), M2(R), M2(R)}), and T (A2, {M3(R), M3(R)}).(2) Also Sp 6(R) is Jordan split in two ways, sp 6(R) ≃ T (C3, {R, R, R}) ≃ T (A1, {H3(R)}).(3) For a final example consider SO(3 , 8) . It is Jordan split in three ways as well, so (3 , 8) = 

T (B3, {R, R, J(0 , 5) }) ≃ T (B2, {R, J(1 , 6) }) ≃ T (A1, {J(2 , 7) }).Given a Jordan split group G of type R, our key construction is what we call the Jordan pinning of the group. As motivation, we first look at groups with an A1-graded Lie algebra. 4.1. A1-graded groups. The recognition theorem for A1 allows us to reduce the study of 

A1-graded Lie algebras to the Lie algebras sl 2(J) for some Jordan algebra J = ( V, ι, 1).

Definition 4.3. We write SL 2(J) for the simply connected algebraic group over K with Lie algebra sl 2(J).NONCOMMUTATIVE CLUSTER VARIETIES AND MODULI SPACES OF LOCAL SYSTEMS 37 

Degree SL 2(JC) JC SL 2(JR) JR Restricted Type 1 SL 2 C SL 2(R) R A1

2 Spin( s + q + 2) J(s + q) Spin( s + 1 , q + 1) J(s, q ) Bn/D n

3 E7 H3(OC) E(−25) 7 H3(O) E7

E(7) 7 H3(Ospl )

n Sp 2n Hn(C) Sp 2n(R) Hn(R) Cn

n SL 2n Mn(C) SU( n, n ) Hn(C) A2n−1

SL 2n(R) Mn(R)

n Spin(4 n) Hn(HC) Spin ∗(4 n) Hn(H) D2n

Spin(2 n, 2n) Hn(Hspl )

2n Sp 4n H2n(C) Sp(2 n, 2n) H∗

> n

(H) C2n

2n SL 2n × SL 2n Mn(C) × Mn(C) SL 2n(C) Mn(C) A2n−1 × A2n−1

2n SL 4n M2n(C) SL 2n(H) Mn(H) A4n−1

Table 11. SL 2(J) for real and complex Jordan algebras. In Table 11, we list the complex and real algebraic groups which are of the form SL 2(J) for some J.

Definition 4.4. The structure group , denoted by Γ( J), is the Levi factor of the parabolic subgroup associated to the A1 grading of SL 2(J).The structure group covers the inner structure group and will replace the inner structure group moving forward. The map ι from J will extend to an injective map eι : V × → Γ( J).When J is special, we can relate the group SL 2(J) to (a covering of) a subgroup of a general linear group over the ring R containing J. When J is of Hermitian type, SL 2(J) covers Sp 2(R, †)

the generalized symplectic group studied in [Rog20, ABR +22, GKW25]. For J of Clifford type, 

SL 2(J) actually is a subgroup of the generalized symplectic group [Rog25]. 

Lemma 4.5. Suppose that J ⊂ J(R) is a special Jordan algebra for some finite dimensional algebra R over K. Then SL 2(J) covers the subgroup of GL 2(R) which is generated by the elements 

1 v

0 1



and 

1 0

v 1



for v ∈ V .Proof. The Lie algebra sl 2(J) is a subalgebra of End 2(R) when J is special by Lemma 2.25. It is generated by the elements v(1) , w (−1) since 

v(1) , w (−1) 

 =

 v  

w



−



w

  v

=

vw 

−wv 



= ι(v, w )(0) .

Thus the subgroup generated by upper and lower triangular unipotent matrices has Lie algebra 

sl 2(J) and is covered by SL 2(J). □

Next observe that for each v ∈ V ×, the diagonal matrix [ vv−1 ] is in SL 2(J) by the calculation 

vv−1



=

 1

−v−1 1

  1 v

1

  1 −11

  11 1

  1 −11

  1 v−1

1



.

In order to describe non special Jordan algebras, we consider two natural injections, x : V →

SL 2(J) and y : V → SL 2(J) given by the A1-grading of sl 2(J):

x(v) = exp  (v)1

 y(v) = exp  (v)−1

 .

Then the previous calculation inspires the following definitions: 

Definition 4.6. 

• The lifted reflection , ¯ςβ , is the element x(−1)y(1)x(−1).

• The structure map eι : V × → Γ( J) is defined by eι(v) = y(−v−1)x(v)¯ ςβ x(v−1).

• The structure involution is the anti-involution σ : Γ( J) → Γ( J) given by 

σ(A) = ¯ ςβ A−1 ¯ς−1 

> β

.38 ZACHARY GREENBERG, DANI KAUFMAN, MERIK NIEMEYER, AND ANNA WIENHARD 

The structure involution here extends the involution on the inner structure group given in Definition 2.11. The norm map defined in Definition 2.16 extends to the structure group as a character given on elements of the form eι(v) by N (v).

Definition 4.7. Suppose that J is special and let R be its universal specializing envelope. 

• The general structure group GΓ( J) is the subgroup of R× × R × which preserves the vector space V by the action (a, b ) · v = avb −1. In the case of an exceptional Jordan algebra, there is a form of the group E8 which contains the group SL 2(J) as a subgroup. In this case, we define the general structure group to be the Levi subgroup of this group which is a central extension of Γ( J).

• The adjoint structure group PΓ( J) is the general structure group modulo the sub-group of trivially acting elements. When J is special the map ι on V × can be recovered from the composition of eι with passing to the quotient R× × R × → R × × R ×/{(−1, −1) }.

Remark 4.8 . What we are calling the structure group is different than what is referred to as the structure group in [Koe99]. 

Definition 4.9. There is a cocharacter ˇβ : K× → Γ( J) defined by ˇβ(k) := eι(k1).The cocharacter extends to an injective map from Γ( J) into SL 2(J) whose image is the associated Levi subgroup. Then together with x : V → SL 2(J) and y : V → SL 2(J), these maps “pin” SL 2(J). This is analogous to the pinning of SL 2(K) and when J is special, they have the same matrix form 

x(v) = 

1 v

1



ˇβ(a) = 

aa−1



y(v) = 

1

v 1



.

In fact the triple (x(1), ˇβ(1), y (1)) pin a distinguished SL 2(K) subgroup. 

Definition 4.10. Let G be Jordan split of type A1. So there is an isomorphism ϕ : sl 2(J) → g

for some J = ( V, ι, 1). Since SL 2(J) is simply connected ϕ induces a map ϕ∗ : SL 2(J) → G. The 

A1-Jordan pinning of G is given by the collection of maps ϕ∗ ◦ x : V → G, ϕ∗ ◦ ˇβ : Γ( J) → G,

ϕ∗ ◦ y : V → G.Since sl 2(J) is independent of isotopy we can freely choose the identity element of J when choosing an isomorphism g ≃ sl 2(J) or equivalently choosing the pinning. We define a normal-ized pinning using the decomposition of w0 into strongly orthogonal roots {δi} constructed Lemma 3.23. A normalized pinning is one where x(1) = Pci=1 ei for ei the root space gδi . For the remainder of the paper we only consider normalized pinnings. Next we lift the Weyl group of the A1-grading to G. This is an element ςβ with ς2 

> β

in the center of G. The element ς from Definition 4.6 is such a lift, 

ςβ = x (−1) y (1) x (−1) .

Since  x(1), ˇβ(1), y (1) form an SL 2-triple by construction, ςβ is the classic lift of the Weyl group for SL 2 [GS19, Section 3.1]. 

Lemma 4.11. The lifted reflection, ςβ , conjugates x(v) into y(−v).Proof. The sub Jordan algebra generated by v is special by Theorem 2.8, so the calculation can take place in GL 2(R) for some specializing ring R. Then 

ςβ =

0 −11 0



and ς−1 

> β

x(v)ςβ =

 0 1

−1 0

  1 v

0 1

  0 −11 0



=

 1 0

−v 1



= y(−v) .

□

Our next goal is to understand when a generic product of images of pinning maps and ςβ can be decomposed as y(w) ˇβ(a)x(v). We call the subset of elements which can be decomposed this way Gauss decomposable .

Proposition 4.12. Let v ∈ J be invertible. NONCOMMUTATIVE CLUSTER VARIETIES AND MODULI SPACES OF LOCAL SYSTEMS 39 

(1) x(v)ςβ = ςβ −1y(−v) = y(v−1) ˇβ(ι(v)) x(−v−1)

If w ∈ J is also invertible such that (w + v) is invertible as well, then (2) (w−1 + v−1) is also invertible. (3) ι(w + v)ι(w)−1 = ι(v)ι(w−1 + v−1)

(4) x(v)y(w−1) = y (v + w)−1 ˇβ ι(w + v)ι(w)−1x  (w−1 + v−1)−1.Proof. Denote by Jv,w the sub Jordan algebra generated by v, w which is special by Theorem 2.8. These relations live entirely in the subgroup SL 2(Jv,w ) of SL 2(J). Thus each statement can be checked in GL 2(R) for R the ring containing the subgroup generated by v, w . For example in 

R, we have (w−1 + v−1) = v−1(w + v)w−1 and so w−1 + v−1 is invertible when v, w and v + w

are. The final computation reduces to confirming 

1 v

1

  1

w−1 1



=

 1(v + w)−1 1

  (w + v)w−1

(w + v)−1w

  1 (w−1 + v−1)−1

1



.

□

This proposition gives an interpretation of the ι map in terms of the group SL 2(J); ι(v) is the element of the structure group which appears when decomposing x(v)ςβ .Next we want to understand which elements of G are Gauss decomposable. This will be closely related to the double cosets of P opp  

> {β}

in G, which is called the Θ-Bruhat decomposition of G for Θ = {β}. We will see the coset of ςβ is dense in G. Moreover for any g ∈ P opp Θ ςβ P opp Θ ,the element gς β is Gauss decomposable. We construct elements ς(j) 

> β

for j ∈ [0 , c ] which will represent each coset. Recall that 1 =

Pci=1 ei for a choice of ei in each root space gδi .

Lemma 4.13. For any 1 ≤ i ≤ c, {(ei)1, (ei)−1, ι (ei, e i)} is an sl 2-triple. The sl 2-subalgebras generated by these commute with each other. Proof. By abuse of notation, we write ei := ( ei)1, and fi := ( ei)−1, h i := [ ei, f i]. By construc-tion, the subspace spanned by any such triple is closed under the Lie bracket and therefore a copy of sl 2.These commute since the roots δi are strongly orthogonal. Namely, for i̸ = j, we have 

0 = [ ei, e j ] = [ fi, f j ] = [ ei, f j ] and thus 

[hi, e j ] = [ei, f i], e j

 = −[fi, e j ], e i

 − [ej , e i], f i] = 0 .

Again since the roots δi are strongly orthogonal, we have 

X

> i

ei, X

> j

fj

 = X

> i

[ei, f i] = X

> i

hi .

By assumption 

P 

> i

ei, P 

> j

fj , [P 

> i

ei, P 

> j

fj ]



is an sl 2-triple. Thus 

2 X

> i

ei =

X

> j

hj , X

> i

ei

 = X

> i

[hi, e i] .

The equality has to hold for the individual summands since the triples span disjoint subalgebras. Analogously, we get [hi, f i] = −2fi. □

We now set 

e(j) =

> j

X

> i=1

ei

so that 1 = e(c). Again, the elements (e(j))1, (e(j))−1, ι(e(j), e (j)) form an sl 2-triple. For any algebraic group G with Lie algebra sl 2(J) we define 

ςβ (j) = x



−e(j)

y



e(j)

x



−e(j)

.

Note that ςβ = ςβ (c).40 ZACHARY GREENBERG, DANI KAUFMAN, MERIK NIEMEYER, AND ANNA WIENHARD 

We can use the elements ςβ (j) to decompose any algebraic group which is locally isomorphic to 

SL 2(J):

Proposition 4.14 (Θ-Bruhat decomposition) . Let G be a algebraic group whose Lie algebra is 

sl 2(J). Denote by δ1, . . . , δ c the strongly orthogonal roots of the decomposition in Lemma 3.23 which contain β. Then the Bruhat decomposition of G with respect to P opp Θ is given by 

G =

> c

a

> j=0

P opp Θ ςβ (j)P opp Θ

Proof. It is a standard fact [War12] that (1) G = a   

> w∈W(∆ \Θ) \W(∆) /W (∆ \Θ)

P opp Θ ˙wP opp Θ ,

where ˙w is any lift of a representative in W (∆) of the double coset to G. This is independent of the lift. From Proposition 3.45 we know that the elements ς(j) 

> β

:= Qji=1 sδi for 0 ≤ i ≤ c represent the double cosets. Thus, it suffices to prove that ςβ (j) is indeed a lift. Because the roots δi are strongly orthogonal we can rearrange the product to obtain 

ςβ (j) =

> j

Y

> i=1

x(−ei) ·

> j

Y

> i=1

y(ei) ·

> j

Y

> i=1

x(−ei) = 

> j

Y

> i=1

x(−ei)y(ei)x(−ei) .

Each factor in the final expression is a lift of the reflection sδi so ς(i) 

> β

lifts the correct word. □

Definition 4.15. The rank of an element v ∈ V is the j such that x(v) ∈ P opp Θ ς(j) 

> β

P opp Θ . We write V (j) for the subset of rank j.In Proposition 4.39 we will see that V × = V (c).

Remark 4.16 . Recall the maps ϕ and ϕred : W (R) → W (∆) defined in Section 3.9. For G as before, we have W (R) = ⟨ςβ ⟩ ∼= Z/2Z. The top cell of the Bruhat decomposition is 

P opp Θ ς(c) 

> β

P opp Θ = P opp Θ ϕ(ςβ )P opp Θ = P opp Θ ϕred (ςβ )P opp Θ .

In the following sections, we will generalize everything above to a Jordan split group over an arbitrary simple root system. 4.2. Jordan pinning. In this section, we define a Jordan pinning for a algebraic group, which plays a key role in the remainder of the paper. We will use it to understand generic elements of the group and eventually to define coordinates on the associated flag varieties and local systems. 

Definition 4.17. Let G be a Jordan split group over a root system R indexed by simple roots 

Θ = {β1, · · · βp}. Let Ji be a representative in the isotopy class of Jordan algebras such that 

g = T (R, {Ji}). A Jordan pinning of G is a collection of homomorphisms ˇβi : Γ( Ji) → G

and maps xi, y i : Vi → G indexed by i ∈ Θ such that for i ∈ Θ the maps xi, y i, ˇβi form a homomorphism φi : SL 2(Ji) → G by 

φi (A) = ˇβ(A), φi

 exp( v(1) ) = xi(v), φi

 exp( v(−1) 

) = yi(v) .

We call the Jordan pinning normalized if it furthermore satisfies that for each βi ∈ Θ we have 

xi(1i) ∈ exp( gδ1 ⊕ · · · ⊕ gδci ) and yi(1i) ∈ exp( g−δ1 ⊕ · · · ⊕ g−δci ) .

If a Jordan pinning is not normalized we can always change Ji by an isotopy to make it so. This does not affect the homomorphisms from SL 2(Ji), so we will always take normalized Jordan pinnings. 

Definition 4.18. The Levi factor , LΘ, of a Jordan pinning of G of type R is the subgroup generated by { ˇβi(A)|A ∈ Γ( Ji), i ∈ Θ}. This is also the Levi subgroup of the associated parabolic subgroup, PΘ, of the grading (Definition 3.10). NONCOMMUTATIVE CLUSTER VARIETIES AND MODULI SPACES OF LOCAL SYSTEMS 41 

Definition 4.19. The Jordan pinning induces extended root maps βi : LΘ → PΓ( Ji) from the Levi factor to the adjoint structure group for each i by lx i(v)l−1 = xi (βi(l)( v)) . These extend the usual root maps from Z(LΘ) → K× given by the inclusion of the split group of type 

R into G.

Remark 4.20 . LΘ acts on the set of Jordan pinnings by conjugation. We can view this action as changing each Ji by an isomorphism. Therefore, the action of LΘ on the space of pinnings identifies a twisted form for each Ji. We expect that the set of pinnings with respect to a given set of twisted forms is an LΘ-torsor as in the classic pinnings of a split group. Suppose that βi and βj are connected in R and Ji is one dimensional (and hence isomorphic to K). Now fix a Jordan pinning of G. The composition βi ◦ ˇβj is a character of Γ( Jj ). We can use this to define a map N : V × 

> j

→ K by N (v) = βi( ˇβj (ι(v)−1)) . In other words N (v) satisfies the following equation for all x in gβi = Vi:

∀x ∈ gβi : ˇβj

 ι(v)−1 · x · ˇβj

 ι(v) = N (v)x . 

We can extend N to all of Vj by taking N (v) = 0 when v / ∈ V ×.

Lemma 4.21. The map N above is a norm map of the Jordan algebra Ji of degree 1,2,3 if the subdiagram Fij is A2, B2 or G2.Proof. To check that N is a norm map, we need to verify the properties from Definition 2.16. By definition and the fact that ι(1) = 1 ∈ Γ( Jj ),

N (1) = βi( ˇβj (ι(1))) = βi( ˇβj (1)) = βi(1) = 1 .

On V × 

> j

, the map is nonzero because the roots βi and βj are connected in R. Furthermore N (v)

is defined to be zero for noninvertible elements, so N (v)̸ = 0 if and only if v ∈ V × as needed. Finally since βi ◦ ˇβj is a character, N is multiplicative. So 

N (ι(v)( w)) = ( βi ◦ ˇβj ) ι(ι(v)( w))  = ( βi ◦ ˇβj )( ι(v)ι(w)ι(v)) = N (v) · N (w) · N (v) ,

and N (ι(v)( w)) = N (v)2N (w) as needed. The final property to check is that N is given by eN (v, · · · , v ) for some eN ∈ Sym r (V ∗) for 

r = 2 , 3. To see this, define eN using the Lie algebra of G. By abuse of notation denote by 

v = log( xj (v)) , 1i = log( xi(1i)) . The brackets ad r (( 1j )j )(1) i = I gives an element in the 1 dimensional root space βi + rβ j . Define eN by eN (v1, . . . , v r ) · I = [ v1, [v2, . . . , [vr , 1] . . . ]] . The Jacobi identity implies that this is an element in Sym r (V ∗). To see that eN (v, . . . , v ) = N (v)

we conjugate everything by ˇβj (ι(w)) . This acts on the root space βi by multiplication by 

N (w)−1 and on the root space βi + rβ j by multiplication by N (w), and on the root space βj

by v → ι(w)( v). Therefore we find eN (ι(w)( v), . . . , ι (w)( v)) · N (w)−1 = eN (v, . . . , v ) · N (w) for all w, v . In particular for v = 1j we have eN (w2, . . . , w 2) = N (w)2 = N (w2). Since over an algebraically closed field every invertible w has a square root, we can conclude that eN gives N

in this case, and taking the K-points gives the result generally. □

Definition 4.22. We call G simply connected with respect to {Ji} if it has a Jordan pinning where every map is an injection. 

Definition 4.23. We say an element g ∈ G is Gauss-decomposable with respect to Θ if 

g ∈ U opp Θ LΘUΘ. In other words g factors uniquely as (2) g = [ g]−[g]0[g]+ ,

where [g]− ∈ U opp Θ , [g]0 ∈ LΘ and [g]+ ∈ UΘ.The set of Gauss decomposable elements G0 = U opp Θ LΘUΘ is an open dense subset of G.42 ZACHARY GREENBERG, DANI KAUFMAN, MERIK NIEMEYER, AND ANNA WIENHARD 

Example 4.24 . The group SL 6(R) is Jordan split over A2 with Ji = M2(R). The structure group 

Γ( Ji) is generated by pairs of matrices (A, A −1) sitting inside GL 2(R) × GL 2(R). One choice of Jordan pinning is given by 

x1(A) = 

h 1 A

> 1 1

i

x2(A) = 

h 1 1 A

> 1

i

ˇβ1(A, B ) = 

h A B 1

i

ˇβ2(B, C ) = 

h 1 B C

i

y1(A) = 

h 1 

> A1 1

i

y2(A) = 

h 1 1 

> A1

i

.

Example 4.25 . Before we give a nontrivial pinning of Spin(3 , 4) , we recall the C2-pinning of 

Sp 4(R). This pinning is split so each Jordan algebra is R with structure group R×.

x1(t) = 

 1 0 0 0 0 1 0 t

> 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 1



y1(t) = 

 1 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 t 0 1 



ˇβ1(a) = 

 1 0 0 00 a 0 00 0 1 00 0 0 a−1



x2(t) = 

 1 t 0 00 1 0 00 0 1 00 0 −t 1



y2(t) = 

 1 0 0 0    

> t1 0 00 0 1 −t
> 0 0 0 1



ˇβ2(a) = 

 a 0 0 00 a−1 0 00 0 a−1 00 0 0 a



.

Example 4.26 . A more complicated example is pinning G = Spin(3 , 4) as a Jordan split group of type B2. The short root space is labeled β2 and corresponds to a copy of Spin(3 , 2) inside 

G. We use an exotic isomorphism to identify Spin(3 , 2) ≃ Sp 4(R) ≃ SL 2(J) for the Jordan algebra Sym 2(R). Using the fact that B2 ≃ C2, we can upgrade the pinning for Sp 4 of type 

C2 from Example 4.25 to provide a Jordan pinning for G of type B2. Let M ∈ Sym 2(R) and 

t ∈ R. Recall that the adjugate τ is a linear map on Sym 2(R) since J is of degree 2. We use the 8-dimensional faithful representation of Spin(3 , 4) to write these pinning maps as block 4 × 4

matrices over M2(R). Scalar entries are interpreted as scalar multiples of 12. We have: 

x1(t) = 

 1 0 0 0 0 1 0 t

> 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 1



y1(t) = 

 1 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 t 0 1 



ˇβ1(t) = 

 1 0 0 00 t 0 00 0 1 00 0 0 t−1



x2(M ) = 

 1 M 0 00 1 0 00 0 1 00 0 −τ (M ) 1 



y2(M ) = 

 1 0 0 0        

> M1 0 000 1 −τ(M)00 0 1



ˇβ2(A) = 

" A 0 0 00 σ(A)−1 0 00 0 τ (A)−1 00 0 0 στ (A)

#

.

We can verify some of the statements about this Jordan pinning, for example Lemma 4.21: 

ˇβ2(A)x1(t) ˇβ2(A)−1 =

 1 0 0 00 1 0 tσ (A)−1στ (A)−1  

> 0 0 1 00 0 0 1



=

 1 0 0 00 1 0 tN (A)−1  

> 0 0 1 00 0 0 1



.

4.3. Jordan weights. Now we assume that G is such that G is simply connected with respect to a root system R. We wish to define a collection of functions dual to the functions ˇβi to generalize the fundamental weights of split algebraic group. In noncommutative rank less than or equal to one, what we also call lower noncommutative rank, there is a natural system generalizing the fundamental weights. However in noncommutative rank bigger or equal to two, what we also call higher noncommutative rank, we must weaken the duality between coroot and fundamental weights. With this weakened duality there will be many possible systems of weights and we will prove our constructions are independent of the choice. 

Definition 4.27. A system of Jordan weights is a set of functions Λi : LΘ → Γ( Ji) such that: (1) Λi( ˇβj (Λ j (l))) = 

(

1 i̸ = j

Λj (l) i = j. (weak duality) (2) For all i̸ = j, ˇβi(Λ i(l)) ˇβj (Λ j (l)) = ˇβj (Λ j (l)) ˇβi(Λ i(l)) . (commutativity) (3) For all l ∈ LΘ, Q 

> i

ˇβi(Λ i(l)) = l. (reconstructability) We say a system is faithful on βi if Λi( ˇβi(a)) = a.We note that the Jordan algebras, {Ji} are only well-defined up to isotopy. In every case it is possible to choose the isotopy class so that for any i, j one of Ji or Jj is a Jordan subalgebra of the other. This implies that we can choose a pining which identifies a single identity element for all the Jordan algebras and we can consider the target of Λi to be the same for all i.

Example 4.28 . When pinning SL 6(R) with Θ = {α2, α 4}, both J1 and J2 are isotopic to M2(R).We will take the identity matrix as the identity element in both cases. NONCOMMUTATIVE CLUSTER VARIETIES AND MODULI SPACES OF LOCAL SYSTEMS 43 

Similarly when pinning Sp 12 (R) with Θ = {α2, α 4, α 6} we have J1 and J2 isotopic to M2(R)

and J3 isotopic to H2(R). Choosing the identity matrix as the identity in all three cases realizes the required subalgebra conditions. 

Remark 4.29 . The Jordan weights naturally extend to Gauss decomposable elements of G, by applying the weight to the Levi factor [g]0.

Proposition 4.30. In noncommutative rank 0 or 1, there is a unique system of Jordan weights that is faithful on all simple roots. Proof. In rank 0, the usual fundamental weights provide such a system. In rank 1, property (3) determines Λp by forcing Λp

  ˇβp(A) = A and all other Λi to be fundamental weights. □

Example 4.31 . A system of Jordan weights for the pinning of Spin(3 , 4) in Example 4.26 is 

Λ1 : LΘ → R

Λ1

" A Bτ (A)−1 

> τ(B)−1

#! 

= pdet( A) det( B)Λ2 : LΘ → Sym 2(R)Λ2

" A Bτ (A)−1 

> τ(B)−1

#! 

= A . 

We now focus on higher noncommutative rank. As a motivating example, consider the group 

SL 6(C) the A2-pinning analogous to Example 4.24. The Levi subgroup is identified with the triple of matrices (A, B, C ) with det( ABC ) = 1 . So any element of the Levi can be decomposed as ˇβ1(A, A −1) ˇβ2(AB, C ). The natural guess of Jordan weights is Λ1(A, B, C ) = ( A, A −1) and 

Λ2(A, B, C ) = ( AB, C ) which has weak duality and reconstructability but not commutativity. Instead there are two choices of weights which are faithful either on ˇβ1 or ˇβ2 but not both: 

Λ1(A, B, C ) = ( A, pdet( AB )−1

B) Λ2(A, B, C ) = ( pdet( AB )12, C ) or 

Λ1(A, B, C ) = ( A, pdet( A)−1

12) Λ2(A, B, C ) = ( pdet( A)B, C ) .

Over non algebraically closed fields, the square roots we used might not be well defined. Instead we use a weak system of Jordan weights which lands in a central extension of the structure group by K. The coroot maps can be similarly extended to map the extended structure group into a central extension of G. Under this construction the weak equivalent of the first set of weights above is 

Λ1(A, B, C ) = ( A, B ) Λ2(A, B, C ) = ( 12, C ) .

The difference between weak and standard systems of Jordan weights is only important for some groups of higher noncommutative rank. As such, we will drop the word weak for the rest of the paper. 

Proposition 4.32. In higher noncommutative rank there exists many (weak) systems of Jordan weights. Moreover, given a root βi we can choose a system that is faithful on βi.Proof. There are two families of root systems that admit higher noncommutative rank gradings, 

Ap, C p and three exceptional cases A2, C3, and F4.We begin with type Ap. Let R be a finite dimensional algebra over K and consider the group 

G := GL p+1 (R). Let PΘ be the parabolic subgroup consisting of upper triangular matrices with Levi subgroup GL 1(R)p+1 . This parabolic subgroup induces an Ap-grading on SL p+1 (R) where each Jordan algebra is J(R).There is a natural Jordan pinning of G given by the p standard embeddings of SL 2(R) → G

as 2 × 2 diagonal blocks. To define a weak system, we extend the coroot maps ˇβi to have domain 

GL 1(R) × GL 1(R), so that these extended pinning maps are maps from GL 2(R) → G. This identifies LΘ with GL 1(R)p+1 with the image of ˇβi contained in the factors i and i + 1 .We can now construct a (weak) system of Jordan weights faithful on βi by defining the image of each SL 1(R) factor to either be the trivial map to 1 or the identity map. Each Λj will map factors other than j or j + 1 using the trivial map. To be faithful, we define Λi to be the identity map on both factors i and i + 1 . We then define for j < i , Λj the trivial map on factor j + 1 

and the identity map on factor j. Similarly for j > i we take Λj trivial on factor j and the identity on factor j + 1 . This construction maps each factor with identity map exactly once, so it satisfies commutativity and reconstructability. 44 ZACHARY GREENBERG, DANI KAUFMAN, MERIK NIEMEYER, AND ANNA WIENHARD 

Next we focus on type Cp. Now suppose that R has an anti-involution † : R → R . Let 1′

> p

be the anti-diagonal matrix with 1 along the antidiagonal and let Ω = 

 0 1′

> p

−1′ 

> p

0



. The group 

H := Sp 2p(R, †) = {g ∈ GL 2p(R)|gΩ( †(g)) T = Ω } has a Cp-grading, with Θ associated to the parabolic subgroup of upper triangular matrices in H. The Levi subgroup of this parabolic is GL 1(R)p. H has a natural pinning obtained from the pinning of G = GL 2p(R) by setting 

xHi (v) = xGi (v)xG 

> 2p−i

for i < p and xHi (v) = xGi (v) for i = p. A faithful choice of Jordan weights is given by a symmetric choice of faithful weights on GL 2p(R).Finally, consider the exceptional groups of higher noncommutative rank over A2, C 3, or F4.In every case the absolute root system is type F4, E6, E7 or E8. Over an algebraically close field, their Levi subgroups are central extensions of Spin(8) or (SL 2)3, while the structure groups are central extensions of Spin(8) and (SL 2)2 respectively. The weight functions are then constructed analogously by choosing isomorphisms on the factors corresponding to βi for Λi and the identity map on those factors for overlapping weights. In all cases we see that there is a choice of Jordan weights faithful on the given noncommu-tative root βi. □

4.4. Lifts of the grading Weyl group. The Jordan pinning over the root system R will allow us to lift the Weyl group W (R) of R to G. This lift will act on the decomposition of G into 

R-root spaces as the ordinary Weyl group acts on the split algebraic group associated to R. Let 

∆R be the Dynkin diagram for the root system R.

Definition 4.33. We define two lifts of each generator ςi of W (R)

ςi := yi(1i)xi(−1i)yi(1i) and ςi := xi(1i)yi(−1i)xi(1i) .

As in the classical split case, ςi−1 = ςi and ςi2 ∈ ZΘ is in the center of the Levi. This implies that the lifts can be equivalently defined as 

ςi := xi(−1i)yi(1i)xi(−1i) and ςi := yi(−1i)xi(1i)yi(−1i) .

Since the lifts fulfill the braid relations for the Dynkin diagram of type R, we obtain unique lifts 

w and w of any element W (R) by lifting a reduced expression. These lifts define an “action” of 

W (R) on G (action of the positive braid group) by ςi(g) = ςigς i.Recall from Definition 2.11 that there is an anti-involution on the structure group Γ( Ji) we will denote by σi. Using this involution we compute: 

Lemma 4.34. For any i,

ςi

  ˇβi(A) = ˇβi

 σi(A)−1.

Proof. By construction this computation lives entirely in a single SL 2(Ji). This group is the exponential of a Lie algebra constructed via the Tits-Kantor-Koecher construction (Defini-tion 2.24). Therefore we can compute ςi( ˇβi(A)) by its adjoint action on xi(1i).

ςi

  ˇβi(A) .x i(1i) = ςi ˇβi(A)ςixi(1i)ςi ˇβi(A)−1ςi

= ςi ˇβi(A) xi(−1i)yi(1i)xi(−1i) xi(1i) yi(−1i)xi(1i)yi(−1i) ˇβi(A)−1ςi

= ςi ˇβi(A) yi(−1i) ˇβi(A)−1ςi

= ςiyi

 σi(A)−1(−1i)ςi

= xi

 σi(A)−1(1i) .

Thus ςi

  ˇβi(A) = ˇβi

 σi(A)−1 as claimed. □

Lemma 4.35. Assume that Ji is a commutative Jordan algebra. Then 

ςi

  ˇβj (A) =

( ˇβi(N (A)) ˇβj (A) i connected to j in ∆R

ˇβj (A) otherwise 

ςj

  ˇβi(a) =

( ˇβi(a) ˇβj (a1j ) i connected to j in ∆R

ˇβj (A) otherwise NONCOMMUTATIVE CLUSTER VARIETIES AND MODULI SPACES OF LOCAL SYSTEMS 45 

Proof. For j connected to i, the norm on Jj was defined in Lemma 4.21 so that 

ˇβj (A).x i(1i) = xi

 N (A)−1 ˇβj (A).y i(1i) = yi

 N (A) .

It is then a simple computation to see 

ςj

  ˇβj (A) = xi(1i)yi(−1i)xi(1i) ˇβj (A)yi(1i)xi(−1i)yi(1i)= xi(1i)yi(−1i)xi(1i)yi

 N (A)xi

  − N (A)−1yi

 N (A) ˇβj (A)= ˇβi(N (A)) ˇβj (A) .

Similarly, since the roots are adjacent in the original Dynkin diagram ∆ we have 

ˇβi(a).x j (1j ) = xj (a−11j ) ˇβi(a).y j (1j ) = yj (a1j ) .

The computation is then analogous as it restricts to a calculation in the split subgroup. Finally, when βi and βj are not adjacent in ∆R, the corresponding roots are not adjacent in the original Dynkin diagram. Therefore the actions of ςi and ςj are trivial. □

With the previous two lemmas (Lemmas 4.34 and 4.35) we have computed the full action of the Weyl group in lower noncommutative rank. We observe that when ∆R is not simply laced, the degree of the norm map induces the asymmetry given by the high weight edge of ∆R.4.5. R-Bruhat decomposition. The Weyl group of the grading root system can be used to define a family of disjoint subsets of G. Although these “cells” do not cover all of G, their combinatorics mirror the combinatorics of a true Bruhat decomposition. First, recall from Equation (1) that the Bruhat decomposition with respect to P opp Θ is given by 

G = a   

> w∈W(∆ \Θ) \W(∆) /W (∆ \Θ)

P opp Θ ˙wP opp Θ .

We now restrict to the cells which are indexed by elements of W (R). These will be double cosets of P opp Θ , which is the opposite parabolic subgroup associated to the R-grading of G. Recall the map ϕred : W (R) → W (∆) defined in Section 3.9. 

Definition 4.36. The R-Bruhat cell associated to the element w ∈ W (R) is P opp Θ ϕred (w)P opp Θ .We can represent this cell in several other ways, using either the map ϕ : W (R) → W (∆) 

from Section 3.9, or the lifts w and w from Definition 4.33. 

Lemma 4.37. For any w ∈ W (R) we have 

P opp Θ ϕred (w)P opp Θ = P opp Θ ϕ(w)P opp Θ = P opp Θ wP opp Θ = P opp Θ wP opp Θ .

We will often simply write P opp Θ wP opp Θ for w ∈ W (R) for this cell, and switch between the different expressions as needed. 

Proof. By construction ϕred (w) and ϕ(w) lie in the same coset in W (∆) /W (∆ \ Θ) . For a single reflection we proved that P opp Θ ϕ(ςi)P opp Θ = P opp Θ ςiP opp Θ in the proof of Proposition 4.14. The lemma then follows from Proposition 4.40. □

Proposition 4.38. The largest cell P opp Θ ϕred (w0)P opp Θ is dense in G.Proof. This cell can equivalently be represented by w∆, the longest element in W (∆) . Thus, left multiplication by w∆ identifies this cell with PΘP opp Θ , the set of Gauss decomposable elements. This set is dense G. □

Proposition 4.39. The Bruhat cells associated to a single generator ςi intersect UΘ exactly in the invertible elements of the pinned root space xi. In symbols: 

(3) UΘ ∩ P opp Θ ςiP opp Θ = xi(V × 

> i

) .

Proof. This was proved in [GW25] for groups with a Θ-positive structure. We give an alternate proof that only uses the properties of the Jordan pinning and not the original Weyl group. We instead prove the equivalent statement UΘςi ∩ P opp Θ ςiP opp Θ ςi = xi(V × 

> i

)ςi. First we note that 

P opp Θ ςiP opp Θ ςi = P opp Θ xi(Vi) since acting by ςi sends all negative roots to negative roots except for −βi. Let uς i ∈ UΘςi and consider the projection of u onto any positive root space other than 46 ZACHARY GREENBERG, DANI KAUFMAN, MERIK NIEMEYER, AND ANNA WIENHARD 

βi. When multiplied by ςi, this projection only intersects P opp Θ xi(V ) at the identity element. So the only nontrivial intersection occurs when u = xi(v) for some v ∈ V . Then by Proposition 4.12 elements of the form xi(v)ςi only decompose as yi(v−1) ˇβi(ι(v)) xi(v) when v is invertible. Since all such elements are clearly in P opp Θ xi(V ), we have the intersection UΘςi ∩ P opp Θ ςiP opp Θ ςi is exactly xi(V ×)ςi as claimed. □

The final property of Bruhat decompositions that extends to the R-graded decomposition is the result of multiplying two cells whose index word v and w add lengths when multiplying. Without this assumption the result is much more complicated to describe. 

Proposition 4.40. Let w1, w 2 ∈ W (R) such that ℓ(w1w2) = ℓ(w1) + ℓ(w2). Then 

P opp Θ w1P opp Θ w2P opp Θ = P opp Θ w1w2P opp Θ .

Proof. This statement follows by induction on the length of w2. If l(w2) > 1 then w2 = ςiw′ 

> 2

for some w′ 

> 2

of shorter length. Then by induction 

P opp Θ w1P opp Θ w2P opp Θ = P opp Θ w1ςiςiP opp Θ ςiw′

> 2

P opp Θ = P opp Θ w1ςiςiP opp Θ ςiP opp Θ w′

> 2

P opp Θ .

Moreover ςiP opp Θ ςiP opp Θ = xi(Vi)P opp Θ as in the previous proof. So the expression becomes 

P opp Θ w1ςixi(Vi)P opp Θ w′

> 2

P opp Θ .

When w1ςi acts on xi(Vi) it transforms into some element in P opp Θ because ℓ(w1ςi) = ℓ(w1) + 1 .So P opp Θ w1ςixi(Vi) = P opp Θ w1ςi and we obtain P opp Θ w1ςiP opp Θ w′

> 2

P opp Θ . By induction we can move the rest of w′ 

> 2

across proving the theorem. □

Finally, let us consider some ‘intermediate’ cells which are not indexed by elements of W (R).

Corollary 4.41. Suppose that w is a word in W (R) and wς i is a reduced word in W (R). Then 

P opp Θ ϕred (w)ς(j) 

> i

P opp Θ = P opp Θ ϕred (w)P opp Θ · P opp Θ ς(j) 

> i

P opp Θ ,

for all 1 ≤ j ≤ ci. Moreover, for j1̸ = j2, P opp Θ ϕred (w)ς(j1) 

> i

P opp Θ and P opp Θ ϕred (w)ς(j2) 

> i

P opp Θ are disjoint. Proof. We first generalize a result from [GW25], that P opp Θ ϕred (w)P opp Θ = P opp Θ ϕred P opp ∆ . By [War12], for any w ∈ W (R) we have 

P opp Θ ϕred (w)P opp Θ = [ 

> u∈W(∆ \Θ)

P opp Θ ϕred (w)P opp ∆ uP opp ∆ .

Since ϕred (w)u is reduced by Lemma 3.51 we use standard Bruhat theory to obtain 

= [ 

> u∈W(∆ \Θ)

P opp Θ ϕred (w)uP opp ∆ = P opp Θ ϕred (w)P opp ∆ .

The final equality holds because ϕred (w) normalizes W (∆ \ Θ) by Lemma 3.49. By assumption, wς i is reduced, so Lemma 3.51 implies that ϕred (w)ς(j) 

> i

is reduced as well. This allows us to conclude 

P opp Θ ϕred (w)P opp Θ · P opp Θ ς(j) 

> i

P opp Θ = P opp Θ ϕred (w)P opp ∆ ς(j) 

> i

P opp Θ = P opp Θ ϕred (w)ς(j) 

> i

P opp Θ .

By Corollary 3.48 we see that the double cosets of wς (j) 

> i

are all distinct which implies that the corresponding cells are disjoint. □

We can parameterize unipotent elements in each cell using a generalization of the Lusztig map, which parameterizes the positive unipotent semigroup in split real Lie groups. 

Definition 4.42. Let D = ςi1 · · · , ς iN be a reduced expression for the longest word in the Weyl group for R. A prefix R-Lusztig map , F kD : Ji1 × · · · × Jik → UΘ is given by 

F kD (v1, · · · , v k) = xi1 (v1) · · · xik (xk) .

The R-Lusztig map is given by F ND for N the length of the longest word. 

Corollary 4.43. For any choice of invertible elements vj ∈ Jij , the element F kD (v1, · · · , v k) is in the R-Bruhat cell P opp Θ wP opp Θ where w = ςi1 · · · ςik .NONCOMMUTATIVE CLUSTER VARIETIES AND MODULI SPACES OF LOCAL SYSTEMS 47 

Proof. This follows by induction on k from Proposition 4.40. Let w1 = ςi1 · · · ςik−1 . We know that 

F kD (v1) = F k−1 

> D

(v1, · · · , v k−1)xik (vk) and by induction that F k−1 

> D

(v1, · · · , v k−1) ∈ P opp Θ w1P opp Θ .We also know xik ∈ P opp Θ ςik P opp Θ and that ℓ(w1ςik ) = ℓ(w1) + ℓ(ςik ) since ςi1 · · · ςik is reduced. So Proposition 4.40 implies that 

F kD (v1) = F k−1 

> D

(v1, · · · , v k−1) · xik (vk) ∈ P opp Θ w1P opp Θ ςik P opp Θ = P opp Θ wP opp Θ .

□

4.6. Root system calculus. The above results enable us to make calculations in Jordan split groups of type R that are independent of the choice of Jordan algebras. The calculations depend only on the root system, and we call this the root system calculus .Let G be a Jordan split group of type R and fix a normalized Jordan pinning of G. This defines elements xi(v), y i(v), ˇβi(a) for v ∈ Ji and a ∈ Γ( Ji). In Section 4.4, we also defined elements ςi and ςi which lift the Weyl group of type R to G. The following lemmas provide all relations among these generators needed for the remainder of the paper. Many of the lemmas in this section are restatements of earlier lemmas gathered here for easy reference. We begin with relations that are entirely within a single pinned SL 2(Ji).

Lemma 4.44 (Proposition 4.12) . Let v ∈ V × 

> i

. Then 

xi(v)ςi = ςiyi(−v) = yi(v−1) ˇβi(ι(v)) xi(−v−1) .

Let v, w, v + w ∈ V × 

> i

. Then 

xi(v)yi(w−1) = yi

 (v + w)−1 ˇβi

 ι(w + v)ι(w−1) xi

 (w−1 + v−1)−1 .

Next we consider the relations among pinning maps from different roots. 

Lemma 4.45. Let i̸ = j index two simple roots in R and consider their connection in the Dynkin diagram. 

• Regardless of connection, xi(v)yj (w) = yj (w)xi(v).

• If i is disconnected from j then xi(v)xj (w) = xj (w)xi(v) and yi(v)yj (w) = yj (w)yi(v).Proof. The first and second statement follow from computing the brackets of the corresponding root spaces in g. The brackets vanish as βi − βj is never a root and βi + βj isn’t a root when i is not connected to j in a simple Dynkin diagram. So by the Baker-Campbell-Hausdorff theorem the corresponding group elements commute. □

Now we recall the “braid action” of the Weyl group on G given by ςi(g) = ςigς i. The following lemma shows that the action on the Levi subgroup mirrors the usual action on the Cartan subgroup with the addition of structure involution σi on Γ( Ji) (Definition 2.11) and the norm map (Lemma 4.21). 

Lemma 4.46 (Lemmas 4.34 and 4.35) .

• For any i, we have ςi

  ˇβi(A) = ˇβi

 σi(A)−1.

• For i̸ = j with i disconnected from j in R we have ςi( ˇβj (A)) = ˇβj (A).

• For i̸ = j, with i connected to j in R and Ji commutative we have 

ςi

  ˇβj (A) = ˇβi(N (A)) ˇβj (A)

ςj

  ˇβi(a) = ˇβi(a) ˇβj (a1j )

Moreover the Weyl group action sends root spaces to root spaces. There is not a unique expression for elements of nonsimple root spaces as products of pinning maps. However it will suffice to know the following lemma. 

Lemma 4.47. For i̸ = j, ςj (xi(v)) ∈ PΘ and ςj (yi(v)) ∈ P opp Θ .Proof. By construction ςj acts by reflection on the root grading. Since the only reflection which sends a simple positive root βi to a negative root is ςi the statement holds. □

The next lemma describes the action of the Levi factor on the root spaces and on itself. This requires the map βi : LΘ → P Γ( Ji) defined in Definition 4.19 via lx i(v)l−1 = xi

 βi(l)( v).48 ZACHARY GREENBERG, DANI KAUFMAN, MERIK NIEMEYER, AND ANNA WIENHARD 

Lemma 4.48. For any i, we have 

• βi( ˇβi(A))( v) = A(v)

• ly i(v)l−1 = yi(βi(ςi(l))( v)) = yi(σi(βi(l)) −1(v)) 

• l ˇβi(ι(v)) ςi(l)−1 = ˇβi

 ι βi(l)( v) 

Proof. The first statement combines definition of β with the action of the coroot ˇβ(A) on x(v).For the second statement, we conjugate everything by ςi to change yi(v) into xi(−v) and recover the definition of βi. For the final statement write w = βi(l)( v). On the one hand 

lx i(v)l−1ςi = xi(w)ςi = yi(w−1) · ˇβi(ι(w)) · xi(−w−1) .

On the other hand, we observe that w−1 = σi(βi(l)) −1(v−1) and compute 

lx i(v)l−1ςi = lx i(v)ςi ςi(l−1)= l yi(v−1) ˇβi(ι(v)) xi(−v−1)ςi(l)−1

= ly i(v−1)l−1 · l ˇβi(ι(v)) ςi(l)−1 · ςi(l)xi(−v−1)ςi(l)−1

= yi(w−1) · l ˇβi(ι(v)) ςi(l)−1 · xi(−w−1) .

Equating the ˇβi terms proves the final statement. □

# Part 2. Noncommutative Cluster Varieties 

Our next goal is to develop a theory of noncommutative cluster varieties rich enough to provide cluster structures for the natural geometric objects related to Jordan split groups. In noncommutative rank 0, the algebraic groups are quasi-split and the classical cluster structure will suffice as described in [GS19]. In our previous work, we defined a noncommutative cluster framework that suffices for noncommutative rank 1 [GKNW26]. In higher noncommutative rank, we instead require a further generalization of the noncommutative wiring diagrams defined in [GK24]. In this part, we review the classical cluster theory and describe the two noncommutative generalizations needed for the remainder of the paper. 5. Classic cluster algebras 

We first recall the construction of a cluster algebra. It is grown from an initial seed which consists of a quiver and a set of variables associated to each node of the quiver. 5.1. Quivers and seed mutation. Definition 5.1. A quiver Q is a directed graph on n nodes with no self loops or two cycles. The nodes of Q are partitioned into two sets, the mutable/unfrozen nodes and frozen nodes. A quiver with weighted nodes is a quiver where each node is assigned a positive integer weight dk. The adjacency matrix of a weighted quiver is a skew-symmetrizable matrix ϵij 

with entries ϵij = eij dj / gcd( dj , d i), where eij is the number of arrows from node i to node j

counted with signs. Note that the diagonal matrix D with Dii = di is the skew symmetrizer of ϵ, in other words 

Dϵ is skew symmetric. 

Example 5.2 . We will only need quivers with nodes of two different weights. These will either be in {1, 2} or in {1, 3}. In either case we draw nodes of higher weight larger than nodes of weight 1. For example in Figure 6 the first two nodes are weight 1 while the rightmost node is weight 2. The skew-symmetrizable adjacency matrix is also given. NONCOMMUTATIVE CLUSTER VARIETIES AND MODULI SPACES OF LOCAL SYSTEMS 49 

1 2 3 

0 1 0

−1 0 20 −1 0



Figure 6. Quiver with weighted nodes. We would draw the same quiver if node 3 had weight 3 instead. In this case the adjacency matrix would be  0 1 0

−1 0 30 −1 0

 .

It will always be clear from the context which case we are dealing with. 

Definition 5.3. A seed , (Q, a) consists of a weighted quiver Q and a list of algebraically independent variables a = ( a1, . . . , a n) in K(x1, . . . , x n) associated to the n nodes of Q. The variables ai are called cluster variables .Given a seed (Q, a) and a mutable node k, we can produce a new seed μk(Q, a) = ( Q′, a′) by a process called mutation which consists of mutating the quiver Q and the cluster variables. 

Definition 5.4. The mutation of Q at node k is the quiver μk(Q) formed by (1) For each pair of arrows i → k → j add dk gcd( di, d j )/(gcd( di, d k) gcd( dk, d j )) arrows from i to j.(2) Remove any 2-cycles created by the previous step. (3) Reverse all arrows incident to k.This procedure is equivalent to the following operation on the adjacency matrix: (4) b′ 

> ij

=

(

−bij k ∈ { i, j }

bij + b+

> ik

b+ 

> kj

− b−

> ik

b− 

> kj

k / ∈ { i, j }

where x± = ± max(0 , ±x).

Example 5.5 . Consider the quiver Q in Figure 7a. It has one mutable node drawn with a circle and 4 frozen nodes drawn as squares. Mutation at the mutable node produces the quiver Figure 7b. 

abcde

(a) 

abcdf

(b) 

Figure 7. Mutation at the mutable node in the middle relates the two quivers. We are now ready to define seed mutation and the cluster algebra: 

Definition 5.6. The mutation of a seed (Q, a) at k is the new seed (μk(Q), a′) whose quiver is given by mutation above. All the cluster variables of a′ are the same as a except for a′ 

> k

which satisfies the exchange relation 

aka′ 

> k

= Y 

> bik >0

abik  

> i

+ Y 

> bik <0

a−bik 

> i

The cluster algebra generated by a seed (Q, a) is the subalgebra of the field of fractions K(a)

generated by all cluster variables obtained by arbitrary sequences of mutations. 50 ZACHARY GREENBERG, DANI KAUFMAN, MERIK NIEMEYER, AND ANNA WIENHARD 

Example 5.7 . Consider again the quivers in Figure 7. We have labeled both with variables 

a, . . . , f . The exchange relation reads: (5) ef = ac + bd . 

Cluster algebras are of particular interest because they endow the coordinate rings of some varieties with a combinatorial structure: We say a variety has a cluster structure if there is a seed which generates a cluster algebras isomorphic to the coordinate ring of the variety. Thus we will often implicitly identify the abstract cluster coordinates with elements of the given ring. 

Example 5.8 . Consider the decorated flag variety A for SL 2(R). It consists of nonzero vectors in R2. The configuration space 

Conf 4(A ) = SL 2(R)\A 4

consists of 4-tuples of decorated flags up to the diagonal action of SL 2(R). The subspace 

Conf × 

> 4

(A ) where no two vectors lie on a common line has a cluster structure given by ei-ther quiver in Figure 7. Namely, if the configuration x is represented by (v1, . . . , v 4), we can compute coordinate functions 

aij (x) := det( vi|vj )

which are clearly invariant under the action of SL 2(R) on A 4 and thus descend to Conf × 

> 4

(A ).We get  42

 = 6 coordinates since aij = −aji . One can check that these satisfy the equation 

a13 a42 = a14 a32 + a12 a43 

which has exactly the form of the exchange relation Equation (5). Thus, we can assign the coordinate functions to the nodes of the quivers in Figure 7 as a = a14 , b = a12 , c = a32 , d =

a43 , e = a13 and f = a42 .This is the most basic example of the theory we will discuss in Part 3. 5.2. Cluster algebras from surfaces. The quivers in Figure 7 have another interesting prop-erty: They are obtained from the two triangulations of the square by drawing a node for every arc in the triangulation (where the boundary arcs correspond to frozen nodes) and inscribing a clockwise three-cycle of arrows into every triangle. Cluster algebras arising in this way were studied in [FG07, FST08]. For any quiver obtained from a triangulated surface in the way described above, any single mutation is equivalent to a flip in the triangulation. This is the operation where one diagonal of a square is removed and replaced with the other one. The exchange relation for such a mutation can be read off in an interesting way: Consider a square as in Figure 8. To replace the diagonal with the other one, we consider the two zigzag paths which connect the endpoints of the new diagonal. 

abcde

Figure 8. Mutation and zigzag paths. By writing down the cluster variables we encounter along these two paths we get the expression (6) aec + bed = f e 2

where f is the new cluster variable obtained by mutation and the equality simply follows by multiplying the exchange relation by e. In this commutative setting neither the orientation of the paths nor the order of the product matter. But we observe the surface can provide a natural order which is exactly the approach used by Berenstein-Retakh in their definition of noncommutative surfaces [BR18]. NONCOMMUTATIVE CLUSTER VARIETIES AND MODULI SPACES OF LOCAL SYSTEMS 51 

5.3. Key properties. We now recall a few key properties of cluster algebras [FZ02]. 

Proposition 5.9. If two seeds (Q, a) and (Q′, a′) are related by a sequence of mutations, they produce isomorphic cluster algebras. 

Proposition 5.10 (Laurent Phenomenon) . Every cluster variable can be written as a Laurent polynomial in the cluster variables from a single seed (Q, a). Moreover the coefficients of the Laurent polynomial are positive. 

Definition 5.11. Given a (semi)ring R, the R-points of a cluster algebra are the homomor-phisms from the cluster algebra to R. When R = R this is equivalent to choosing a real number for each cluster variable subject to the exchange relations. An R-point is called positive if all the cluster variables are evaluated at strictly positive real numbers. 

Proposition 5.12 (Positivity) . The positive R-points of a cluster algebra can be constructed by evaluating the cluster variables of any seed at positive real numbers and using the exchange relations to evaluate all other cluster variables. 

Corollary 5.13. The positive points of a cluster algebra form a well-defined semi-algebraic set. Furthermore a positive point can be specified by choosing arbitrary positive numbers for all the cluster variables in a single seed (Q, a).

6. Polygonal cluster algebras 

We now recall some of the basic constructions from [GKNW26] we will need to describe the cluster structure on our noncommutative cluster coordinates. We introduce a small modification to include the G2 case. In this section we fix a parameter r which will be 2 in type Bp and 3 in type G2.6.1. 2-colored and ordered quivers. All of the quivers we will consider are weighted quivers where the weights are either 1 or r. We denote by Q(1) 0 and Q(2) 0 the set of weight one and weight r nodes respectively. We call the weight 1 nodes commutative nodes and the weight 

r nodes noncommutative nodes .

Definition 6.1. A 2-colored quiver Q is a weighted quiver where all of the arrows between noncommutative nodes are partitioned into two sets called parallel and crossing arrows re-spectively. The combination of one parallel and one crossing arrow with the same source and target is called a paired arrow .The pruned quiver denoted by Qpr is obtained by removing all of the commutative nodes and all paired arrows between weight r nodes. We call the arrows in Qpr noncommutative arrows .

Convention. We draw parallel arrows by black arrows with solid tips ( ) and crossing arrows by blue arrows with a hollow tip ( _). Paired arrows are green with a double arrow head ( ↠). Crossing arrows are assigned weight r −1, so that during mutation they count as r −1 arrows. Consequently, paired arrows have weight r. This is reflected in the following mutation rule: 

Definition 6.2. Mutation of a 2-colored quiver is defined by the following rules: First suppose that k ∈ Q(2) 0 is a weight r node, then mutation at k is determined by the following process: (1) For every sequence i → k → j with i, j weight r nodes, introduce arrows i → j, whose colors are determined by the coloring rules 

+ =

_ + _ = + ( r − 2) ↠

_ + = _ .

If instead at least one of i, j is weight one, then the new arrows are always colored black. (2) Cancel any resulting 2-cycles of the same color. Note that a paired arrow can cancel with either a parallel or a crossing arrow to result in an arrow of the opposite class: 

+ ↞ = ^_ + ↞ =52 ZACHARY GREENBERG, DANI KAUFMAN, MERIK NIEMEYER, AND ANNA WIENHARD 

(3) Reverse any arrow connected to k.If instead k ∈ Q(1) 0 is weight one then mutation is determined as follows: (1) For every sequence i → k → j with i, j weight r nodes, introduce a paired arrow i↠j. If instead at least one of i, j is weight one, then the new arrows are always colored black. (2) Cancel any resulting 2-cycles of the same color. (3) Reverse arrows connected to k.

Remark 6.3 . The key motivation for these definitions comes from the type of coordinates we will define on Θ-positive representations. In these cases, we assign elements of the structure group Γ( J) of a Jordan algebra to the non commutative nodes of Q and real numbers to the commutative nodes. The number r is the degree of the norm map of J. The commutative arrows will really ‘see’ the norm of the elements while crossing arrows will ‘see’ an involution τ applied to the corresponding elements. 

Example 6.4 . Some examples of 2-colored quivers and their mutation are shown in Figure 9. 

1 μ1

r

1

μ1

Figure 9. 2-colored quivers and their mutation. Adding color to the quivers is not sufficient to capture the combinatorics of the coordinates which we will discuss in Part 3. For this, we will also need to take the order into account since some of the functions will take values in a non-abelian group. This requires a further upgrade of the quivers: 

Definition 6.5. An ordered (2-colored) quiver consists of a 2-colored quiver Q together with a splitting of the incoming and outgoing arrows in the pruned quiver Qpr at every node 

k ∈ Q(2) 0 into two ordered tuples, denoted In f (k) and Out f (k) for f ∈ { 0, 1}.

In •(k)Out •(k)Out ◦(k)In ◦(k)

k

Out c(k)

Figure 10. Decoration of big nodes in an ordered quiver with partition of the arrows. 

Convention. We draw the noncommutative nodes of an ordered quiver as shown in Figure 10. The order of the tuples is given by going counterclockwise around the node. We call the two halves open and filled, respectively. To match the pictures we use ◦ for 0 and • for 1. The commutative arrows (arrows connected to weight 1 nodes and paired arrows) connected to a node k ∈ Q(2) 0 are denoted by the sets In c(k) and Out c(k).In order to mutate such quivers we restrict to a special subclass. NONCOMMUTATIVE CLUSTER VARIETIES AND MODULI SPACES OF LOCAL SYSTEMS 53 

6.2. Decorated polygons. In [GKNW26] we introduced the notion of source-target-compatible quivers using an algebraic compatibility condition, and proved that these are in correspondence with decorated polygonal tiling. To keep the exposition concise, we will simply consider deco-rated polygons and their corresponding quivers here. 

Definition 6.6. A decorated polygon consists of the following data: 

• a polygon Pn,

• an orientation of its sides, 

• a partition of its vertices into two disjoint sets, called parallel and crossing angles 

such that there is an odd number of parallel angles ,

• a choice of vertex for every side such that the straight lines connecting the midpoint of each side to its corresponding vertex intersect pairwise (allowing intersection at the endpoints). We call these lines angle indicators .Some examples of decorated polygons are visualized in Figure 11. We indicate a parallel angle by a black solid arc near the vertex, while a crossing angle is indicated by a blue dashed arc. 

Figure 11. Examples of decorated polygons. Given a decorated polygon we construct an ordered quiver as follows: (1) For every side, we get a noncommutative node such that the filled half is on the left as given by the orientation. (2) The halves of the nodes facing into the polygon are connected with arrows: For a given node k all nodes corresponding to sides to the right of the angle indicator are sources of arrows with target k, while all nodes which correspond to sides to the left of the angle indicator are targets of arrows starting at k.(3) The order of the arrows at every node is given by the clockwise order of the sides. (4) To determine the color of the arrows, start by coloring the arrows between nodes cor-responding to adjacent sides: Unless all angle indicators end at the vertex between the two sides, color the arrow the color of the angle. Otherwise take the opposite color. Color all remaining arrows such that every set of three nodes 

• has an odd number of parallel arrows if the nodes form a 3-cycle, 

• has an even number of parallel arrows otherwise. 

Remark 6.7 . The coloring rules determine a unique coloring of the quiver [GKNW26]. The ordered quivers associated to the polygons in Figure 11 are shown in Figure 12. 

Figure 12. Ordered quivers associated to the decorated polygons in Figure 11. By gluing decorated polygons along their sides, we can use them to tile a surface. 

Definition 6.8. A decorated tiling of an oriented surface S with marked points consists of the following data 54 ZACHARY GREENBERG, DANI KAUFMAN, MERIK NIEMEYER, AND ANNA WIENHARD 

• a set of non-intersecting oriented arcs between marked points on S, such that the com-plementary regions are polygons, 

• an admissible decoration for every such polygon such that the orientation of the edges agree with the orientation of the arcs on the surface, Using the same rules as above for every polygon in the tiling, we obtain an ordered quiver from every decorated tiling. 

Definition 6.9. An ordered quiver for which the pruned quiver can be represented as a deco-rated tiling is called a polygonal quiver .

Remark 6.10 . This differs slightly from the terminology in [GKNW26]. There we gave an alternate classification of these quivers which we called ‘source-target compatible’. We can now use the polygons to mutate polygonal quivers: 

Definition 6.11. Let Q be an polygonal quiver corresponding to a decorated tiling T . The (admissible) mutation at a node k produces a new polygonal quiver μk(Q) as follows: (1) Perform a mutation of the underlying 2-colored quiver at k.(2) Order the arrows at every node such that the ordered quiver corresponds to a decorated tiling T ′. The tiling T ′ is determined by the following conditions: 

• If k ∈ Q(1) 0 , then T ′ has the same polygons but possibly different angle indicators. 

• If k ∈ Q(2) 0 , then T ′ is related to T by a flip as shown in Figure 13. All the other angle indicators and angle colors are determined by the mutated 2-colored quiver. We denote by |Q| the set of polygonal quivers which are obtained from Q by sequences of admissible mutations. 

Figure 13. A flip in a decorated tiling. 

Remark 6.12 . The second step is not always possible: There are polygonal quivers for which a mutation of the underlying 2-colored quiver does not lead to a quiver which can be obtained from the prescribed tiling. We do not consider mutations at such nodes. 

Example 6.13 . Let us illustrate the mutation procedure and possible inadmissibility of mutations with two examples: Figure 14 illustrates an admissible mutation at a noncommutative node. The order of the arrows is deduced from the decorated tilings which are also shown On the other hand, consider the polygonal quiver in Figure 15 with its pruned part represented by the decorated triangle as shown. Mutation at the commutative node is not admissible because the new 2-colored quiver cannot be represented by changing the angle indicators of the decorated polygon. Finally, we define two operations on polygonal quivers which will be used later: 

Definition 6.14. Let Q be an polygonal quiver with decorated tiling T , k a noncommutative node of Q, respectively a side in T . The switch at k gives an polygonal quiver σk(Q) which corresponds to the tiling σk(T ) where the orientation of k is reversed. When r = 2 , we moreover define: The weaving at k gives wk(Q) corresponding to wk(T )

where the types of all angles adjacent to k is switched, i.e. straight angles become crossing and vice versa. NONCOMMUTATIVE CLUSTER VARIETIES AND MODULI SPACES OF LOCAL SYSTEMS 55 

The first operation corresponds to reversing the fill of the node k, while the second operation switches the color of all arrows connected to k. Since we would like these operations to commute with mutation, the weaving only makes sense if r = 2 because for r = 3 the different kinds of arrows behave combinatorially quite differently. 6.3. Seed group and angles. Let us now introduce the algebraic framework needed to define mutations. Let Q be an polygonal quiver with corresponding decorated tiling P . We assign a collection of variables to Q:

n

X(f ) 

> i

, N i i ∈ Q(2) 0 , f ∈ Z/2Z

o

∪

n

Ni i ∈ Q(1) 0

o

.

Let FQ be the free group generated by these. We define two anti-automorphisms of FQ called σ

and τ as follows: For i ∈ Q(2) 0 , f ∈ Z/2Z and j ∈ Q(1) 0 ∪ Q(2) 0

X(f )

> iσ

7−→ X(f +1) 

> i

Njσ

7−→ Nj

X(f )

> iτ

7−→  X(f )

> i

−1Ni

Njτ

7−→ Nj

.

To lighten the notation, we write Xi := X(0)  

> i

and στ (X(f ) 

> i

) := σ τ (X(f ) 

> i

).We now consider paths in the decorated tiling: 

Definition 6.15. An angle path γ is a (continuous) path along the sides and angles of a decorated tiling, which avoids the vertices of the polygons, as shown in Figure 16. The parity 

> 132456
> μ6
> 132456

Figure 14. A polygonal ordered quiver and its mutation, decorated tilings corresponding to the pruned quivers. 

> 1

Figure 15. A quiver for which mutation at node 1 is not admissible and the decorated polygon corresponding to the pruned quiver. 56 ZACHARY GREENBERG, DANI KAUFMAN, MERIK NIEMEYER, AND ANNA WIENHARD 

ℓ on angle paths is the Z/2Z-valued additive function with 

ℓ(e) = 

(

1 e is a side or a crossing angle 

0 e is a parallel angle. 

123

> 123

Figure 16. A closed angle path. To every angle path we associate an expression in the variable from above: 

Definition 6.16. Let γ be an angle path in a tiling P . The label L(γ) ∈ FQ of γ is computed recursively according to the following rules: 

• The label of a path following an angle is 1. 

• The label along a side i is στ (Xi) if the path follows the orientation, τ (Xi) otherwise. 

• The label of the path γ ∗ δ obtained by concatenation is given by 

L(γ ∗ δ) = L(γ)στ ℓ(γ) L(δ) .

An angle is the label associated to any loop around a polygon. 

Example 6.17 . Consider the polygon in Figure 16 with the indicated angle path γ. Since this is a loop, the associated label is an angle, namely 

L(γ) = τ (X1)σ(X2)στ (X3) .

The definition of the angles is motivated by the work of Berenstein-Retakh on noncommuta-tive surfaces [BR18]. Namely, label the vertices of the triangle as indicated in Figure 16, and rename the variables 

X1 = x21 X2 = x32 X3 = x31 

and xji := σ(xij ) according to the orientation of the corresponding sides (this is compatible with our notion of switch). Then the angle reads 

L(γ) = τ (x21 )x23 τ (x13 ) = N1N3 · x−121 x23 x−113 =: N1N3 · T 2,31 .

This is exactly the noncommutative angle T 2,31 from [BR18] up to multiplication by the central variables. 

Definition 6.18. The seed group QQ is obtained by taking the quotient of the free group FQ

by the relations: 

Ni is central 

∆ = σ(∆) for any angle ∆ .

We write AQ for the noncommutative space whose group of functions is given by the seed group 

QQ. We call it the seed torus .Consider an angle ∆ given by a loop γ around a polygon. By reversing the loop γ, we obtain the label L(γ) = σ L(γ), so the relation for the angles in the seed group can be understood as assigning the same label to a loop around a polygon and its reverse. 

Remark 6.19 . In [GKNW26], we constructed an algebra associated to each quiver instead and extended σ and τ linearly to the entire algebra. However, this approach only works for r = 2 ,while we extend the theory here to include the case r = 3 .NONCOMMUTATIVE CLUSTER VARIETIES AND MODULI SPACES OF LOCAL SYSTEMS 57 

If two polygonal quivers are related by one of the operations (switching or weaving) from Definition 6.14, they have isomorphic seed groups: 

Proposition 6.20. Let Q be an polygonal quiver with a noncommutative node k. Then we have an isomorphism defined by 

σk : QQ

> ∼

→ Qσk (Q)

X(f ) 

> i

7 →

(

X(f ) 

> i

i̸ = kX(f +1)  

> k

i = kNi 7 → Ni .

When r = 2 we have another isomorphism defined by 

wk : QQ

> ∼

→ Qwk (Q)

X(f ) 

> i

7 →

(

X(f ) 

> i

i̸ = k

 X(f +1) 

> k

−1Nk i = kNi 7 → Ni .

Thus, whenever we perform a switch at k, we will replace Xk with σ(Xk) in all formulas. Similarly, when we weave at k, we replace Xk with στ (Xk). All other variables remain unchanged. 

Proof. It suffices to check that σk, w k map angles onto angles: For instance if an angle path goes through k, the angle in Qσk (Q) is obtained from the angle for the same path in QQ by replacing Xk with σ(Xk), which is exactly the effect of the map σk defined above. □

These maps define weaving and switch maps of the associated seed tori. 6.4. Jordan algebra points. So far we have given a description of the mutation of polygonal quivers, and we have assigned a group QQ and a torus AQ to each one. When r = 2 it is possible to define a polygonal cluster algebra given by gluing together quotients of a quiver algebra 

[GKNW26]. The defining relations were constructed so that the algebra could be evaluated in arbitrary Clifford algebras. However for r = 3 , such an algebra does not exist. Nevertheless, we can define “evaluations” of 

QQ into arbitrary Jordan algebras. These evaluations can be glued together to form a geometric object in analogy with the construction of a cluster variety for classic commutative cluster algebras. Now let J = ( V, ι, 1) be a normed Jordan algebra of degree r.

Definition 6.21. Let Q be an polygonal quiver. A J-point of the seed tori AQ is a group homomorphism ϕ : QQ → Γ( J) such that: (1) ϕ intertwines the σ and τ defined for QQ with those defined for Γ( J).(2) ϕ(∆) = ι(v∆) for some v∆ ∈ V for any angle ∆.We denote by AQ(J) the set of J-points of AQ.

Remark 6.22 . Because of the first requirement, we can define a J-point of AQ by picking images 

ϕ(Xi) for i ∈ Q(2) 0 and ϕ(Nj ) for j ∈ Q(1) 0 . This determines the images of all other generating variables. Also, observe that ϕ(Ni) ∈ K× for any i ∈ Q0.For the second condition, it suffices to check one angle per polygon. This is because angles in the same polygon with different base points are related by applying στ and ∆ 7 → A∆σ(A) for 

A ∈ Γ( J). Both of these operations preserve ι(V ) ⊂ Γ( J).If J moreover has a positive structure, we can define positive points: 

Definition 6.23. We say that a J-point ϕ : QQ → J is positive if (1) ϕ(Xi) ∈ Γ( J)◦ for all i ∈ Q(2) 0 .(2) ϕ(Ni) ∈ K>0 for all i ∈ Q(1) 0 .(3) v∆ ∈ V >0 for any angle ∆.The set of such points is denoted AQ(J>0).58 ZACHARY GREENBERG, DANI KAUFMAN, MERIK NIEMEYER, AND ANNA WIENHARD 

Remark 6.24 . Again, it is sufficient to check condition (3) for one angle per polygon as the operations in Remark 6.22 preserve the cone if we restrict to the identity component of the structure group, which is condition (1). Our next goal is to define a mutation of Jordan points, i.e. a map AQ(J) → A Q′ (J) that is defined whenever Q′ is obtained from Q by (admissible) mutation. Note that this map will only be defined for an open subset of Jordan points. This gives rise to a birational map of seed tori 

AQ → A Q′ .

Definition 6.25. Given an admissible mutation μk : Q → Q′ at a noncommutative node k ∈

Q(2) 0 we define a mutation map μk : AQ(J) → A Q′ (J) by requiring that 

 μk(ϕ)(X′ 

> j

) = ϕ(Xj ) for j̸ = k

and that the angles as indicated in Figure 17 follow the angle summation formula 

(7)  μk(ϕ)  στ εf (∆ ′ 

> f

(k))  = ι

 ϕ(Of )

ϕ(Nk) v∆lf (k) + ϕ(If )

ϕ(Nk) v∆rf (k)



,

for f ∈ {◦ , •} where the powers εf are chosen such that στ εf (∆ ′ 

> f

(k)) contains σf (X′

> k

) (no τ ). Moreover, we have defined 

Of = Y

> i∈Out c(k)

Ni · Y 

> α∈Out f+1 (k)

Nα ,If = Y

> i∈In c(k)

Ni · Y 

> α∈In f(k)

Nα .

This mutation is defined whenever the argument of ι in Definition 6.25 lies in V ×, which is a generic condition on ϕ.

∆′◦(k)∆′•(k)

(a) Angles after flip 

∆l

> ◦

(k) ∆r

> ◦

(k)

(b) Angles in ∆′◦(k).

∆r

> •

(k) ∆l

> •

(k)

(c) Angles in ∆′•(k).

Figure 17. Angles used for mutation of J-points. 

Remark 6.26 . Note that in the mutation map, the only elements which are added are in the vector space V (which gets mapped to Γ( J) via ι), and the only elements which are multiplied belong to Γ( J). As such J does not need to be contained in an algebra. If we consider a positive J-point of QQ, the new angle always lies in ι(V ×):

Lemma 6.27. An admissible mutation μk : Q → Q′ sends positive J-points to positive J-points. Proof. Consider a positive J-point of AQ. Then, in particular, the elements v∆lf (k) and v∆rf (k)

from the angle summation formulas are in V >0. This positive cone is preserved by the action of elements in Γ( J)◦ and R>0 and addition. Thus the new angles given by Definition 6.25 are again in V >0. As all other angles are unchanged or equivalent to the new angles by actions of elements in Γ( J)◦ the resulting point is also positive. □

Definition 6.28. We write A|Q| for the noncommutative space which is obtained by gluing together the seed tori along all sequences of admissible mutation maps. Given a normed Jordan algebra of degree r J we write A|Q|(J) for the set of Jordan points of A|Q|.NONCOMMUTATIVE CLUSTER VARIETIES AND MODULI SPACES OF LOCAL SYSTEMS 59 

The previous lemma implies that the set of positive Jordan points A|Q|(J>0) can be computed on any single seed torus, as the mutation maps are isomorphisms on the positive points. In [GKNW26] for the case r = 2 , we construct an analog of the cluster algebra called the 

noncommutative polygonal cluster algebra which contains all of the cluster variables ob-tained by admissible mutation and prove a noncommutative Laurent phenomenon. This implies that the ring of global functions on A|Q| contains the noncommutative polygonal cluster algebra associated to Q.

Example 6.29 . To make the mutation formulas more explicit, let us give an example. Consider again, the mutation shown in Figure 14. Suppose that ϕ is a J-point for the seed torus associated to the left quiver. Then ϕ′ := μ6(ϕ) is defined by the angle addition formulas 

ϕ′ στ (∆ ′◦(6))  = ϕ′ σ(X3)τ (X2)X′

> 6

στ (X5) = ι ϕ N2N3

N6

!

v∆l 

> ◦(6)

+ ϕ N5

N6

!

v∆r

> ◦(6)

!

ϕ′ ∆′•(6)  = ϕ′ στ (X4)σ(X′

> 6

)τ (X1) = ι ϕ N4

N6

!

v∆l 

> •(6)

+ ϕ N1

N6

!

v∆r

> •(6)

!

with the vectors determined by the equations 

ι(v∆l

> ◦(6)

) = ϕ στ (X6)X4στ (X5) ι(v∆r

> ◦(6)

) = ϕ σ(X3)τ (X2)σ(X1)τ (X6)

ι(v∆l

> •(6)

) = ϕ τ (X6)τ (X3)σ(X2)τ (X1) ι(v∆r

> •(6)

) = ϕ στ (X4)X5στ (X6) .

6.5. Mutation in special cases. We will now motivate the mutation procedure for J-points and in particular the angle summation formula Definition 6.25: Consider again the flip in Fig-ure 13 and the zigzag mutation procedure for surface cluster algebras as visualized in Figure 8. In Figure 18a we have combined both ideas and outlined two paths in a schematic picture of a decorated tiling. 

γ1

γ2

(a) Zigzag paths (b) Angle after flip (c) Angle from zigzag paths. 

Figure 18. Reading off exchange relations from decorated tilings. As before, let the node at which we mutate be k. From the figure a first guess for a mutation formula would be (8) X′

> k

Nk = Ic · στ ε1  L(γ1) + Oc · στ ε2  L(γ2)

where γ1 and γ2 are the angle paths marked in the figure. We choose ε1, ε 2 such that τ (Xk),respectively στ (Xk) appears in the summands. This mirrors Equation (6) on the noncommuta-tive part since τ (Xk)/N k = X−1 

> k

. We have also added the central variables coming from small nodes and paired arrows 

Ic := Y

> i∈In c(k)

Ni , Oc := Y

> i∈Out c(k)

Ni .

This exchange relation is essentially the one used in [GKNW26] to glue the quotients of the quiver algebras. As we already remarked above, this cannot be done when r = 3 , essentially since we cannot assign a new central element N ′

> k

. This is why we only define mutation on 

J-points of the quiver algebra. Thus, suppose that ϕ : QQ → Γ( J) is a J-point and that we performed an admissible mutation at a noncommutative node k to get μk(Q) = Q′. To construct the J-point ϕ′ of QQ′ , we keep 60 ZACHARY GREENBERG, DANI KAUFMAN, MERIK NIEMEYER, AND ANNA WIENHARD 

the image of all variables Xi, N i for i̸ = k unchanged. A reasonable idea to define ϕ′(X′

> k

) is to use Equation (8) and just replace all variables by their image under ϕ. However, the image of ϕ

lies in the group Γ( J), so it does not make sense to add the two terms unless Γ( J) is contained in some algebra (which will often be the case). Instead, as we saw mutation should be performed using the angles: Consider Figure 18b, the local picture of the decorated tiling after the flip. The label assigned to the indicated path is an angle in ∆′ ∈ Q Q′ . If we write it down and plug in the naive mutation formula Equation (8), we find (9) στ ε ∆′Nk = I · ∆1 + O · ∆2

where ∆1 is the angle corresponding to the red loop in the right polygon, and ∆2 corresponds to the blue loop in the left polygon in Figure 18c. ε is chosen such that στ ε(∆ ′) contains X′

> k

(not στ (X′

> k

)). Moreover 

I = Ic · Y

> i∈In •(k)

Ni , O = Oc · Y

> i∈Out ◦(k)

Ni

are central terms which correspond to going back and forth as indicated in Figure 18c, as well as the commutative nodes and paired arrows as before. All loops used to compute angles have base points as above, see Figure 17. We could also deduce a similar equation for the other angle after the flip. If Γ( J) is contained in an algebra and ι provides a linear embedding of V , this approach starting with the zigzag paths, leads exactly to the mutation we introduced in Definition 6.25. Importantly, this is the case for spin groups with Jordan split type Bp.

Remark 6.30 . Deducing Equation (9) from Equation (8) requires a slightly more careful analysis of the powers of στ . This uses the parity condition for decorated polygons and can be found in [GKNW26]. 7. Noncommutative networks 

In higher noncommutative rank, we use different combinatorial data to provide coordinates, a planar bipartite network. These networks were introduced by Postnikov to study the Grass-mannian [Pos06] and have many applications to cluster algebra theory [FWZ21]. The noncom-mutative generalization we consider here is mostly the same as that of [GK24]. 

Definition 7.1. A plabic network on a disk is a bipartite graph embedded in a disk with edge weights in an (associative) algebra R such that (1) A vertex is degree 1 if and only if it is on the boundary of the disk. (2) The graph in the interior of the disk is planar. (3) The counterclockwise product of edge weights around any vertex is 1.Plabic networks are considered up to natural equivalences given by isotopy of the disk fixing the boundary and contracting/adding vertices of degree 2 (Figure 19). 

A A−1

⇐⇒ 

A A−1

⇐⇒ 

Figure 19. Local equivalence moves of plabic networks. We will be interested in control over the boundary edges which cause the network to be nonplanar. 

Definition 7.2. A triangular grounded wiring network on n strands is a bipartite network embedded in a triangle with a designated ground side such that (1) The left and right sides of the triangle have n • vertices labeled 1 to n.(2) The edges incident to the ground are called legs . Removing all the legs results in a planar graph. NONCOMMUTATIVE CLUSTER VARIETIES AND MODULI SPACES OF LOCAL SYSTEMS 61 

(3) The non leg edges can be partitioned into two groups, strands and bridges such that the side boundary nodes labeled i are connected by a unique path of strands. A general grounded wiring network on a disk is a network embedded in disk with a trian-gulation of the disk such that the network restricted to each triangle is a triangular grounded wiring network. A grounded wiring network can be obtained by amalgamating copies of the elementary net-works in Figure 20 along the boundary vertices with matching strand numbers and potentially deleting legs. 1 1

... ...i ii + 1 i + 1 

... ...n n

Figure 20. The elementary network J(i).

Definition 7.3. Each grounded wiring network P has an associated seed group QP obtained by taking the quotient of the free group generated by the edges of the network by the relation that the counterclockwise product around each vertex of P is 1. The seed torus , AP is the noncommutative torus with QP as its group of coordinate functions. 

Remark 7.4 . The condition on the weights that the counterclockwise product around each vertex is equal to 1 is different from the convention in [GK24]. We will expand on this distinction in Section 17.7. 

Definition 7.5. Let J be a special Jordan algebra with specializing ring R. A J-point of a grounded wiring network P is a group homomorphism QP → R ×.We consider two grounded wiring networks equivalent if they are related by leg slide and identification of legs attached to the same strand. 

Definition 7.6. A leg slide is performed by moving a leg left or right horizontally until it travels across a bridge onto a neighboring strand (Figure 21). A leg slide is associated with the following monomial map on the weights: Let w be the weight of the leg. Each edge that is traversed from ◦ to • has its weight left multiplied by w.Each edge traversed from • to ◦ has its weight right multiplied by w−1.

Definition 7.7. There is a natural mutation of weighted plabic networks given by the square move with a noncommutative generalization given by [GK24, Equation 68]. Figure 22 shows the local transformation of the network and the birational map from AP → A P ′ and its inverse are given in Equation (10). 62 ZACHARY GREENBERG, DANI KAUFMAN, MERIK NIEMEYER, AND ANNA WIENHARD 

... ...ca−1w−1 a a−1b−1

... ...wb... ...wc c−1w−1 ca−1w−1 wa a−1b−1

... ...wbw −1

Figure 21. A leg slide. 

b1 = (1 + a3a4a1a2)a−12 a−11 a−14

= a−12 a−11 a−14 (1 + a4a1a2a3)

b3 = (1 + a1a2a3a4)a−14 a−13 a−12

= a−14 a−13 a−12 (1 + a2a3a4a1)

a1 = b3(1 + b4b1b2b3)−1

= (1 + b3b4b1b2)−1b3

a3 = b1(1 + b2b3b4b1)−1

= (1 + b1b2b3b4)−1b1

b2 = a4(1 + a1a2a3a4)−1

= (1 + a4a1a2a3)−1a4

b4 = a2(1 + a3a4a1a2)−1

= (1 + a2a3a4a1)−1a2

a2 = (1 + b4b1b2b3)b−13 b−12 b−11

= b−13 b−12 b−11 (1 + b1b2b3b4)

a4 = (1 + b2b3b4b1)b−11 b−14 b−13

= b−11 b−14 b−13 (1 + b3b4b1b2)

(10) Note that for i ∈ Z/4Z, aiai+1 = ( bibi+1 )−1. Thus the products around each vertex in square 

a1

a2a3

a4

b1

b2b3

b4

Figure 22. Square move of a plabic network. are preserved, which ensures the result of a square move is a correctly weighted network. 

Definition 7.8. The honeycomb networks , Pn, are a family of networks embedded in a triangle following the pattern demonstrated in Figure 23. The honeycomb networks are used to parameterize triples of GL n(R) flags in [GK24]. We will recover the honeycomb networks when parameterizing groups with an Ap-grading in Section 14.1. These networks are important as they are fully planar, so they can be regrounded. 

Definition 7.9. A full planar triangular grounded network can be regrounded by choosing a new side of the triangle to be the ground side. NONCOMMUTATIVE CLUSTER VARIETIES AND MODULI SPACES OF LOCAL SYSTEMS 63 

321

(a) n = 3 

4321

(b) n = 4 

Figure 23. The standard GL n-network. In Figure 23, we observe that any side of the triangle can be chosen to be the ground for a honeycomb network. The horizontal strands are identified by “pulling the sides tight” parallel to the ground. 

Definition 7.10. We write |P | for the set of grounded networks which are obtained from 

P by equivalence moves, square moves, leg slides and regroundings. We write A|P | for the noncommutative space obtained by gluing together the seed tori AP along the birational maps defined by each of these operations. From this definition we obtain noncommutative spaces from grounded wiring networks and from polygonal cluster algebras. We refer to both these constructions as noncommutative cluster varieties . Each space is built by gluing seed groups via noncommutative mutation relations. Although the construction of the seed group is different in each case, when we refer to the seed group the correct construction will be clear from context. 

# Part 3. Cluster-like Coordinates on Decorated Flag Varieties 

We will now use Jordan pinnings to define coordinates on configuration spaces of decorated flags. Thus, let G be Jordan split over a root system R over the K Jordan algebras {Ji}. We will write p for the rank of R. We recall that there are 3 cases based on the noncommutative rank of G of type R.

• When G is non-commutative rank 0 of type R, we will see that our coordinates are obtained by evaluating the commutative cluster varieties of [GS19] in field extensions of 

K.

• When G is non-commutative rank 1 of type R, our coordinates will give evaluations of non-commutative polygonal cluster algebras with general r for A1, r = 2 for Bp and 

r = 3 for G2. In this case we will assume that the simple roots in R are indexed such that the noncommutative root is the p-th one. 

• When G is higher noncommutative rank of type R, we will relate our coordinates to the description in [GK24]. Together this amounts to giving for each R a noncommutative cluster variety AR,n whose Jordan points parameterize configurations of n decorated flags. 8. Setup and strategy 

We consider the partial flag variety defined by the associated parabolic PΘ to the R-grading. We denote the flag variety by PΘ := G/P Θ and the decorated flag variety by AΘ := G/U Θ.64 ZACHARY GREENBERG, DANI KAUFMAN, MERIK NIEMEYER, AND ANNA WIENHARD 

Moreover, let π : AΘ → PΘ be the projection map induced by the inclusion UΘ ⊂ PΘ. In this case the fiber over a point in PΘ is an LΘ-torsor. The configuration space of n decorated flags for n ∈ N is given by 

Conf n(AΘ) := G\A n

> Θ

using the diagonal action of G on the product. Our ultimate goal is to endow this space with cluster-like coordinates. 8.1. Pairs of flags. We start by considering pairs of flags. Let w0 ∈ W (R) be the element of maximal length which we already encountered in Section 4.4. 

Definition 8.1. Two flags B1, B 2 ∈ PΘ are called transverse if there exists g ∈ G such that 

(gB 1, gB 2) = ( B, w 0B). This is denoted B1 ⋔ B2. Two decorated flags A1, A 2 ∈ AΘ are called transverse if π(A1) ⋔ π(A2).For an element w ∈ W (R), we call a two-tuple of flags, resp. decorated flags, w-transverse if there exits g ∈ G such that (gB 1, gB 2) = ( B, wB ) resp. (gπ (A1), gπ (A2)) = ( B, wB ).

Remark 8.2 . By Proposition 4.38 transversality is a generic condition for pairs of (decorated) flags. But as we saw in Equation (1), for B1, B 2 ∈ PΘ there does not necessarily exist a w in the grading Weyl group such that (gB 1, gB 2) = ( B, wB ). However, all flags that we will consider will be w-transverse for some w in the grading Weyl group. 

Remark 8.3 . If (A1, A 2) is w-transverse, then (A2, A 1) is w−1-transverse. To construct coor-dinates, we will only need the notion of w0-transverse and ςi-transverse where this distinction vanishes. We define the basic invariant for a pair of flags using that the fibers of π are LΘ-torsors: 

Definition 8.4. For two w-transverse decorated flags, we define the L-distance l(A1, A 2) to be the unique element of l ∈ LΘ such that there exists an element g ∈ G for which 

g(A1, A 2) = ( UΘ, wU Θl ) .

This is constant on G-orbits and thus defines a map Conf 2(AΘ) → LΘ. Given a Jordan pinning and choice {Λi} of Jordan weights, we can reconstruct this element of LΘ as 

l = Y

> i

ˇβi(Λ i(l)) .

Therefore, our collection of coordinates on Conf × 

> 2

(AΘ), the space of transverse configurations, is the set {Λi(l(A1, A 2)} ∈ Q 

> i

Γ( Ji). Before we take a closer look at the L-distance, let us describe the general strategy for the construction of cluster coordinates on Conf n(AΘ).8.2. General strategy. Consider the space Conf × 

> n

(AΘ) ⊂ Conf n(AΘ) defined by the condition that any two flags in the configuration are transverse. For split groups G coordinates on this space were previously constructed: Fock-Goncharov pioneered the approach presented below and described concrete coordinates for G = SL( n, R) [FG06]. This was extended to all classical split algebraic groups by Le [Le19] and further to include exceptional groups by Gilles [Gil21]. Finally, a very general construction was provided by Goncharov-Shen [GS19]. Our goal will be to extend their construction to (G, Θ) reduced of Weyl type. Thus, let [( A1, . . . , A n)] ∈ Conf × 

> n

(AΘ). Its coordinates are obtained as follows: 

Step 1: We associate the flags to the vertices of an n-gon in a counterclockwise manner. 

Step 2: Next, fix a triangulation of the n-gon . This naturally breaks the configuration of n flags into n − 2 configurations of 3 flags (associated to the triangles), which share sub-configurations of 2 flags (associated to the edges). This amalgamation approach was introduced by Fock and Goncharov and they proved that the configurations associated to the triangles determine the full configuration for split G [FG06, Thm. 8.1]. We extend this in Theorem 12.2. Therefore, it suffices to describe coordinates on Conf × 

> 3

(AΘ).

Step 3: We further decompose a configuration of 3 flags into elementary configurations 

(see Section 9). These are elements of Conf 3(AΘ) which are not fully transverse. Instead, NONCOMMUTATIVE CLUSTER VARIETIES AND MODULI SPACES OF LOCAL SYSTEMS 65 

one pair of flags is only ςi-transverse for ςi a simple reflection in W (R). See Definition 9.5. These configurations are obtained from a configuration of 3 decorated flags by computing an 

interpolating sequence of decorated flags between one pair of flags in the configuration (or along an edge of the triangle), see Proposition 9.1. It depends on a choice of reduced expression for the longest word w0 ∈ W (R). The set of elementary configurations determines the full configuration. This approach is due to Goncharov-Shen in the split case [GS19], and we extend it in Theorem 11.13. 

Step 4: Invariants of elementary configurations can be obtained by computing pairwise L-distances between the flags. To produce (noncommutative) coordinates from this, one applies the Jordan weights to these L-distances as explained previously. These will be assigned to the nodes of a elementary quiver or edges of an elementary network , which are upgraded version of the ordinary quivers described in [GS19]. Here it will be a polygonal quiver in non-commutative rank 1, see Section 10.2 or a grounded wiring network in higher noncommutative rank Section 7. We will see in Lemma 11.12 that the coordinate functions define a J-point of the corresponding noncommutative cluster variety. 

Step 5: All the elementary seeds are amalgamated to obtain a quiver, with corresponding coordinate functions, first for Conf × 

> 3

(AΘ), and then for Conf × 

> n

(AΘ).    

> A1
> A2
> . . .
> associate flags to n-gon triangulate restrict to Conf ×
> 3(AΘ)
> interpolate via sequence of flags elementary configuration calculate L-distances elementary seed (L-distances) amalgamate cluster charts

Cluster-like coordinates on 

Conf × 

> n

(AΘ)

Figure 24. Overview of the general strategy. Our main goal now is to understand how the choices we made effect these coordinates: (1) the choice of triangulation, (2) the choice of edge within each triangle along which to compute an interpolating sequence, (3) the choice of reduced expression of w0 for each edge, (4) the choice of Jordan weights used to compute coordinates. Specifically, we will show that making different choices correspond to noncommutative muta-tions. We only need to consider a few different elementary operations to make all of the changes above. Concretely, we will prove that we can use mutation to relate coordinate systems 

• on Conf × 

> 3

(AΘ) with different reduced expressions (‘2,3,4,6 moves’, Section 11.3) 

• on Conf × 

> 3

(AΘ) which differ by the choice of interpolating edge (‘rotation’, Section 11.4) 

• on Conf × 

> 4

(AΘ) arising from the two triangulations of the square (‘flip’, Section 12.1). The choice of Jordan weights only appears in the higher noncommutative rank case and our coordinates will be naturally independent of this choice. 66 ZACHARY GREENBERG, DANI KAUFMAN, MERIK NIEMEYER, AND ANNA WIENHARD 

Remark 8.5 . In Section 16, we will see that, when the Jordan algebra Ji has a positive structure, mutations sends positive points to positive points. This will recover the Θ-positive structures on Conf × 

> n

(AΘ) defined in [GW25]. Moreover, the above approach allows to define cluster-like coordinates on the moduli space of decorated twisted local systems and also yields a positive structure on this space as we will see in Section 17. 8.3. Opposition involution. We recall the opposition involution on a root system given by βi∗ = −w0(βi). For root systems of type A1, B p, Cp, F4, or G2, βi∗ = βi, but in Ap we have βi∗ = βp−i+1 using the standard indexing of the simple roots. It is closely related to the following involution on LΘ:

Definition 8.6. The opposition involution on LΘ is the map 

(.)∗ : LΘ → LΘ , l 7 → w0

 l−1 =: l∗ .

It induces opposition involutions ˇβi 7 → ˇβi∗ on the coroot system and (.)∗ : Vi → Vi∗ on the vector spaces via  ˇβi

 ι(v)∗

= ˇβi∗

 ι(v∗) .

This map shows up naturally as we will see in Proposition 8.8(1). If A1 ⋔ A2 ∈ AΘ, the 

L-distance satisfies 

l(A2, A 1) = sGl(A1, A 2)∗ .

Here sG = w20 is a distinguished element of order 2 in the center of G. It depends only on the type of the root system R and will be used in Section 17 to twist local systems. 

Lemma 8.7. We have the following identity for the Jordan pinning: 

w0xi(v)w0 = yi∗ (−v∗) .

Proof. Because of the action of W (R) on the coroots, we know that w0xi(v)w0 = yi∗ (v′) for some v′ ∈ Vi. Multiply both sides of this equation by ςi∗ . On the one hand we obtain from 

Lemma 4.44 the following Gauss decomposition: 

ςi∗ yi∗ (v′) = yi∗ (−v′) ˇβi∗

 ι(−v′)xi∗ (v′− 1) .

On the other hand, we can write w0 = wς i = ςi∗ = ςiw−1 for some w ∈ W (R) . Then 

ςi∗ w0xi(v)w0 = wx i(v)ςiw−1

= w



yi(v−1) ˇβi

 ι(v)xi(−v−1)



w−1 .

Since w(βi) is a positive root, this is a Gauss decomposition. As this is unique, we have 

ˇβi∗

 ι(−v′) = w

 ˇβi

 ι(v)

= w0

 ˇβi

 ι(v)−1

= ˇβi∗

 ι(v∗)

and thus since ι is injective, v∗ = −v′. □

8.4. L-distance revisited. We are now prepared to take a closer look at the L-distance which we defined in Section 8.1. First, we establish its basic properties: 

Proposition 8.8. Let w ∈ W (R), and (A1, A 2) ∈ Conf 2(AΘ) which are w-transverse. (1) The L-distance is not generally symmetric. In particular, we have if w = ςi

l(A2, A 1) = ˇβi(−1) ςi

 l(A1, A 2)−1 .

If A1 ⋔ A2, i.e. if w = w0, then 

l(A2, A 1) = sGw0

 l(A1, A 2)−1 = sGl(A1, A 2)∗ .

(2) For l1, l 2 ∈ LΘ

l(A1l1, A 2l2) = w−1 l−11

l(A1, A 2) l2 .

(3) Let (A2, A 3) be a pair of w′-transverse flags. If ℓ(ww ′) = ℓ(w) + ℓ(w′), then 

l(A1, A 3) = ( w′)−1 l(A1, A 2)l(A2, A 3) .

The proof uses the following: NONCOMMUTATIVE CLUSTER VARIETIES AND MODULI SPACES OF LOCAL SYSTEMS 67 

Lemma 8.9. Let A1, A 2, A 3 ∈ AΘ such that (A1, A 2) are w-transverse and (A2, A 3) are w′-transverse for some w, w ′ ∈ W (R). If ℓ(ww ′) = ℓ(w) + ℓ(w′), then (A1, A 3) are ww ′-transverse. Proof. We may assume that A1 = UΘ, A2 = gU Θ and A3 = gg ′UΘ for some g, g ′ ∈ G. Then the assumptions about the transversality can be expressed in terms of the Bruhat decomposition with respect to PΘ as follows: g ∈ PΘwP Θ, g′ ∈ PΘw′PΘ. By Proposition 4.40 since ℓ(ww ′) = 

ℓ(w)+ ℓ(w′) we have gg ′ ∈ PΘwP Θw′PΘ = PΘww ′PΘ. Translating the cell back to transversality implies that (A1, A 3) is ww ′-transverse as claimed. □

Proof (of Proposition 8.8). 

(1) By simple calculation we see if g(A1, A 2) = ( UΘ, wU Θl) for some g ∈ G, l ∈ LΘ, then 

l−1w−1g(A2, A 1) =  UΘ, l −1w−1UΘ

 =



UΘ, w −1UΘ w(l−1)



.

For w = ςi, we have 

ς−1 

> i

= ςi = ςi

> 2

ςi = ˇβi(−1) ςi .

Similarly, we have w0 = sGw0 .(2) By definition, there exists g ∈ G such that 

g(A1l1, A 2l2) =  l1UΘ, wU Θl(A1, A 2)l2

 .

Thus, 

l−11 g(A1l1, A 2l2) = 



UΘ, wU Θw−1(l−11 )l(A1, A 2)l2



which means l(A1l1, A 2l2) = w−1(l1)−1l(A1, A 2)l2 by definition. (3) From Lemma 8.9 we know (A1, A 3) are ww ′-transverse. So there exists g ∈ G such that 

g(A1, A 3) = 



UΘ, ww ′UΘl(A1, A 3)



.

Setting A′ 

> 2

:= gA 2, there exist g1, g 2 ∈ G such that 

g1

 UΘ, A ′

> 2

 =  UΘ, wU Θl(A1, A 2)

g2

 A′

> 2

, ww ′UΘl(A1, A 3)) =  UΘ, w ′UΘl(A2, A 3) .

From the second equation, we deduce A′ 

> 2

= wU Θw′(l(A1, A 3)l(A2, A 3)−1), and thus the first equation implies 

l(A1, A 2) = w′(l(A1, A 3)l(A2, A 3)−1)

which implies the lemma. 

□

We now compute some explicit L-distances: 

Lemma 8.10. The decorated flags xi(v)w0UΘ and w0UΘ are ςi∗ -transverse if v ∈ V × 

> i

. In this case the L-distance is given by: 

l xi(v)w0UΘ, w 0UΘ

 = ˇβi∗

 ι(v∗) .

Proof. Let w ∈ W (R) such that w0 = ςiw. Then w0 = wς i∗ We compute in Conf 2(AΘ) using Lemma 4.44: 

 xi(v)w0UΘ, w 0UΘ

 =  xi(v)ςiwU Θ, w 0UΘ

 =  yi(v−1) ˇβi(ι(v)) xi(−v−1)wU Θ, w 0UΘ



=



xi(−v−1)wU Θ, w 0UΘ

  ˇβi(ι(v)) ∗

=



wU Θ, wς i∗ UΘ ˇβi∗

 ι(v∗)

=



UΘ, ς i∗ UΘ ˇβi∗

 ι(v∗)

.

We have used that w−1xi(v′)w ∈ UΘ for any v′ ∈ Vi, since w(βi) is a positive root. □68 ZACHARY GREENBERG, DANI KAUFMAN, MERIK NIEMEYER, AND ANNA WIENHARD 

Corollary 8.11. Let D be a reduced expression of w ∈ W (R) and wk = ςi1 · · · ςik be the length 

k prefixes of D. Let v = ( v1, . . . , v m) with vj ∈ V × 

> ij

for 1 ≤ j ≤ m = ℓ(w). Then: 

l FD (v)w0UΘ, w 0UΘ

 = w∗

> m−1

( ˇβi∗ 

> m

(ι(v∗

> m

)) · w∗

> m−2

( ˇβi∗ 

> m−1

(ι(v∗

> m−1

)) · · · ˇβi∗ 

> 1

(ι(v∗ 

> 1

)) =

> m

Y

> j=1

w∗ 

> m−j

( ˇβi∗ 

> m−j+1

(ι(v∗

> m−j+1

))) ,

where F kD is the prefix R-Lusztig map (see Definition 4.42). Proof. Let F kD = Qkj=1 xij (vj ) be a prefix R-Lusztig map as in Definition 4.42. Since all vj are invertible, we have by Lemma 8.10 that the flags (F kw0UΘ, F k−1w0UΘ) are ςi∗ 

> k

-transverse with 

L-distance l(F kw0U Θ, F k−1w0UΘ) = ˇβi∗ 

> k

(ι(v∗

> k

)) . Application of Proposition 8.8(3) concludes the proof. □

The previous statement allows for a simple computation for a very tricky decomposition if we combine it with the following observation: 

Proposition 8.12. Let D = ςi1 · · · ςim be a reduced expression in W (R). For generic v =(v1, . . . , v m) with vj ∈ V × 

> ij

, the element FD (v)ςim · · · ςi1 is Gauss decomposable with Levi part 

l FD (v)w0UΘ, w 0UΘ

 = [ FD (v)ςim · · · ςi1 ]∗ 

> 0

.

Proof. Let w ∈ W (R) such that w0 = ςim · · · ςi1 w, so that w0 = wς i∗ 

> m

· · · ςi∗ 

> 1

. We Gauss decom-pose 

FD (v)ςim · · · ςi1 = u−lu +

and compute in Conf 2(AΘ):

 FD (v)w0UΘ, w 0UΘ

 =  FD (v)ςim · · · ςi1 wU Θ, w 0UΘ

 =  u+wU Θ, w 0UΘl∗

=  w−1u+wU Θ, w −1w0UΘl∗ =  UΘ, ς i∗ 

> m

· · · ςi∗ 

> 1

UΘl∗ .

The final equality requires a proof that w−1u+w ∈ UΘ, which follows from the root system calculus (Section 4.6). Explicitly, write 

u+ = [ FD (v)ςim · · · ςi1 ]+ = xi1 (v′

> 1

) · ςi1 xi2 (v′

> 2

)ςi1 · · · ςi1 · · · ςim−1 xim (v′

> m

)ςim−1 · · · ςi1

=

> m

Y

> j=1

ςi1 · · · ςij−1 xij (v′ 

> j

)ςij−1 · · · ςi1

for some v′ 

> 1

∈ Vi1 , . . . , v ′ 

> m

∈ Vim . This is generically possible as V × 

> ij

⊂ Vij is dense. Since 

ςij · · · ςi1 w is reduced for any j, w−1ςi1 · · · ςij−1 (βij ) is a positive root, which implies the claim. □

Now we can use Lemma 8.10 to compute the Levi part of elements of the form uww−1 where 

u is an element of UΘ given by a Lusztig type map for a reduced expression of w.

Corollary 8.13. Let D = ςi1 · · · ςim be a reduced expression w ∈ W (R) and wk the word given by the length k prefix of D. Then 

[FD (v)ςim · · · ςi1 ]∗ 

> 0

=

> m

Y

> j=1

w∗ 

> m−j

( ˇβim−j+1 (ι(vm−j+1 ∗))) .

Given a system of Jordan weights {Λi}, we can apply the weights to the L-distance to obtain coordinates, valued in Γ( Ji). To lighten the notation we make the following definition with a small abuse of notation: 

Definition 8.14. Given a system of Jordan weights {Λi} for Θ, we also write Λi for the G-invariant function on A 2Θ defined by: 

Λi(A1, A 2) = Λ i(l(A1, A 2)) .

Also, for Gauss-decomposable g ∈ G we define Λi(g) = Λ i(UΘ, w 0gU Θ) = Λ i([ g]0).NONCOMMUTATIVE CLUSTER VARIETIES AND MODULI SPACES OF LOCAL SYSTEMS 69 

In the noncommutative rank 1 case, there is a unique nontrivial Jordan algebra associated to the pth root. This Jordan algebra has a pair of maps: the structure involution σ, and the adjugate τ (Definitions 2.11 and 2.18). 

Corollary 8.15. For i < p , Λi(sGA2, A 1) = Λ i(A1, A 2). Moreover when i = p, we have 

Λp(sGA2, A 1) = 



σ(Λ p(A1, A 2)) Jordan split type A1

τ (Λ p(A1, A 2)) Jordan split type Bp with p even 

σ(Λ p(A1, A 2)) Jordan split type Bp with p odd 

σ(Λ p(A1, A 2)) Jordan split type G2

Proof. By Proposition 8.8(1) this follows from computing the action of w0 on each pinning map 

ˇβi. For i < p this is independent of Jordan split type and w0( ˇβi(t)) = ˇβi(t−1). For the special Jordan weight, we must compute each case separately. In type A1, w0 = ςp and the action follows by Lemma 4.34. Type Bp is computed in Corollary 13.12 and type G2 in Corollary 13.25. □

9. From Conf × 

> 3

(AΘ) to elementary configurations 

In Section 8.2 we outlined the general strategy of constructing cluster-like coordinates on 

Conf × 

> n

(AΘ). We will now explain in detail how to decompose a configuration [( A1, A 2, A 3)] ∈

Conf × 

> 3

(AΘ) into configurations associated to simple reflections ςi ∈ W (R).9.1. Interpolating sequence. Choose a reduced expression of the longest word, D(w0) = 

ςi1 · · · ςin and a system of Jordan weights. First, we use these choices to compute an interpo-lating sequence of decorated flags between A2 and A3.

Proposition 9.1. Assume that (A2, A 3) ∈ A 2Θ is a generic pair of decorated flags, and that we have a reduced expression D(w0) = ςi1 · · · ςin with ik ∈ { 1, . . . , p } of the longest word in W (R).Let wk = ςi1 · · · ςik . Then there exists a unique chain 

A2 = A02, A 12, . . . , A n 

> 2

= A3

of decorated flags such that (i) (Ak 

> 2

, A k−12 ) are ςik -transverse, (ii) If ˇγk := wk−1( ˇβik ) is simple (equal to ˇβj for some j), then 

l  Ak 

> 2

, A k−12

 = ˇβik (Λ j (l (A3, A 2))) ∈ ˇβik (Γ( Jik )) 

otherwise l  Ak 

> 2

, A k−12

 = 1 .This chain is called the interpolating sequence between A2 and A3 with respect to D(w0).Proof. First we note that there is nothing to prove in the case when p = 1 (∆Θ is A1). Since 

(A2, A 3) is generic, there exists g ∈ G such that 

g(B2, B 3) =  PΘ, w 0PΘ

 ∈ P2Θ

where Bi := π(Ai). Define 

Bk 

> 2

:= g−1ςi1 · · · ςik PΘ .

Then B02 = B2, B n 

> 2

= B3, and  Bk 

> 2

, B k−12

 is ςik -transverse. Condition (ii) along with our choice of Jordan weights uniquely determines the points Ak 

> 2

in the fiber of π over Bk 

> 2

: we have 

l(A3, A 2) = Q 

> i

ˇβi(Λ i(l(A3, A 2))) so we choose Ak 

> 2

so that 

l  Ak 

> 2

, A k−12

 = ˇβik (Λ j (l(A3, A 2))) 

or l  Ak 

> 2

, A k−12

 = 1 appropriately. This proves existence of an interpolating sequence. For uniqueness, we need to prove that the sequence Bk 

> 2

is unique. This is done inductively. It suffices to prove the following: Suppose 

B′, B ∈ PΘ are wς i-transverse where wς i is a reduced word in W (R) for some w ∈ W (R) and 

i ∈ { 1, . . . , p }. Then the flag B′′ ∈ PΘ, that is w-transverse from B′ and ςi-transverse to B, is unique. 70 ZACHARY GREENBERG, DANI KAUFMAN, MERIK NIEMEYER, AND ANNA WIENHARD 

Now, suppose that B = gP Θ, B ′ = g′PΘ, and that B′′  

> 1

= g1PΘ and B′′  

> 2

= g2PΘ are two flags which fulfill the condition above. This means that g−11 g, g −12 g ∈ PΘςiPΘ. Since ς−1 

> i

= ςi, we have g−1g2 ∈ PΘςiPΘ and thus 

g−11 g2 ∈ PΘςiPΘςiPΘ.PΘςiPΘςiPΘ decomposes as a union of cells ` 

> j

PΘς(j) 

> i

PΘ by Proposition 3.45. We wish to show that g−11 g2 is actually in the identity cell. Assume for contradiction that this is not the case. If 

g−11 g2 ∈ PΘς(j) 

> i

PΘ, j̸ = 0 , then 

(g′)−1g2 =  (g′)−1g1

 ·  g−11 g2

 ∈ PΘwP Θς(j) 

> i

PΘ = PΘwς (j) 

> i

PΘ

by Corollary 4.41. This contradicts the assumption that the w-distance between B′′  

> 2

and B′ is 

w. □

Remark 9.2 . The L-distance between A3 and A2 is easily computed from the interpolating sequence by 

l(A3, A 2) = wk1−1(l(Ak1 

> 2

, A k1−12 )) · · · wkp−1(l(Akp 

> 2

, A kp−12 )) 

where ˇγk := wk−1( ˇβik ) is equal to the simple coroot ˇβj .

Definition 9.3. We define an action of (LΘ)3 on Conf 3(AΘ) by (l1, l 2, l 3) · (A1, A 2, A 3) = (A1l∗ 

> 1

, A 2l∗ 

> 2

, A 3l∗ 

> 3

) called the rescaling action .The coinvariants of the rescaling action are configurations of undecorated flags. 

Lemma 9.4. The interpolating flags Bk 

> 2

from the above construction are invariant under the rescaling action. Proof. In the construction Bk 

> 2

only depends on the undecorated flags B2, B 3, which are inde-pendent of the rescaling action. □

9.2. Elementary configurations and their partial potential. For any reduced expression of w0 ∈ W (R), the configurations represented by (A1, A k−12 , A k 

> 2

) are generically elementary configurations for ςik which we define now. 

Definition 9.5. An elementary configuration of decorated flags for ςi ∈ W (R) is an element of Conf 3(AΘ) which can be represented as (A, A l, A r ) ∈ A 3Θ such that: 

• (A, A l) and (A, A r ) are w0-transverse, 

• (Ar , A l) is ςi-transverse, 

• l(Ar , A l) ∈ ˇβi(Γ( Ji)) .We denote the space of elementary configurations for ςi by Conf i

> 3

(AΘ).

AAl Arςi

w0 w0

AAl Ar

ςi∗

w0 w0

Figure 25. Elementary and opposite elementary configurations for ςi.The space of elementary configurations admits a natural parametrization. 

Lemma 9.6. Let (A, A l, A r ) ∈ A 3Θ represent an element of Conf i

> 3

(AΘ). Then there exist unique 

g ∈ G, ll, l r ∈ LΘ and a ∈ V × 

> i

such that 

g(A, A l, A r ) = ( UΘ, w 0UΘll, x i∗ (a∗)w0UΘlr ) .NONCOMMUTATIVE CLUSTER VARIETIES AND MODULI SPACES OF LOCAL SYSTEMS 71 

Definition 9.7. The element a ∈ V × 

> i

only depends on (A, π (Al), π (Ar )) ∈ AΘ × P2Θ and is called the partial potential of the elementary configuration, which is denoted by δi(A, A l, A r ).

Proof (of Lemma 9.6). Since (A, A l) are transverse we have unique g ∈ G and ll ∈ LΘ such that g(A, A l) = ( UΘ, w 0UΘll). Because we also have (A, A r ) are transverse, gA r = uw 0UΘlr

for some u ∈ UΘ, l r ∈ LΘ. But the ςi-transversality of (Ar , A l) implies u ∈ UΘ ∩ P opp Θ ςi∗ P opp Θ .This intersection is exactly xi∗ (V × 

> i∗

) by Proposition 4.39. Thus there is an a ∈ V × 

> i

such that 

u = xi∗ (a∗) as needed. Moreover changing ll and lr leaves u fixed and so a only depends on 

π(Al) and π(Ar ). □

9.2.1. Computing partial potentials. Let (A, A l, A r ) ∈ A 3Θ represent an elementary configuration in Conf i

> 3

(AΘ). The LΘ-distances ll = l(A, A l), l r = l(A, A r ) together with the partial potential induce an embedding 

Conf i

> 3

(AΘ) ,→ L2Θ × V × 

> i

.

There is a relation which determines the image of the embedding which is given in Corollary 10.3 for lower noncommutative rank and in Remark 10.5 for higher noncommutative rank. Set lb := l(Ar , A l) ∈ ˇβi(Γ( Ji)) . We can express lb in terms of ll, l r , the partial potential 

a := δi(A, A l, A r ) ∈ Vi.

Proposition 9.8. For ll, l r , l b and a as above we have: 

lb = ςi(l−1 

> r

) ˇβi

 ι(a)ll .

Proof. We see that lb = ςi(l−1 

> r

)l(xi∗ (a∗)w0UΘ, w 0UΘ)ll by Proposition 8.8(2). Then Lemma 8.10 tells us that the inner L-distance is given by ˇβi(ι(a)) as needed. □

We can also understand the structure of the rescaling action on the potentials: 

Proposition 9.9. The rescaling action restricted to the top flag A in an elementary configura-tion transforms the potential by δi(Aℓ, A l, A r ) = βi(ςi(ℓ))( δi(A, A l, A r )) 

Proof. The potential does not depend on on the decorations of A2, A 3 so 

(Aℓ ∗, B l, B r ) = ( UΘℓ∗, w 0PΘ, x i∗ (a∗)w0PΘ) = 



UΘ, w 0PΘ, ℓ ∗− 1xi∗ (a∗)ℓ∗ w0PΘ



Now noting that w0ℓ∗− 1xi∗ (a∗)ℓ∗w0 = ℓy i(−a)ℓ−1 = yi(βi(ςi(ℓ)( −a)) computes the action on the potential a. □

9.2.2. Opposite elementary configurations. We now consider another parameterization of ele-mentary configurations. These will be useful when computing flips in Section 12.1 and actions of the cluster modular group in Section 17.6. 

Definition 9.10. The set of opposite elementary configurations , Conf ¯i

> 3

(AΘ), is the set of triples (Al, A r , A ) ∈ A 3Θ for which 

• (Al, A ) and (Ar , A ) are w0-transverse, 

• (Al, A r ) is ςi∗ -transverse, 

• l(Al, A r ) ∈ ˇβi∗ (Γ( Ji∗ )) .

Lemma 9.11. There is an isomorphism 

flip : Conf i

> 3

(AΘ) → Conf ¯i∗ 

> 3

(AΘ) (A, A l, A r ) 7 → (Al := Ar , A r := Al, s GA) .

We can write opposite elementary configurations in a convenient standard from: 

(Al, A r , A ) = ( UΘ(ll)∗, y i∗ (b∗)UΘ(lr )∗, w 0UΘ)

with ll = l(Al, A ), l r = l(Ar , A ) ∈ LΘ and b ∈ Vi.

Definition 9.12. The element b =: δ¯i(Al, A r , A ) ∈ Vi is the partial potential of (Al, A r , A ).The following lemma, proves this potential is same as the potential for an ordinary elementary configuration. 72 ZACHARY GREENBERG, DANI KAUFMAN, MERIK NIEMEYER, AND ANNA WIENHARD 

Lemma 9.13. Let (sGA, A l, A r ) ∈ Conf i∗ 

> 3

(AΘ) be the flip of (Al, A r , A ) ∈ Conf ¯i

> 3

(AΘ). Then 

δ¯i(Al, A r , A )∗ = δi∗ (sGA, A l, A r ).

Proof. This follows by direct computation. Let b = δ¯i(Al, A r , A ), ll = l(Al, A ) and lr = l(Ar , A ).

(sGA, A l, A r ) = ( sGA, A r , A l) ∼ (sg w0UΘ, y i∗ (b∗)UΘ(lr )∗, U Θ(ll)∗) .

By Proposition 8.8, (lr )∗ = l(sGA, A r ) = l(sGA, A l) =: ll and (ll)∗ = l(sGA, A r ) =: lr . Applying 

w0 to the configuration results in 

(sGA, A l, A r ) ∼ (UΘ, w 0yi∗ (b∗)w0w0UΘll, w 0UΘlr ) .

By Lemma 8.7, w0yi∗ (b∗)w0 = xi(−b). Thus 

(sGA, A l, A r ) ∼ (UΘ, x i(−b)w0UΘll, w 0UΘlr ) ∼ (UΘ, w 0UΘll, x i(b)w0UΘlr ) .

From this standard form we see δi∗ (sGA, A l, A r ) = b as claimed. □

Corollary 9.14. For ll = l(Al, A ), l r = l(Ar , A ), l t = l(Al, A r ) and b = δ¯i(Al, A r , A ) ∈ Vi as above we have: 

lt =  lr ˇβi

 ι(b)ςi(ll)−1∗ .

Thus the potential of an opposite elementary configuration can be computed as follows, 

ˇβi

 ι(b) = ( lr )−1(lt)∗ςi(ll) .

Proof. As before take (Al, A r , A ) to be the flip of the elementary configuration (sGA, A l, A r ) ∈

Conf i∗ 

> 3

. By Proposition 9.8, lb = l(Ar , A l) = ςi∗ (l−1 

> r

) ˇβi∗

 ι(b∗)ll. Then since lr = ll∗ and ll = lr ∗

we have, 

lt = lb = ςi∗ (l−1 

> r

) ˇβi∗

 ι(b∗)ll =  lr ˇβi

 ι(b)ςi(ll)−1∗ .

□

9.2.3. Reflection maps. 

Definition 9.15. The left reflection map r : Conf i

> 3

(AΘ) → Conf ¯i

> 3

(AΘ) is given by 

r(A, A l, A r ) = ( A′, A, A r )

where A′ is the unique decorated flag so that 

(A′, A ) are ςi∗ -transverse , (A′, A l) are ςi∗ w0-transverse , l(A′, A ) = l(Ar , A l)∗ .

There is an analogous right reflection map which creates an opposite configuration by replac-ing Ar with a new flag A′.The left reflection map is visualized in Figure 26. 

AAl Ar

A′

ςi

ςi∗

ςi∗ w0

w0

Ar

A′ AAl

ςi∗

w0

Figure 26. Left reflection map for elementary configurations. 

Proposition 9.16. The standard form for the left reflection is 

r(UΘ, w 0UΘll, x i∗ (a∗)w0UΘlr ) = ( UΘ(ll)∗, y i∗ (b∗)UΘ(lr )∗, w 0UΘ)

where b = βi(l−1 

> r

)( a−1), ll = ςi(l−1 

> b

lll−1 

> b

) and lr = lr .NONCOMMUTATIVE CLUSTER VARIETIES AND MODULI SPACES OF LOCAL SYSTEMS 73 

Proof. First we compute that with l′ = ςi∗ (lb∗)−1,

r(UΘ, w 0UΘll, x i∗ (a∗)w0UΘlr ) = ( ςi∗ UΘl′, U Θ, x i∗ (a∗)w0UΘlr ) .

Next, we use Lemma 4.44 to decompose xi∗ (−a∗)ςi = yi∗ (−(a∗)−1) ˇβi∗ (ι(a∗)) xi∗ (( a∗)−1) so that this configuration is the same as 

(UΘ ˇβi∗ (a∗)l′, y i∗ (( a∗)−1)UΘ, w 0UΘlr )

which is the same as 

(UΘl∗ 

> r

ˇβi∗ (a∗)l′, l ∗ 

> r

yi∗ (( a∗)−1)) l∗

> r
> −1

UΘl∗ 

> r

, w 0UΘ).

By applying the opposition involution to l∗ 

> r

yi∗ (( a∗)−1)) l∗ 

> r−1

, we can compute 



l∗ 

> r

yi∗ (( a∗)−1)) l∗

> r
> −1

∗

= l−1 

> r

xi(a−1)lr = xi(βi(l−1 

> r

)( a−1)) .

Therefore we have b = βi(l−1 

> r

)( a−1) and lr = lr . By rearranging Proposition 9.8 we have 

ˇβi

 ι(a) = ςi(lr )lbl−1 

> l

.

Since the structure involution fixes the image of ι, we have 

ˇβi

 ι(a) = ςi

  ˇβi(ι(a))  = ςi(lll−1 

> b

)l−1 

> r

.

Now we compute 

(l′)∗ ˇβi(ι(a)) lr = ςi(lb)−1 ˇβi(ι(a)) lr = ςi(lb)−1ςi(lll−1 

> b

)l−1 

> r

lr = ςi(l−1 

> b

lll−1 

> b

) ,

which finally implies ll = ςi(l−1 

> b

lll−1 

> b

). □

Lemma 9.17. The reflected potential b = βi(l−1 

> r

)( a−1) is given in terms of L-distances in the original configuration by 

l−1 

> r

lll−1 

> b

= ˇβi(ι(b)) .

Proof. Starting with lb = ςi(l−1 

> r

) ˇβi

 ι(a)ll we rearrange to find 

l−1 

> r

lll−1 

> b

= l−1 

> r

ˇβi

 ι(a−1)ςi(lr ) = ˇβi

 ι(βi(l−1 

> r

)( a−1))  = ˇβi(b).

□

10. Cluster Coordinates on elementary configurations of Θ-flags 

Now that we understand how to reduce a configuration of three decorated flags to a series of elementary configurations, we can start the process of constructing coordinates by first en-dowing the elementary configuration spaces with appropriate coordinates which are suitable for amalgamation in the next step. 10.1. Partial potentials in noncommutative rank 1. We now specialize to noncommu-tative rank 1 , i.e. the Jordan split type is either A1, B p or G2. Observe that in these cases the opposition involution on the (co)root system is trivial, while it may be nontrivial on LΘ.Recall that we index the Dynkin diagram such that the noncommutative root has index p. We denote the corresponding Jordan algebra Jp =: J. All roots βi with i < p are commutative. 

Corollary 10.1. The partial potential a = δ(A, A l, A r ) for a ςp-elementary configuration fulfills 

σ Λp(lr )−1Λp(lb)Λ p(ll)−1 · Λp−1(lr ) = ι(a)

with ll = l(A, A l), l r = l(A, A r ), l b = l(Ar , A l).Proof. Rearrange the equation from Proposition 9.8 and apply Λp to both sides. By defini-tion Λp only sees the image of ˇβp. So by Lemmas 4.34 and 4.35 we see that Λp(ςp(lr )) = 

σ(Λ p(lr )) −1Λp−1(lr ). □74 ZACHARY GREENBERG, DANI KAUFMAN, MERIK NIEMEYER, AND ANNA WIENHARD 

Proposition 10.2. Let (A, A l, A r ) represent an element in Conf i

> 3

(AΘ) for i < p . The partial potential is computed by the following formula: 

δi(A, A l, A r ) = Λi(lb)Λi(ll)Λ i(lr ) · Λi−1(ll)Λ i+1 (ll)

δp−1(A, A l, A r ) = Λp−1(lb)Λp−1(ll)Λ p−1(lr ) · Λp−2(ll)N (Λ p(ll)) .

Proof. This is [GS19, Lemma 11.12]. It also follows by analogous computation to Corollary 10.1. 

□

Corollary 10.3. Let (A, A l, A r ) represent a configuration in Conf p

> 3

(AΘ). Then for any i < p 

Λi(A, A l) = Λ i(A, A r ) .

Proof. This is essentially the same as [GS19, Lemma 11.13]. We know that lb ∈ ˇβp(Γ( J)) by definition of the elementary configuration. Applying Λj for j̸ = i to the equation for lb, we find 

1 = Λ j (ςi(ll)) −1Λj (lr ) and thus 

Λj (lr ) = Λ j (ςi(ll)) = Λ j (ll)

where the last equality holds because j̸ = i. □

10.2. Elementary seeds in lower noncommutative rank. To each elementary configuration we associate an elementary seed of a polygonal cluster algebra. The cluster coordinates will be given by Jordan weights applied to l(A, A l), l(A, A r ), l(Ar , A l).The quivers of the elementary seed E◦(i) for 1 ≤ i ≤ p will be based on the quivers defined in [GS19]: We think of the plane as having different levels 1, . . . , p . E◦(i) has one node labeled j on every level j̸ = i, and two nodes labeled il, i r on level i. These are connected by an arrow from 

il to ir , and there are half-arrows from ir to i + 1 and i − 1, and from i − 1 and i + 1 to il. The nodes on level p have weight r, on all other levels they have weight 1. The elementary quiver 

E(i) is obtained from E◦(i) by adding an additional frozen node labeled ib of the same weight as the nodes on level i attached in an oriented cycle of full edges. See Figure 27 for examples. 12            

> ...p
> 1
> ...i−1
> ii+ 1
> ...p...p−2
> p−1
> p...p−1
> p
> 1
> ...i−1
> ii+ 1
> ...p

Figure 27. The elementary quivers E◦(1) , E (i), E ◦(p − 1) , E ◦(p), E  ¯i.The cluster coordinates are given as follows: (11) ail = Λ i(A, A l) air = Λ i(A, A r ) aib = Λ i(Ar , A l)

aj = Λ j (A, A l) = Λ j (A, A r ) for j̸ = i

For i < p , the only noncommutative node can be weaved or switched without affecting the mutation relations at any other node. In fact, the potential can be recovered by the same formula as in [GS19] when we remember that small nodes only “see” N (ap) in this case. The quiver for i = p requires additional decoration to specify a quiver in a polygonal cluster algebra. In Figure 28 we see this both as an ordered quiver and as a polygonal tile representing NONCOMMUTATIVE CLUSTER VARIETIES AND MODULI SPACES OF LOCAL SYSTEMS 75 

> pl
> pb
> pr
> ...

(a) E(p) (b) E(p) 

> plpr
> ...

(c) E◦(p) (d) E◦(p)

Figure 28. Elementary ordered seeds and pruned polygonal tiles with angles. the pruned quiver. These decorations are chosen so that the potential is recovered (up to commutative multiplication) by the angle based near the top vertex. 

Lemma 10.4. The potential δp(A, A l, A r ) is computed as 

(12) ι(δp(A, A l, A r )) = ∆ 1

N (apl )N (apr ) ap−1

where the angle ∆ is defined by the angle path going around the polygon which starts near the end of the angle indicator, as shown in green in Figure 28. Proof. This is a simple computation. According to Definition 6.16 the angle is given by: 

∆ = στ (apr )( apb )τ (apl )

with apb = 1 for the quiver E◦(p). Scaling by the norms converts τ (apl ) and στ (apr ) into a−1

> pl

and σ(a−1 

> pr

) as needed to match the formula in Corollary 10.1. □

10.3. Elementary networks in higher noncommutative rank. Now let G ≃ GL p+1 (R)

for R a finite dimensional algebra over K. Recall that in this case we have LΘ ≃ GL 1(R)p+1 .Let (A, A l, A r ) represent a configuration in Conf i

> 3

(AΘ). This determines three L-distances: 

ll = l(A, A l) = ( L1, · · · , L p+1 ),lr = l(A, A r ) = ( R1, · · · , R p+1 ),lb = l(Ar , A l) = (1 , · · · , B i, B i+1 , · · · , 1) .

We construct an elementary network associated with this configuration modeled on the plabic graphs associated to wiring diagrams [FWZ21]. The outer edges of the network E(i) are assigned elements of GL 1(R) from the three L-distances as in Figure 29. All the internal edge weights are determined by this assignment and the rule that the cyclic product around each vertex is 1. 

Remark 10.5 . The vertex relations for E(i) immediately imply that for j / ∈ { i, i + 1 }, Rj = Lj .The final vertex relation around the central • vertex has the form Bi+1 L−1 

> i+1

·Ri+1 Bi ·L−1 

> i

Ri = 1 .This is equivalent to Proposition 9.8 which relates the partial potential D = δi(A, A l, A r ) ∈

Vi∗ to the L-distances. In this case, Proposition 9.8 takes the form 



...R−1

> i+1

R−1

> i

...



...DD−1

...



...Li

Li+1 

...

 =



...R−1

> i+1

DL i

R−1 

> i

D−1Li+1 

...

 =



...Bi

Bi+1 

...

 .

Proposition 10.6. Choose Θ weights Λi which are faithful on the root βi. Then the potential 

D = δi(A, A l, A r ) is given by 

ι(D∗) = σi(Λ i(lr ))Λ i(lb)Λ i(ll)−1.76 ZACHARY GREENBERG, DANI KAUFMAN, MERIK NIEMEYER, AND ANNA WIENHARD 

1

L1 R−11... ...iLi R−1

> i

i + 1 

Li+1 R−1

> i+1

... ...p + 1 

Lp+1 R−1

> p+1

i + 1 iB−1 

> i+1

B−1

> i

1

L1 R−11... ...iLi R−1

> i

i + 1 

Li+1 R−1

> i+1

... ...p + 1 

Lp+1 R−1

> p+1

Figure 29. The weighted elementary networks E(i) and E◦(i).Thus, we can use the partial potential to label the networks with a free collection of elements in GL 1(R), L1, · · · , L p+1 , B i, B i+1 , D as in Figure 30. The analogous weighting for E◦(i) is given by setting Bi = Bi+1 = 1 and removing the legs. 1

L1 L−11... ...iLi Bi+1 L−1

> i+1

Di + 1 

Li+1 BiL−1 

> i

D−1

... ...p + 1 

Lp+1 L−1

> p+1

i + 1 iB−1 

> i+1

B−1

> i

Figure 30. The elementary networks E(i) weighted with the potential. We will also use these networks to describe elementary configurations for groups G with a 

Cp-grading. In this case, R has an anti-involution ⋆ and G ≃ Sp 2p(R, ⋆ ) by the recognition theorem (Theorem 3.15). Then G is a subgroup of GL 2p and will use elementary networks of 

GL 2p to describe those for G. In particular, for i < p the elementary configuration Conf i

> 3

(AΘ)

is represented by the amalgamation of E(i) and E(i∗) for GL 2p with the additional constraint that elements of l ∈ LΘ, l = ( L1, . . . , L 2p) ⊂ GL 2p(R) now satisfy that Li = ⋆(L−12p−i+1 ). We will assign elementary networks with 2p strands which are symmetric by reflecting along the line between strands p, p + 1 exchanging labels under this action. For Conf p

> 3

(AΘ) we use the network E(p) for GL 2p with the extra symmetry on strand weights. In Figure 31 we see the two networks needed to parameterize type C2.In order to recover the L-distances from the network, we consider a path from infinity to the ground which passes through p + 1 strands. If the strand crossed at height i is labeled X with 

• on the right, the ith component of the L-distance is X. If instead ◦ is on the right, the ith 

component is X−1. When this path is homomotopic to a side of the network without crossing any bridges or legs it recovers the L-distance of that side. Similarly, the path parallel to the ground traveling from the right side to the left side recovers 

lb. The index of the legs is given by the strand it lands on after sliding it to the left past all NONCOMMUTATIVE CLUSTER VARIETIES AND MODULI SPACES OF LOCAL SYSTEMS 77 

1

L1 B2L−12 D

2

L2 B1L1D−1

3

⋆L −12 ⋆(B1L−11 D−1)−1

4

⋆L −11 ⋆(B2L−12 D)−1

2 1

B−12 B−11

4 3

⋆B 1

⋆B 2

1

L1 L−11

2

L2 B2L−12 D

3

⋆L −12 B1L−11 D−1

4

⋆L −11 ⋆L 1

3 2

⋆B 2 B−12

Figure 31. The weighted elementary networks Θ type C2.bridges. By construction this path always has ◦ vertices on the right, so all the entries of the 

L-distance will be the inverse of the weight in the network. 11. Triples of Θ-flags 

The results of the previous section imply the following lemma: 

Lemma 11.1. The {Ji} points of the noncommutative cluster variety AE(i) parameterize the elementary configuration space Conf i

> 3

(AΘ).

Note that there are no mutable vertices or possible square moves at this point, so this cluster variety is really just a noncommutative torus. Now we will amalgamate these cluster varieties into one which describes generic triples of flags. Consider a triple (A1, A 2, A 3) of pairwise transverse flags in AΘ. Then there exist g ∈ G,

l2, l 3 ∈ LΘ and u3 ∈ UΘ such that 

g(A1, A 2, A 3) = ( UΘ, w 0UΘl2, u 3w0UΘl3) .

Proposition 11.2. The map 

Conf × 

> 3

(AΘ) → LΘ × LΘ × UΘ

(A1, A 2, A 3) 7 → (l2, l 3, u 3)

is an open dense embedding. Proof. The image of the map on the UΘ-factor is UΘ ∩ P opp Θ w0P opp Θ , which is an open dense subset of UΘ. □

We now describe how to assemble the cluster charts for elementary configurations into a cluster chart for a triple of flags: We fix a reduced expression D(w0) = ςi1 · · · ςin for the longest word w0 in W (R). Given a triple (A1, A 2, A 3) ∈ AΘ which represents an element of Conf × 

> 3

(AΘ),we may use this reduced expression to compute an interpolating sequence {Ak 

> 2

} between A2 and 

A3. As we have seen we obtain elementary configurations (A1, A k 

> 2

, A k+1 2 ) in this way, and we constructed elementary seeds/networks for each elementary configuration space. We can now amalgamate these elementary seeds according to the reduced expression D(w0) to obtain a cluster chart for AΘ.11.1. Amalgamating. Depending on the noncommutative rank, we need to amalgamate either polygonal quivers or noncommutative networks. 78 ZACHARY GREENBERG, DANI KAUFMAN, MERIK NIEMEYER, AND ANNA WIENHARD 

11.1.1. Noncommutative rank 1. The seeds for each elementary quiver are planar, and so it makes sense to amalgamate adjacent frozen nodes at the same level. For each k, let k+ be the next index for which ik = ik+ . At the end of the process every node at level ik in the elementary seeds between ik and ik+ will be amalgamated. Due to Corollary 10.3 these nodes are assigned equal functions, and thus every node has an associated function on Conf × 

> 3

(A ). Observe that the extra decoration which turned E(p) into an ordered quiver is chosen such that it makes sense to amalgamate on level p. The half-arrows either combine to give a full arrow if they are oriented the same way or cancel if they have opposite orientations. Internal nodes become unfrozen. The extra nodes on the bottom are connected with half edges oriented from left to right according to the adjacency of the coroots ˇβk in the associated Dynkin diagram. For more details see [GS19]. The resulting quiver has three components of frozen nodes connected by half arrows: the left nodes of the initial elementary seed, the right nodes of the final elementary seed, and the bottom nodes consisting of the extra frozen nodes. By Remark 9.2, ∆p(A3, A 2) = wk−1( ˇβp(A)) where 

wk−1 is the prefix of the reduced expression which returns ˇβp to itself and l(Ak 

> 2

, A k−12 ) = ˇβp(A).As we saw in Lemma 4.34, the action of wk−1 might not be trivial on the special coroot space. This is not a problem, as the difference can only be application of the involution στ . The final step in this construction is then to weave at the frozen weight r node so the function agrees with ∆p(A3, A 2). We compute the action of wk−1 specifically for type Bp in Lemma 13.16 and for type G2 in Lemma 13.24. 11.1.2. Higher noncommutative rank. Our choice of Jordan weights factors into our construction of the interpolating sequence. In higher noncommutative rank we amalgamate our networks simply by gluing their adjacent boundary black vertices on the same strands together. This produces a grounded wiring network with edge weights as the gluing respects the cyclic product condition. However, the amalgamated network has 2p legs and we would like a network with exactly p + 1 legs so that the ground side matches the left and right. Sliding (Definition 7.6) each leg to the left past all the brides identifies a unique strand for each leg. All legs with the same label can be replaced by a single leg whose weight is the product of the weights. By the construction of the system of Jordan weights, the product is independent of the order even though the ring itself is noncommutative. 

Definition 11.3. A grounded wiring network obtained by sliding all the legs to the left of all the bridges and reducing to at most one leg per strand is called left slid .

Proposition 11.4. The left slid grounded wiring network obtained is independent of the choice of system of Jordan weights. Proof. Let fA2 be such that its undecorated flag is the same as A2 but l(A3, fA2) = 1 . Now, every choice of Jordan weights gives the same interpolating sequence between eA2 and A3. The grounded wiring network obtained from amalgamating elementary networks for the interpolating sequence between eA2 and A3 is the same as the left slid network other than the leftmost labels and the legs. Clearly this is true for any choice of Jordan weights. Furthermore, different systems Jordan weights change the decomposition lb = Q ˇβi(Λ i(lb)) but not the final projection to the 

ith component. This projection is the weight of the leg of the ith strand and thus is independent of the choice of Jordan weights. Therefore the left slid network is independent as claimed. □

Corollary 11.5. The amalgamated elementary networks associated to two different choices of Jordan weights are equivalent by leg slides. 

11.2. Cluster charts. The result of the construction is a set of functions on Conf × 

> 3

(AΘ) and an ordered quiver or network which indexes the functions. 

Definition 11.6. A set of functions on Conf × 

> 3

(AΘ) arising from this construction is called a 

cluster chart for Conf × 

> 3

(AΘ). These functions live on the nodes of an ordered quiver or edges of a network we denote by QD, 1, where D is the reduced expression of w0. We write AD, 1 for the noncommutative torus for which QD, 1 is the group of monomial functions. NONCOMMUTATIVE CLUSTER VARIETIES AND MODULI SPACES OF LOCAL SYSTEMS 79 

Remark 11.7 . The superscript 1 is used to distinguish these charts from the ‘rotated’ ones that we will introduce in Section 11.4. We note that unlike the commutative charts, these functions satisfy multiplicative relations. Nevertheless they replace the ordinary cluster charts of [GS19] and can be mutated like ordinary cluster charts. 

Definition 11.8. A generalized mutation is any of the following operations from in Part 2. 

• Mutation of polygonal quivers (Definition 6.25) 

• Square moves of weighted networks (Definition 7.7) 

• Switching/ Weaving of noncommutative nodes (Definition 6.14) 

• Leg slides (Definition 7.6) 

• Regrounding a planar network (Definition 7.9) The first two operations are birational transformations and replace the standard mutation of commutative cluster algebras. Switching or weaving at a noncommutative node k results in essentially the same set of functions with a different representative of {Xk, σ (Xk), τ (Xk), στ (Xk)}

chosen for the node. Similarly changing the ground, changes the underlying combinatorial representation but leaves all the functions the same. The final operation of a leg slide is slightly more complicated. It results in “the same chart”, but with the functions changed by a noncommutative monomial transformation. 

Definition 11.9. Let H be a group, h1, h 2 ∈ H. A noncommutative monomial transfor-mation is a map H → H expressed by mh1,h 2 (g) := h1gh −12 .There is another important monomial transformation on cluster charts for AΘ given by the rescaling action (Definition 9.3). 

Proposition 11.10. The rescaling action acts on the functions in any cluster chart via pull back along a noncommutative monomial transformation. Proof. This follows from Proposition 8.8 and Lemma 9.4; the rescaling action rescales all of the flags in the interpolating sequence used to make our cluster charts and the second property of the L−distance is clearly a monomial transformation. □

Our main goal will be to prove: 

Theorem 11.11. The noncommutative cluster variety A|QD, 1| contains a torus for each cluster chart associated to all reduced expressions D′ of w0 and the rotated cluster charts. Its {Ji}

points parameterize open dense subsets of Conf × 

> 3

(AΘ).

The cluster charts we have seen so far depend on the choice of a reduced expression for 

w0 ∈ W (R) in Steps 2 and 3. We will prove Theorem 11.11 for charts obtained by changing the reduced expression in Section 11.3. First, we establish that these cluster charts deserve to be called charts for Conf × 

> 3

(AΘ). For this we need: 

Lemma 11.12. The functions from a cluster chart evaluated on any element of Conf × 

> 3

(AΘ)

define a {Ji}-point of AD, 1.Proof. In the quiver case we check that all angles are mapped to the image of ι. This holds by the construction of the elementary seeds, the angles at the weight r nodes recover ι(v∗) for 

v ∈ V the potential of the elementary quiver. In the network case, the Jordan algebra is special and the edge weights live in the specializing ring R. □

Next we need the converse, that each Jordan point corresponds to a triple of decorated flags. 

Theorem 11.13. The J-points of AD, 1 parametrize an open dense subset of Conf × 

> 3

(AΘ).Proof. We will show that the J-points parameterize the set of elements of Conf × 

> 3

(AΘ) which can be represented as 

(A1, A 2, A 3) = ( UΘ, w 0UΘl2, F D (ti1 , . . . , t in )w0UΘl3)80 ZACHARY GREENBERG, DANI KAUFMAN, MERIK NIEMEYER, AND ANNA WIENHARD 

with tik ∈ V × 

> i

. Since the R-Lusztig map (Definition 4.42) has open dense image in UΘ, this set of triples is dense in Conf × 

> 3

(AΘ).Notice that we use the R-Lusztig map for the same reduced expression D for the chart. The image of the interpolating sequence {Ak 

> 2

} under the projection π : AΘ → PΘ,

Bk 

> 2

=



> k−1

Y

> j=1

xij (tj )

 w0PΘ ,

recovers the Lusztig map factor by factor. Thus the partial potential of the elementary config-uration (A1, A k−12 , A k 

> 2

) recovers the parameter tk. By Corollary 10.1, the partial potential is a simple function of the J-points. Since l(A1, A 2) = l2 and l(A1, A 3) = l3, we can compute the re-maining parameters from the points associated to the left/right edges of the triangle. Therefore, any such configuration can be reconstructed from the J-coordinates as needed. □

11.3. Changing reduced expression. We will now explain how cluster charts coming from different reduced expressions of w0 ∈ W (R) are related. Reduced expressions can be changed from one to another by the following moves [BB05]: 

Proposition 11.14. Let {ςi | 1 ≤ i ≤ p} denote the standard generators of the Weyl group 

W (R) corresponding to the root grading. Any two reduced expressions of w ∈ W can be related by a finite sequence of the following braid moves :

Two Move ςiςj = ςj ςi for |i − j| > 1.

Three Move ςiςi+1 ςi = ςi+1 ςiςi+1 for 1 ≤ i ≤ p − 2

Four Move ςp−1ςpςp−1ςp = ςp−1ςpςp−1ςp (Bp/C p case) 

Six Move ς1ς2ς1ς2ς1ς2 = ς2ς1ς2ς1ς2ς1 (G2 case). 

Thus, to prove Theorem 11.11 it suffices to show that each braid move is realized by a sequence of mutations. 

Lemma 11.15 (Two Move) . The seeds given by two words which differ by a two move only differ in the indexing of the functions. Proof. Let 1 ≤ i, j ≤ p with |i − j| > 1. Clearly, the quiver obtained by amalgamating E(i)

and E(j) is the same as the one obtained by amalgamating E(j) with E(i). According to Corollary 10.3 all the functions can be computed in terms of the two decorated flags with W -distance ςiςj = ςj ςi, and are thus independent of whether we use ςiςj or ςj ςi to obtain the interpolating flag. □

The three move in noncommutative rank 1 is proved essentially the same way as in [GS19]: 

Lemma 11.16 (Three move, NC Rank 1) . The seeds given by two words which differ by a three move ςiςi+1 ςi → ςi+1 ςiςi+1 are related by a single mutation at the single mutable node of the subquiver E(i, i + 1 , i ).Proof. We see that the subquivers E(i, i + 1 , i ) and E(i + 1 , i, i + 1) in Figure 32. Label the functions as indicated in the figure. By Corollary 10.3 we observe that all the functions at the frozen nodes can be calculated in terms of the decorated flags with W -distance ςiςi+1 ςi which are independent of this choice of interpolating sequence. This justifies labeling the frozen nodes the same in both quivers in Figure 32. Thus, it suffices to verify the following identity relating the functions at the mutable node: 

XX ′ = Xli Xri+1 Xei + Xli+1 Xri Xei+1 ,

which can equivalently be written as 

1

Xli Xri

· X′Xi−1 = Xei

XX ri

· Xri+1 Xi−1 + Xei+1 

XX li

· Xli+1 Xi−1 .

The terms in this equation are by Proposition 10.2 the partial potentials for the elementary configurations for ςi associated to the two interpolating sequences. Thus the equation holds by NONCOMMUTATIVE CLUSTER VARIETIES AND MODULI SPACES OF LOCAL SYSTEMS 81 

1

...i − 1

ii + 1 

i + 2 

...Xi−1

Xli

XXli+1 

Xri

Xri+1 

Xi+2 

Xei+1 Xei

1

...i − 1

ii + 1 

i + 2 

...Xi−1

Xli Xri

Xli+1 

X′

Xri+1 

Xi+2 

Xei Xei+1 

Figure 32. Three Move: The quivers E(i, i + 1 , i ) and E(i + 1 , i, i + 1) .the additivity of the potential at height i. Essentially, this boils down to the equation [Lus94] 

xi(a)xi+1 (b)xi(c) = xi+1 

 bc a + c



xi(a + c)xi+1 

 ab a + c



.

□

We leave the remaining calculations to later sections, the higher noncommutative rank three move in Section 14.1.2, the four move for Bp in in Section 13.2.6, the four move for Cp in in Section 14.2.2, and the six move for G2 in Section 13.3.1 respectively. 11.4. Rotation. The notion of positivity in flag varieties is inspired by tuples on the circle which follow an orientation. In this case any cyclic rearrangement preserves this notion of positivity. This is also true for generic configurations in PΘ but not in decorated flag varieties. Instead, we need to use the central element sG ∈ G:

Definition 11.17. The twisted cyclic shift map tw : Conf × 

> 3

(AΘ) → Conf × 

> 3

(AΘ) is defined by 

tw : ( A1, A 2, A 3) 7 → (sGA2, A 3, A 1) .

We can obtain additional cluster charts of Conf × 

> 3

(AΘ) by precomposing the above construc-tion with the twisted cyclic shift: 

Definition 11.18. The rotated cluster charts are obtained by applying the previous con-struction to the triples tw( A1, A 2, A 3), respectively tw 2(A1, A 2, A 3). The coordinate functions are indexed by quivers/networks QD, 2, respectively QD, 3, where D is a reduced expression of 

w0 ∈ W (R).Clearly, all the results about the original cluster charts also apply to the rotated ones. For the discussion of decorated twisted local systems in Section 17 the following result is crucial: 

Proposition 11.19. The twisted cyclic shift is realized by a sequence of generalized mutations. Proof. This is trivial to prove in the A1 case as our cluster charts are already rotationally symmetric up to the orientation of the edges of the triangle. But the choices were made exactly so that the difference between the ordered quivers is a switch at the corresponding node, while the functions are related by the opposition involution, which is exactly σ in the A1 case. The Ap case is proved by changing the choice of ground in the honeycomb GL p+1 network (Figure 23). The GL p+1 network is the network constructed using the word ς1 · ς2ς1 · ς3ς2ς1 ·82 ZACHARY GREENBERG, DANI KAUFMAN, MERIK NIEMEYER, AND ANNA WIENHARD 

. . . · ςpςp−1 . . . ς 1. So we first use braid transformations to move to this chart, then we change the choice of ground, and finally we undo the braid transformations. The Cp case follows from the A2p−1 case since in this case our charts are really just the same as charts for groups of type 

A2p−1 and we can rotate using the same procedure. For the Bp and G2 cases we prove this in Sections 13.2.7 and 13.3.1 via an explicit calculation. This is slightly more involved even for the edge functions since the opposition involution is not always σ but can also be τ on Γ( J), in which case one has to weave and switch at the corresponding node. □

Corollary 11.20. If c ∈ Conf × 

> 3

(AΘ) is a positive configuration, so is tw( c).

11.5. Changing orientations. Given a triple (A1, A 2, A 3) ∈ A 3Θ, we have assigned a total order given by A1 → A3 → A2 in the construction of cluster charts, and we have computed the functions associated to frozen edges accordingly: If Ai → Aj , the functions on the corresponding edge are given by Λi(Ai, A j ). We have seen that for the rotated cluster charts the edge functions are related to the original ones via the opposition involution. In this spirit we could upgrade the construction of cluster charts even further by allowing arbitrary orientations for the edges of the triangle and computing the edge functions as follows: If the orientation of an edge Ai → Aj is compatible with the total order, we assign the functions 

Λi(Ai, A j ), otherwise we assign Λi(Aj , A i)∗.

Example 11.21 . Consider the triangle with the side edges oriented “up” from A2 → A1 and 

A3 → A1 when G is B2-graded. In Figure 33, we see the polygonal quiver for the standard case and with the edge orientation changed. In this case the opposition involution fixes the root system, but acts via the involution τ on the p = 2 root space (Corollary 13.13). We observe that in order to amalgamate the elementary quiver to the sides, we first weave and switch at the boundary. Note these operations preserve the angle and the partial potential.               

> UΘ
> w0UΘl2uw 0UΘl3
> BDacacxyN (v)yτ (D)wvB UΘ
> w0UΘl2uw 0UΘl3
> τ(B)τ(D)
> acacxyN (v)yτ (D)wvB

Figure 33. Changing orientation of edges in type B2.

Example 11.22 . We now consider a similar example when G is A2-graded. In this group, the opposition involution acts by reversing the order of components and applying the inverse: l =[A, B, C ] 7 → [C−1, B −1, A −1]). This action preserves the edge weights assigned to the edges and the network is unchanged. 12. Tuples of Θ-flags 

We are now prepared to conclude the detailed explanation of the construction of cluster coordinates on Conf × 

> n

(AΘ) which we outlined in Section 8.2. Thus let (A1, . . . , A n) represent an element of Conf × 

> n

(AΘ). Recall that we start by associating the flags to the vertices of an n-gon in a counterclockwise manner. Next, fix a triangulation of the n-gon. We will use this data to obtain an element of Conf × 

> 3

(AΘ) for every triangle as follows: First, orient all arcs of the triangulation, including the sides of the n-gon via the total order given by reading clockwise around the n-gon: 

A1 → An → An−1 → · · · → A3 → A2 .NONCOMMUTATIVE CLUSTER VARIETIES AND MODULI SPACES OF LOCAL SYSTEMS 83 

Given a triangle T , let i, j, k be the vertices of T ordered such that Ai → Ak → Aj in the total order we just defined. Then the configuration associated to T is represented by the triple 

(Ai, A j , A k) ∈ A 3Θ.For every triangle we choose one side and a reduced expression of the longest element w0 ∈

W (R). Using the construction explained in Section 11 we obtain a (possibly rotated) cluster chart on Conf × 

> 3

(AΘ) which we evaluate on the configuration associated to the triangle. For every triangle we have a seed which we view as inscribed in it. We then amalgamate these seeds along the internal arc of the triangulation. As explained in Section 11.5, in the Bp and 

G2 cases we may need to weave/switch so that the edge functions for the individual triangles become compatible with the orientations of the sides. In the Ap and Cp cases, we need to amalgamate our seeds by gluing the networks along the boundary • vertices with the same index on the edges of the triangles. Recall that by construction, the number of legs is equal to the number of strands and each leg has a unique index given by performing a full slide to the left. In this way we obtain an ordered quiver or network inscribed into the n-gon whose nodes index a set of functions on Conf × 

> n

(AΘ).

Definition 12.1. A set of functions on Conf × 

> n

(AΘ) arising from the above construction is called a cluster chart . We will write AR,n for the noncommutative cluster variety associated to (any) cluster chart. Recall that R here refers to the Jordan split type of the group we are considering. 

A1

A2

A3

A4 A5

A6

A7

Figure 34. The fan triangulation on Conf × 

> 7

(AΘ).

Theorem 12.2. The noncommutative cluster variety AR,n contains seeds for all cluster charts. Moreover the {Ji} points of any cluster chart parametrize an open dense subset of Conf × 

> n

(AΘ).Proof. Very nice charts are given by the fan triangulation , the oriented triangulation for which all internal arcs start at A1, see Figure 34. Any point in Conf × 

> n

(AΘ) has a representative of the form 

(UΘ, w 0UΘl2, u 3w0UΘl3, u 3u4w0UΘl4, . . . , u 3 · · · unw0UΘln) .

This provides an open dense embedding of Conf × 

> n

(AΘ) → Ln−1Θ × U n−2Θ . Now we simply extend the proof of Theorem 11.13: If u3, . . . , u n lie in the image of the Lusztig map, they can be reconstructed from the coordinates one by one, just like the elements l2, . . . , l n. Then Proposition 16.10 shows that a positive J-point reconstructs a positive ui and li. This is the definition of a positive tuple of decorated flags. In order to extend this proof to charts for arbitrary triangulations, we will see that any two such charts are connected by series of cluster mutations (Theorem 12.3). The resulting map from the set parametrized by one cluster chart to the set parametrized by the other is defined on an open dense subset. Moreover such mutations map positive J-points to positive J-points. □84 ZACHARY GREENBERG, DANI KAUFMAN, MERIK NIEMEYER, AND ANNA WIENHARD 

12.1. Flip. In order to extend the proof of Theorem 12.2 for the fan triangulation to any cluster chart, we will prove: 

Theorem 12.3. Any two cluster charts for Conf × 

> n

(AΘ) are related by general mutations. 

We already proved Theorem 11.11, which accounts for the different choices within each in-dividual triangles. Since flips relate any two triangulations, it suffices to prove that flips in the triangulation can be realized by generalized mutations. To understand the flip, we adapt Goncharov-Shen’s approach by considering four flags on a triangulated square, where we take interpolating sequences across the top and bottom edges ([GS19, Section 11]). In this case, the elementary configurations on the top can be identified with flipped opposite elementary configurations (Definition 9.10). These amalgamate nicely with any of the standard elemen-tary configurations allowing for many mixed charts. These charts are parametrized by words in W (R) × W (R), where we denote the generators of the bottom edge by ςi := ( ςi, 1) and the generators of the top edge by ςi := (1 , ς i∗ ) for 1 ≤ i ≤ p.By amalgamating the corresponding elementary and opposite elementary charts, we associate a cluster chart to every reduced expression of (w0, w 0) ∈ W (R) × W (R), similar to Figure 36. In the initial setup, all elements of the form ςi come before elements of the form ςi and after the flip the order is reversed. Thus, to prove Theorem 12.3 it suffices to prove that the following moves on these cluster charts can be realized by mutations: 

Two Move ςiςj = ςj ςi for i̸ = j.

Twisted Two Move ςiςi = ςiςi.The two move in this extended version, can be treated the same as before (Lemma 11.15). 

Lemma 12.4. The seeds given by two words which differ by a twisted two move ii → ii are related by a single mutation on the cluster chart E(ii ).

Let us make some preparatory observations: Consider a triple (A, A l, A r ) which represents an element of Conf i

> 3

(AΘ). There is a unique (undecorated) flag B′ ∈ PΘ such that (Ar , B ′)

are ςi-transverse and (A, B ′) are w0ςi-transverse. We can interpret the triple (Ar , B ′, π (Al)) ∈

AΘ × P2Θ as a triple in the flag variety for SL 2(J), and thus we can assign a (total) potential 

W (Ar , B ′, π (Al)) to the triple in analogy to the partial potentials defined in Definition 9.7. Concretely this means: 

W (UΘ, ς iPΘ, x i(v)ςiPΘ) = v . 

Clearly, this potential is additive: Since xi(v)xi(w) = xi(v + w) we have 

W (UΘ, ς iPΘ, x i(v)xi(w)ςiPΘ) = v + w

= W (UΘ, ς iPΘ, x i(v)ςiPΘ) + W (UΘ, x i(v)ςiPΘ, x i(v)xi(w)ςiPΘ) .

We stress that this is really a potential on the SL 2(Ji)-flag variety, which replaces the SL 2-flag varieties appearing in [GS19]. Now we compute this potential using the parameters ll, l r ∈ LΘ,and a ∈ V × 

> i

for the elementary configuration (A, A l, A r ) = ( UΘ, w 0UΘll, x i∗ (a∗)w0UΘlr ) .First we choose an alternate representative of the triple where we can see B′ = ςiPΘ:

(A, A l, A r ) = ( l−1 

> r

w0UΘ, l −1 

> r

w0xi∗ (−a∗)w0UΘll, U Θ) .

Using the opposition involution (Definition 8.6) and the decompositions from Lemma 4.44, we compute 

W (Ar , B ′, π (Al)) = W (UΘ, ς iPΘ, l −1 

> r

w0xi∗ (−a∗)w0PΘ)= W (UΘ, ς iPΘ, l −1 

> r

yi(a)PΘ)= W (UΘ, ς iPΘ, l −1 

> r

ςixi(−a)ςiPΘ)= W  UΘ, ς iPΘ, l −1 

> r

ςiyi

 −a−1 ˇβi(ι(−a)) xi

 a−1 PΘ



= W  UΘ, ς iPΘ, l −1 

> r

xi

 a−1 ςiPΘ



= βi(l−1 

> r

)  a−1 .

(13) NONCOMMUTATIVE CLUSTER VARIETIES AND MODULI SPACES OF LOCAL SYSTEMS 85 

Notice that this potential is exactly the same as the potential of the reflected configuration. Therefore we can use Lemma 9.17 to compute 

ˇβi(ι(W (Ar , B ′, π (Al)))) = l−1 

> r

lll−1

> b

Proof. Now, consider a configuration of four decorated flags represented by (Al, A l, A r , A r ) ∈ A 4Θ

such that (Al, A l, A r ) and (Ar , A l, A r ) represent elementary configurations in Conf i

> 3

(AΘ) and 

Conf ¯i

> 3

(AΘ) respectively, as in Figure 35. Let a, b ∈ Vi be the potentials of these configurations. Notice that (Ar , A l, A r ) is also a configuration in Conf i

> 3

(AΘ), denote by c its potential. Let 

lll = l(Al, A l), llr = l(Al, A r ), lrr = l(Ar , A r ) ∈ LΘ.Let B1, B 2 ∈ PΘ such that (Ar , B 1) and (Ar , B 2) are ςi-transverse and (B1, A l) and (B2, A r )

are ςiw0-transverse. By the previous calculations we have 

W (Ar , B 2, π (Al)) = W (Ar , B 1, B 2) + W (Ar , B 1, π (Al)) 

βi

 (lrr )−1   c−1 = βi

 (llr )−1   a−1 + b . 

By applying ˇβi ◦ ι, each of the three terms can be computed as a product of L-distances, 

(lrr )−1lrl l−1 

> b

(llr )−1lll l−1 

> b

(lrr )−1(llr )∗ςi(llr ) .Al

Al Ar

Ar

ςi∗

ςi

w0 w0

B1 B2

mutation 

∗∗

D∗

ABCE A1

A2

C−11

C−12

E1

E2

D−11 D−12

B−12B−11

Al

Al Ar

Ar

B2

∗ ∗

D∗

ABCE′ C−11

C−12

A1

A2

E′

> 1

E′

> 2

D−11D−12

B−12 B−11

Figure 35. Setup for the twisted two move: Configuration of four flags and associated decorated polygon or grounded network, before and after mutation. To finish the proof we apply the appropriate Jordan weights to obtain the mutation formula in the chart E(i¯i). In noncommutative rank 1, when i = p, the coordinate are given by the following functions assigned to nodes as in Figure 35: 

A := Λ p(Al, A l)

C := Λ p(Ar , A r )

E := Λ p(Al, A r )

B := Λ p(Ar , A l)

D := Λ p(Al, A r )

x := Λ p−1(Al, A r )

where x is the function assigned to the additional small node on the level p − 1. Explicitly, the function D∗ depends on the type, if we are in type B2p then D∗ = στ (D), otherwise D∗ = D.86 ZACHARY GREENBERG, DANI KAUFMAN, MERIK NIEMEYER, AND ANNA WIENHARD 

Now, we wish to prove that the set of functions where we replace E with E′ := Λ p(Ar , A l) is compatible with the mutation in the polygonal cluster algebra, i.e. we need to show 

E′ = CE −1A + xσ (D∗)σ(E)−1B , 

or equivalently 

C−1E′B−1 = E−1AB −1 + xC −1σ(D∗)σ(E)−1 .

This is exactly what we get if we apply Λp to each term in earlier, which completes the proof in the noncommutative rank 1 case. In higher noncommutative rank, we would have to check the formula for adding potentials agrees with performing a square move. This was done in [GK24, Theorem 6.5]. □

Proof (of Theorem 12.3). For any single flip we first rotate so the quivers are in standard form as in Figure 36. 

A1

A2 A3

A4

. . . . . . r1

r2

Figure 36. Setup for realizing flips as cluster mutations. Then the flip is realized by transforming the word r1r2 to r2r1 (where r2 is written in the generators si). By Lemma 12.4 this is realized by a sequence of cluster mutations, see Figure 37 for the case B2. □

Figure 37. Realizing a flip by (twisted) two moves for p = 2 .We extend the twisted cyclic shift map to n-tuples as follows: 

Definition 12.5. The twisted cyclic shift map tw : Conf × 

> n

(A ) → Conf × 

> n

(A ) for n ≥ 3 is given by 

tw : ( A1, A 2, A 3, . . . , A n) 7 → (sGA2, A 3, . . . , A n, A 1) .

Corollary 12.6. Let c ∈ Conf × 

> n

(AΘ). The cluster charts for c and tw( c) are related by gener-alized mutations. Proof. A chart for the twisted cyclic shift can be obtained by rotating a triangulation for the original tuple. This will result in the edges incident to A2 having the opposite orientation from the standard total order previously used in the construction. However since A2 has been replaced with sGA2, we know the functions on these edges differ by switches/weaves of the polygonal cluster chart. Applying these switches and weaves results in a chart for the original tuple. □NONCOMMUTATIVE CLUSTER VARIETIES AND MODULI SPACES OF LOCAL SYSTEMS 87 

13. Noncommutative rank 1 detailed examples 

We will now explain the detailed calculations missing in the preceding proofs case by case. 13.1. Type A1. The abstract construction becomes much simpler in Jordan split type A1. In fact, we recover the coordinates on the space of positive configurations of decorated flags which were constructed for G ≃ Sp(2 n, R) in [AGRW21]. The polygonal cluster algebras reduce to the noncommutative surface cluster algebra of Berenstein and Retakh [BR18]. 13.1.1. Jordan-pinning. Let G be a Jordan-split group over A1. In Section 4.1 we defined a Jordan pinning of G to consist of the following three maps: 

x : V → G, y : V → G, ˇβ : Γ( J) → G . 

We assume now that the Jordan pinning provides an isomorphism of groups G ∼= SL 2(J), so that the weight Λβ : G0 → R is well-defined as the dual to ˇβ.

Example 13.1 . Consider the Jordan algebra J = H(R, σ ) for R a ring with involution σ. Then 

V = Rσ and eΓ( J) = R×. As both Rσ and R× naturally sit inside R, we can represent G as a subgroup Sp 2(R, σ ) inside Mat 2(R) as defined in [AGRW21]. The pinning maps become for 

B, C ∈ R σ and A ∈ R ×:

x(B) = 

1 B

1



y(C) = 

 1

C 1



ˇβ(A) = 

Aσ(A)−1



.

The weight Λβ is nothing more than the upper left entry of the matrix. This mirrors the split-real A1 story exactly, except the matrix entries can belong to a noncommutative ring. In this case each Θ-flag can be identified with a decorated Lagrangian as follows: 

A BC D



UΘ 7 →

AC



.

13.1.2. Pairs of flags. Recall that the invariant of a pair of decorated Θ-flags is called the L-distance. We now unwind the properties of the L-distance from Section 8.1 in this case. 

Lemma 13.2. We have for any two transverse flags A1, A 2:

l(A2, A 1) = − σ(l(A1, A 2)) 

l(sGA2, A 1) = σ(l(A1, A 2)) .

Example 13.3 . We return to our running example of J = H(R, σ ). In this case the L-distance is closely related to the symplectic Λ-length defined in [AGRW21]. The symplectic Λ-length 

is a G-invariant function of a pair of transverse decorated Lagrangians given by the formula 

Λ([ A, C ], [B, D ]) = σ(A)D − σ(C)B.

Lemma 13.4. Let (A1, A 2) be a pair of transverse decorated flags. Then Λβ (l(A1, A 2)) is equal to the symplectic Λ-length. Proof. Let l = ˇβ(A) be a generic element of the Levi subgroup. Then since both functions are 

G-invariant it suffices to check the relation on any representative (UΘ, w 0UΘl):

 1 00 1



,

0 −11 0

  1 00 1

  A 00 σ(A)−1

 

=

 1 00 1



,

 0 −σ(A)−1

A 0

 

7→

 10



,

 0

A

 

.

By construction Λβ (l(A1, A 2)) = Λ β ( ˇβ(A)) = A. The symplectic Λ-length is σ(1) · A − σ(0) · 0,which agrees. □

Example 13.5 . Let us consider another explicit example, G = Spin(2 , n ). We explicitly fix 

Q =



−1

J

−1

 with J =



1

−1n−2

1



with the induced bilinear form 

b(v, w ) = vT Qw 88 ZACHARY GREENBERG, DANI KAUFMAN, MERIK NIEMEYER, AND ANNA WIENHARD 

and quadratic form q(v) := b(v, v ) on V = Rn+2 . This form has signature (2 , n ) so that V ∼= R2,n .Let ei denote the standard basis vectors and let V ′ := ⟨e2, . . . , e n+1 ⟩ be the subspace on which the restriction of b is induced by J. Now Spin(2 , n ) can be realized in the Clifford algebra Cl( V )

over V .

G can be understood as a group of type A1 over the Jordan algebra J = Cl(1 , n − 1) of Clifford type. We have a Jordan pinning given by (14) 

x : V ′ → G , v 7 → 1 + e1v/ √2

y : V ′ → G , v 7 → 1 + en+2 Jv/ √2ˇβ : Γ0(V ′) → G , t 7 → 1 

> N(t)

 1 + (1 − N (t)) e1en+2 /2t . 

Since J has signature (1 , n − 1) , the even Clifford group Γ0(V ′) ∼= Γ 0(1 , n − 1) can be identified with the structure group Γ( J) and embeds naturally into Cl( V ).

G admits a 2:1 projection map 

ρ : Spin(2 , n ) ↠ SO 0(2 , n ) =: G′

given by the twisted adjoint representation [LM16]. If we compose the Jordan pinning maps with ρ, we obtain 

x′ = ρ ◦ x : V ′ → G′ , v 7 →

" 1 √2vT J q (v) 

> 1√2v
> 1

#

y′ = ρ ◦ y : V ′ → G′ , v 7 →

" 1√2Jv 1  

> q(v)√2vT1

#

ˇβ′ = ρ ◦ ˇβ : Γ0(V ′) → G′ , t 7 →

" N (t) 

> fAd t
> N(t)−1

#

,

where fAd : Γ 0(V ′) → SO( V ′) denotes the usual projection. Observe that ˇβ′ is a 2:1 map, while 

ˇβ is injective. We can use the composite maps to understand that the maps in Equation (14) actually provide a Jordan pinning, i.e. an isomorphism G ∼= SL 2(J). For this we consider the Lie algebra g of G,which is isomorphic to the Lie algebra of G′ and prove that the maps induce an isomorphism 

g ∼= sl 2(J). First, we note that 

x′(v) = exp 

" 0 √2vT J 00 √2v

> 0

#

, y′(w) = exp 

" 0√2Jw 00 √2wT 0

#

.

Now the Lie bracket in g is readily computed to be 

" 0 √2vT J 00 √2v

> 0

#

,

" 0√2Jw 00 √2wT 0

# =

" 2b(v,Jw )2( vw T J−Jwv T )J

> −2b(v,w )

#

.

We need to prove that this corresponds to ι(v, w ) under the identification of block diagonal elements in g with gJ. Recall that the Clifford algebra Cl(1 , n ) over V ′ becomes a quadratic Jordan algebra by fixing an element 1 = e ∈ V ′ with q(e) = 1 and setting 

ι(v)( w) = vewev . 

Here we choose e = (1 , 0, . . . , 0, 1) /√2. Now we compute in the Clifford algebra: 

ι(v, w )( u) =  ι(x + u) − ι(x) − ι(u)(w) = v

> w∗

z}|{ 

ewe u + uewev 

= vw ∗u +  2b(u, w ∗) − w∗uv = 2 b(u, w ∗)v + vw ∗u − w∗ 2b(v, u ) − vu 

= 2  vb (w∗, u ) − w∗b(v, u ) + b(v, w ∗)u = 2  b(v, w ∗) + v(w∗)T J − w∗vT Ju . 

Observe that w∗ = ewe = 2 b(e, w )e − w = (2 ee T J − 1)w = Jw . Thus, ι(v, w ) ∈ gJ is in fact identified with the Lie bracket we computed before. The other relations are easy to check. NONCOMMUTATIVE CLUSTER VARIETIES AND MODULI SPACES OF LOCAL SYSTEMS 89 

Remark 13.6 . In [Rog25, Rog20], the group Spin(2 , n ) is identified with Sp 2(Cl(1 , n − 1) , σ ) with the anti-involution σ given by composing Clifford algebra transposition with conjugation by e.We now turn our attention to the decorated flag variety AΘ = G/U Θ for UΘ = x(V ′). Of course our general theory applies to it, but to make everything as explicit as possible, we consider the decorated flag variety A ′ 

> Θ

= G′/U ′ 

> Θ

for SO 0(2 , n ) instead. It is double covered by AΘ via the map induced by ρ and can be identified with a subset of 

(v, B )|v ∈ V with q(v) = 0 , B basis of ⟨v⟩⊥/⟨v⟩ adapted to J

via 

SO 0(2 , n ) ∋ x =

h

v eB v ′i

7→ (v, B ) ,

i.e. v is the first column of the matrix x, ⟨v⟩⊥/⟨v⟩ can be identified with the column span of the 

(n + 2) × n-matrix eB, which then provides the basis B through its columns. This is adapted to 

J, i.e. in this basis the restriction of b to this space is induced by the matrix J.

Remark 13.7 . One can explicitly describe the subset of {(v, B )} that is identified with the decorated flag variety using conditions on the (time) orientation. Now let F1 = ( v1, B 1) and F2 = ( v2, B 2) be two decorated flags. We want to describe the configuration [F1, F 2] ∈ Conf 2(A ′

> Θ

) geometrically. First, we observe that we have 

• b(v1, v 2)̸ = 0 and 

• dim( ⟨v1⟩⊥ ∩ ⟨ v2⟩⊥) = n .To see this, we first see that this is true for the standard decorated flags [1] =  e1, (e2, . . . , e n+1 )

and [w0] =  en+2 , (−en+1 , e 3, . . . , e n, −e2) (from our Jordan pinning we have w0 = −Q). Thus, our first invariant of the configuration [F1, F 2] is simply b(v1, v 2). To use the rest of the data, set 

W := ⟨v1⟩⊥ ∩ ⟨ v2⟩⊥

and observe that the projections W → ⟨ vi⟩⊥/⟨vi⟩ are isomorphisms if F1 and F2 are transverse: Let x ∈ ⟨ v1⟩⊥. Then x − b(x,v 2) 

> b(v1,v 2)

v1 ∈ ⟨ v2⟩⊥ represents the same element in ⟨v1⟩⊥/⟨v1⟩, showing that the projection W → ⟨ v1⟩⊥/⟨v1⟩ is surjective. Because the spaces have the same dimension by transversality, it must in fact be an isomorphism. The same argument works for the other projection. This allows the construction of a second, noncommutative invariant of the configuration: The bases Bi induce bases ¯Bi of W , both of which are adapted to J. We can pair the basis vectors using b, to obtain an n × n-matrix in SO( J) = SO(1 , n − 1) . If we view the bases ¯Bi as 

(n + 2) × n-matrices (columns are the basis vectors), the invariant can be computed as ¯BT 

> 1

Q ¯B2.If F1 = [ 1] is the standard decorated flag and 

F2 =



w0

h a M a−1

i

=

h a−1

> −JM a

i

we get 

⟨v1⟩⊥ ∩ ⟨ v2⟩⊥ = ⟨e2, . . . , e n+1 ⟩ = V ′

and the bases are represented as 

¯B1 = 1n , ¯B2 = −JM 

so that the invariants are b(v1, v 2) = b(e1, ae n+1 ) = −a and b( ¯B1, ¯B2) = −M .For two arbitrary transverse flags F1, F 2 as before, assume that they are represented by the matrices gi =

h

vi eBi wi

i

, where eBi is an arbitrary lift of Bi to V . To compute the second invariant from this form, we need to compute the lifts ¯Bi of Bi to ⟨v1⟩⊥ ∩ ⟨ v2⟩⊥. Explicitly, these are given by 

¯B1 = eB1 − v1 · vT 

> 2

Q eB1

b(v1, v 2) , ¯B2 = eB2 − v2 · vT 

> 1

Q eB2

b(v1, v 2) .

Thus the invariant is 

¯BT 

> 1

Q ¯B2 = eBT 

> 1

Q



1 − v2vT 

> 1

Qb(v1, v 2)

eB2 .90 ZACHARY GREENBERG, DANI KAUFMAN, MERIK NIEMEYER, AND ANNA WIENHARD 

On the other hand, the L-distance between the two decorated flags is given by 

l(g1UΘ, g 2UΘ) = l  UΘ, w 0w0g−11 g2UΘ

 = w0g−11 g2



> 0

using the Gauss decomposition. Since g−11 = Qg T 

> 1

Q and w0 = w0 = −Q in SO 0(2 , n ) (this is not true in Spin(2 , n )!) we get 

w0g−11 g2 = −gT 

> 1

Qg 2 = −

" vT

> 1
> eBT
> 1
> wT
> 1

#

[ Qv 2 Q eB2 Qw 2 ] = −

" b(v1,v 2) vT             

> 1QeB2b(v1,w 2)
> eBT
> 1Qv 2eBT
> 1QeB2eBT
> 1Qw 2
> b(w1,v 2)wT
> 1QeB2b(w1,w 2)

#

.

By computing the Gauss decomposition, we obtain 

l(g1UΘ, g 2UΘ) = 

 −b(v1,v 2)      

> eBT
> 1Qv 2vT
> 1QeB2/b (v1,v 2)−eBT
> 1QeB2
> −1/b (v1,v 2)



.

Thus the geometric invariants are equivalent to the L-distance. 13.1.3. Triples of flags. The theory for triples of transverse flags (A1, A 2, A 3), also dramatically simplifies in this case. In Jordan split type A1 there is a unique reduced expression of the longest word in the Weyl group, w0 = ςβ . Moreover, the interpolating sequence of flags is trivial as 

(A1, A 2, A 3) is already an elementary configuration of type ςβ . Therefore the cluster chart for a triple of decorated Θ-flags is given by 

A1

A2 A3

Let Mij = Λ β (l(Ai, A j )) be the cluster coordinate associated to the directed side (i, j ).

Theorem 13.8. The potential of the configuration (A1, A 2, A 3) is given by the angle 

(15) ∆g (M23 ) = σ(M12 )−1M23 M −113 .

Proof. The configuration (A1, A 2, A 3) is equivalent to (UΘ, ω 0UΘM12 , x (v)ω0UΘM13 ) where v

is the potential. We then compute M23 = Λ β (l(A2, A 3)) = σ(M12 )vM 13 and the formula follows. □

Remark 13.9 . In this case, the angle in the polygonal cluster algebra is the noncommutative angle of a noncommutative surface cluster algebra. The fact that the angle belongs to the vector space of the Jordan algebra is equivalent to the angle being fixed by σ for J = H(R, σ ).The final step to understanding a triple of flags is understanding twisted cyclic rotation. This case is very simple, as we observe that the only change to this seed under rotation is the orientation of the arcs bounding the triangular tile. As seeds of a polygonal cluster algebra this corresponds to performing a switch at these arcs. This changes the cluster coordinate by applying σ, which has, by Lemma 13.2, exactly the same effect as computing Λβ (l(sGAj , A i)) 

instead of Λβ (l(Ai, A j )) as needed. 13.1.4. Tuples of flags. In Section 12, we saw that flipping an arc of the triangulation amounted to a series of moves on reduced expressions of the longest word in W (R) × W (R). The new move for Θ-flags was the twisted two move at the noncommutative node. In Jordan split type 

A1, this move suffices to flip the arc. The proof of the twisted two move in Lemma 12.4 relied on the additivity of the potential, which we saw in Section 13.1.3 is equivalent to the noncommutative surface angles. Consider a four tuple (A1, A 2, A 3, A 4) of pairwise transverse flags. The additivity of the potentials implies that (16) σ(M −114 )M42 M −112 = σ(M −113 )M32 M −112 + σ(M −114 )M43 M −113 .

This in turn implies the following non commutative exchange relation: (17) M42 = σ(M14 )σ(M −113 )M32 + M43 M −113 M12 .NONCOMMUTATIVE CLUSTER VARIETIES AND MODULI SPACES OF LOCAL SYSTEMS 91 

Remark 13.10 . This is exactly the exchange relation on a noncommutative surface given in [BR18]. Our next step is to study the case of Jordan split type Bp, where more of the subtleties of the general construction appear. 13.2. Type Bp. We now consider G a group of Jordan split type Bp.A root system of type Bp contains 2p short roots and 2p(p − 1) long roots. We chose a set of simple roots for the Θ-root system, {β1, · · · , β p−1, β p} with standard indexing coming from the Dynkin diagram so that βp is the unique short root. The long roots correspond to commutative Jordan algebras, and are therefore associated with a finite extension of K we will denote by K′. The short root spaces, {± βp, ±(βp +

βp−1), . . . , ± P 

> i

βi} can be associated to a degree 2 Jordan algebra of Clifford type, J(V, b, e )

for V a K′ vector space, b a bilinear form, and e an element of norm 1.The structure group is the even Clifford group Γ0(V, b ). We recall that the map embedding the vector space into the structure group is given by ι(v) = ve .The vector space V comes with its adjugate involution which we denote by τ . Since our Jordan algebra is of degree 2, this map is a linear map. Similarly, the generalized structure group comes with the two anti-involutions σ, τ . These are given explicitly by the standard transposition map on the Clifford algebra 

τ (x) = xT , and σ(x) = ex T e . 

Since ι(τ (v)) = τ (ι(v)) we are justified in using the same name for both anti-involutions. More-over we find that LΘ is a central extension of Γ0(V, b ) and we extend σ and τ to anti-involutions on LΘ by having them act trivially on the center. By further abuse of notation, we denote the resulting maps by σ and τ again. 13.2.1. Θ-pinning. Choose a Jordan pinning for G as discussed in Section 4.2. Since the Jordan algebra is always of Clifford type, the pinning maps have the following form: For 1 ≤ i < p xi : K′ → G yi : K′ → G ˇβi : K′× → G , 

and 

xp : V → G yp : V → G ˇβp : Γ 0(V, b ) → G . 

We recall that the pinning provides lifts of the grading Weyl group to G via: 

ςi = yi(1) xi(−1) yi(1) ςp = yp(1)xp(−1)yp(1) .

We will use these to compute some identities for the Jordan pinning in this concrete case. 13.2.2. Weyl group. There are two nice reduced expressions of the longest word we will use in our calculations. The first is given by p repetitions of the Coxeter element ς1ς2 · · · ςp. The second word is inductive and consists of multiplying the p distinct mountain blocks ,

Mk = ςkςk+1 · · · ςp−1ςpςp−1 · · · ςk+1 ςk .

The mountain blocks provide a nontrivial action on the special root space up.

Lemma 13.11. For k < p , the action of Mk on up is given by 

(18) Mk · xp(v) = xp(τ (v)) .

Similarly Mk acts on the short coroot by 

(19) Mk · ˇβp(A) = ˇβp(στ (A)) .

Proof. We begin by calculating the action of Mp−1 on ˇβp using Lemmas 4.34 and 4.35. 

Mp−1 · ˇβp(A) = ςp−1ςpςp−1 · ˇβp(A) = ςp−1ςp · ˇβp(A) ˇβp−1(N (A)) = ςp−1 ˇβp(σ(A)−1) ˇβp−1(N (A)) ˇβp(N (A)1) = ˇβp(σ(A)−1) ˇβp−1(N (A)−1) ˇβp−1(N (A)−1) ˇβp(N (A)1) ˇβp−1(N (A)2)= ˇβp(σ(A−1)N (a)) = ˇβp(στ (A)) .92 ZACHARY GREENBERG, DANI KAUFMAN, MERIK NIEMEYER, AND ANNA WIENHARD 

For k < p − 1, Mk = wM p−1w for w a word consisting of reflections over roots with index less than or equal to p − 2. As such w acts trivially on the image of ˇβp and thus arbitrary Mk act as claimed. We now consider the action of Mk on xp(v). Let w = ςp−1ςp−2 · · · ςk. Then Mk = w−1ςpw.Inductively we observe w moves uβp to another short Θ-root space which is perpendicular to 

uβp . The action of ςp does not change the image root space and thus the action w−1 returns us to uβp . As the pinning map is surjective, there is some w ∈ V such that xp(w) = Mk · xp(v).We then compute the action on xp(v)ςp using Lemma 4.44: 

Mk · (xp(v)ςp) = Mk · (y(v−1) ˇβp(ι(v)) xp(v)) = ( Mk · y(v−1))( Mk · ˇβp(ι(v)))( Mk · xp(v)) = y(w−11 ) ˇβp(στ ι (v)) xp(w2) .

On the other hand Mk · ςp = ςp. So (20) Mk · (xp(v)ςp) = x(w)ςp = y(w−1) ˇβp(ι(w)) xp(w) .

The Gauss decomposition of elements is unique, so we equate the argument of the coroot. This implies ι(w) = στ (ι(v)) = ι(τ (v)) . Since ι is injective we then have w = τ (v) as claimed. □

We now calculate the opposition involution, as defined in Definition 8.6. 

Corollary 13.12. The action of w0 on ˇβp is given by 

w0 · ˇβp(A) = 

( ˇβp

 τ (A−1) p even 

ˇβp

 σ(A−1) p odd .

Consequently, the opposition involution on LΘ is 

(.)∗ : ˇβi(x) 7 → ˇβi(x)ˇβp(A) 7 →

( ˇβp

 τ (A) p even 

ˇβp

 σ(A) p odd .

Proof. Write w0 = M1 · · · Mp using the inductive word. Then since Mp = ςp, the result follows from applying the action of each subword computed in Lemmas 4.34 and 13.11. □

The induced involution on the Θ-root space uβp is given by: 

Corollary 13.13. The involution on the potential is given by v∗ = τ p−1(v) = 

(

τ (v) p even 

v p odd .

Proof. We simply calculate: 

ˇβp

 ι(v∗) =

 ˇβp

 ι(v)∗

=

 ˇβp(ve )

∗

=

( ˇβp(ev ) = ˇβp(evee ) = ˇβp



ι τ (v)

p even 

ˇβp(ve ) = ˇβp

 ι(v) p odd .

□

13.2.3. Spin( p, q ) with its positive pinning. Now we consider the real group G ≃ Spin( p, q ). We can describe an explicit positive Jordan pinning using the projection ρ : G → G′ ≃ SO( p, q )◦.Since the groups are locally isomorphic, the differential d1ρ : g → g′ provides an isomorphism of Lie algebras. Moreover, ρ identifies the unipotent subgroups UΘ ∼= U ′

> Θ

, U opp Θ ∼= ( U ′

> Θ

)opp of G

and G′, and provides a 2:1-map ρ : LΘ ↠ L′ 

> Θ

of the Levi subgroups. To describe the subgroups of G′ explicitly, we choose a matrix representation of the group: We take a (p + 1 , q + p + 1) -form on R2p+q+2 defined by b(v, w ) = vT Qw with 

Q := 



0 0 K

0 J 0

KT 0 0

 ,

where K ∈ GL( p, R), and J ∈ GL( q + 2 , R) are given by (21) K =



> (−1) p
> . . .
> 1
> −1

 and J =

0 0 10 −1q 01 0 0

 ,NONCOMMUTATIVE CLUSTER VARIETIES AND MODULI SPACES OF LOCAL SYSTEMS 93 

so that G′ ∼= SO( Q)◦. It will be convenient to consider the quadratic form of signature (1 , q + 1) 

on V = Rq+2 defined as follows: For v, w ∈ VbJ (v, w ) := vT Jw , N (v) := bJ (v, v ) .

Of course this is just the restriction of b to the subspace V = ⟨ep+1 , . . . , e p+q+2 ⟩ ∼= R1,q +1 .Write for a1, . . . , a p ∈ R× and M ∈ SO( J)

l(a1, . . . , a p, M ) := 



> a1
> . . . ap
> Ma−1
> p
> . . .a−11



∈ SO( Q) .

Then the Levi subgroup of G′ is given explicitly by 

L′ 

> Θ

=

## (

l(a1, . . . , a p, M ) a1, . . . , a p ∈ R×, M ∈

(

SO( J)◦ Q ai > 0SO( J) \ SO( J)◦ Q ai < 0

## )

where the relation between {ai} and M comes from restricting to the identity component of 

SO( Q). The subgroup U ′ 

> Θ

< G ′ consists of all matrices in G′ with ones on the diagonal and en-tries ‘above’ L′

> Θ

. The opposite unipotent subgroup (U ′

> Θ

)opp is obtained from U ′ 

> Θ

by transposing the matrices. Consider the following maps: For 1 ≤ i < p x′ 

> i

: R → U ′ 

> Θ

, t 7 → 1 + t(Ei,i +1 + E2p+q+2 −i, 2p+q+3 −i)

y′ 

> i

: R → (U ′

> Θ

)opp , t 7 →  x′

> i

(t)T

ˇβ′ 

> i

: R× → L′ 

> Θ

, t 7 → l



1, . . . , 1, t 

> i

, t −1

> i+1

, 1, . . . , 1, 1



and 

x′ 

> p

: V → U ′ 

> Θ

, v 7 →

     

> 1
> . . .√2vTJ q J(v)
> 1√2v. . .1



y′ 

> p

: V → (U ′

> Θ

)opp , v 7 →  x′

> p

(Jv )T

ˇβ′ 

> p

: Γ0(1 , q + 1) → L′ 

> Θ

, x 7 → l



1, . . . , 1, N (x), fAd( x)



where fAd : Γ 0(1 , q + 1) → SO( J) is the usual projection via the twisted adjoint representation, see e.g. [LM16]. Observe that ˇβp is a 2:1-map as ˇβp(x) = ˇβp(−x), but that all the other maps are injective. Consequently, LΘ decomposes as a direct product 

L′ 

> Θ

=

> p

M

> i=1

Im   ˇβi

 2:1 

↞ LΘ

where the double covering simply arises as the double covering of Im   ˇβp

 by Γ0(1 , q +1) which is a factor of LΘ. The maps above define a Jordan pinning of G′ which is obtained by postcomposing Jordan pinning maps of G with the projection ρ : G → G′.The Jordan pinning endows V with the structure of a quadratic Jordan algebra as explained in Section 2, with the map ι : V → End( V ) given by v 7 → ve where we can choose e =(1 , 0, . . . , 0, 1) T in the standard basis of V .As in the split case, the Θ-fundamental weights are only defined for G, not for G′ where the map ˇβ′ 

> p

is not injective. However, all the commutative fundamental weights still arise as pullbacks of characters of L′ 

> Θ

under ρ : G → G′. Namely, ΛΘ 

> i

for 1 ≤ i < p is the pullback of 

L′ 

> Θ

→ R× , l(a1, . . . , a p, M ) 7 →

> i

Y

> k=1

ak .94 ZACHARY GREENBERG, DANI KAUFMAN, MERIK NIEMEYER, AND ANNA WIENHARD 

Accordingly, the extension of ΛΘ 

> i

to Gauss-decomposable elements in G is simply the pullback of the i-th principal minor on G′.While the weight ΛΘ 

> p

: LΘ → Γ0(1 , q + 1) does not arise as a pullback, the following compo-sition of maps does: 

LΘ → R× × Γ0(1 , q + 1) , l 7 →



N  ΛΘ 

> p

(l), fAd  ΛΘ 

> p

(l)

.

This can be seen as a noncommutative version of the square of a character (as N is a quadratic map) and it is the pullback of the map 

LΘ → R× × SO( J) , l(a1, . . . , a p, M ) 7 → (a1 · · · ap, M ) .

The corresponding map on the Gauss decomposable elements is the pullback of the map Φp on 

G′ defined as follows: Write g ∈ G with respect to the quadratic form Q defined above as 

g =      

> 
> A11 A12 A13
> A21 A22 A23
> A31 A32 A33
> 

.

For this we have: 

Φp(g) =   det( A11 ), A 22 − A21 A−111 A12 

 .

To illustrate the lifts of the grading Weyl group, we restrict to the case p = 2 , i.e. G′ =SO(3 , q + 3) . The grading Weyl group is W (R) = ⟨s1 =: ς1, s 2s3s2 = ς2⟩ < W which is of type 

B2. Its standard generators and longest element lift to G′ using the Jordan pinning: 

ς1 =

" 0 −11 0 1q+2   

> 0−110

#

, ς2 =

" 1 0 0 10 −J 01 0 0 1

#

, w0 = ς1ς2ς1ς2 =

" 1

> −1
> 1q+2
> −11

#

.

As W (R) is of type B2, we can fix the reduced expression w0 = ς1ς2ς1ς2 to obtain the positive semigroup U >0Θ in UΘ:

U >0Θ =

n

x1(x)x2(v)x1(y)x2(w) =: F (x, v, y, w )|x, y ∈ R>0, v, w ∈ ◦

cβ

o

.

If we write this parametrization in terms of matrices by applying ρ, we find 

ρ F (x, v, y, w ) =

                           

> 1x+y√2( xv TJ+( x+y)wTJ)xN (v+w)+ yN (w)xyN (v)01√2( v+w)TJN(v+w)yN (v)00Id q+2
> √2( v+w)√2yv
> 0001x+y
> 00001

 .

This is (up to some factors of √2) the parametrization of U >0Θ described in [GW25]. 13.2.4. Pairs of flags. As in the generic case, the invariants of a pair of flags are the Θ-fundamental weights applied to the L-distance between the flags. We now calculate explicitly the change in L-distance when we reverse a pair of transverse flags. 

Lemma 13.14. Suppose A1, A 2 ∈ AΘ are transverse. Then 

l(sGA2, A 1) = 

(

τ  l(A1, A 2) p even 

σ l(A1, A 2) p odd .

Moreover, if l1, l 2 ∈ LΘ

l(A1l1, A 2l2) = 

(

τ (l1)l(A1, A 2)l2 p even 

σ(l1)l(A1, A 2)l2 p odd .

Proof. From Proposition 8.8, we know l(sGA2, A 1) = l(A1, A 2)∗. In Corollary 13.12, we com-puted the opposition involution depending on the parity of p which completes the proof. Simi-larly the scaling on A1 factors as the action of w0(l−11 ) depends in the same way on the parity of p. □

Remark 13.15 . Regardless of the parity of p, the difference between l(A1, A 2) and l(sGA2, A 1)

can be accounted for by weaving and/or switching in the polygonal cluster algebra. NONCOMMUTATIVE CLUSTER VARIETIES AND MODULI SPACES OF LOCAL SYSTEMS 95 

13.2.5. Triples of flags. We now account for the last details in Section 11 to build a cluster chart for a triple of flags (A1, A 2, A 3) in Jordan split type Bp. As in Section 11 we will chose a reduced expression for w0 and use it to compute an interpolating sequence of flags A2 =

A02, A 12, · · · Ap2 

> 2

= A3. This sequence allows us to obtain a chart by amalgamating charts for elementary configurations (A1, A k−12 , A k 

> 2

). In Figure 38, we see the resulting quiver for the reduced expression D(w0) = ( ς1 · · · ςp)p. The corresponding polygonal tiling for the pruned quiver is given in Figure 39. It remains to show that all the choices made in the construction above result in cluster charts which are related by a sequence of mutations. In particular, we prove that cluster charts using two words related by the 4-braid move are connected by mutations. We will also give an explicit mutation sequence relating the charts obtained by twisted cyclic shift.                      

> (p, 0) (p, 1)
> . . .
> (p, p −1) (p, p )(p−1,0) . . . (p−1, p )
> . . . .....................
> (1 ,0) . . . (1 , p )(0 ,1)
> . . .
> (0 , p )

Figure 38. The quiver Qp which is inscribed into the triangle. 

> · · ·

(a) p even 

> · · ·

(b) p odd 

Figure 39. Decorated polygons inscribed into triangles. There is one subtlety in the amalgamation which we must discuss before studying the four-move or twisted cyclic shift. In Figure 39, we see that the coloring of the bottom angles in the triangle depend on the parity of p. We must compute the difference between Λp(Ak 

> 2

, A k−12 ) and 

Λp(A3, A 2) which by Proposition 8.8 is the action of wk = ςi1 · · · ςik−1 on ˇβp.

Lemma 13.16. Fix a reduced expression D = ςi1 · · · ςip2 of w0 and let {Ai

> 2

} be the corresponding interpolating sequence. Let k be the index such that l(Ak 

> 2

, A k−12 ) = ˇβp(t)̸ = 1. Let np := |{ j ∈

[1 , k − 1] | ij = p}| be the number of times ςp occurs in wk. Then 

Λp(A3, A 2) = στ np  Λp(Ak 

> 2

, A k−12 )

Proof. From Lemma 4.34 we know that ςp

  ˇβp(A) = ˇβp

 στ (A)/N (A). By construction of the interpolating sequence and Proposition 8.8 we know that 

Λp(A3, A 2) = ( wk)−1 Λp(Ak 

> 2

, A k−12 ) ∈ Im( ˇβp) .96 ZACHARY GREENBERG, DANI KAUFMAN, MERIK NIEMEYER, AND ANNA WIENHARD 

Since all the other reflections ςi for i̸ = p only change the argument of ˇβp by multiplying by central terms and the calculation is exactly as in the split case for these, Λp(A3, A 2) and 

Λp(Ak 

> 2

, A k−12 ) only differ because of the action of ςp, which applies στ unlike in the commutative case. Since we do this np times, this proves the statement. □

Therefore to amalgamate the elementary quiver with the bottom edge of the triangle, we must weave the bottom frozen node of the elementary quiver when np is odd. 

Example 13.17 . For w0 = ( ς1 · · · ςp)p, the relevant scaling occurs at k = n and so np = p − 1.This results in the difference of angle coloring in Figure 39. For w0 = ( ςp · · · ς1)p, the relevant scaling occurs at k = 1 and so np = 0 . Therefore for this word, no weaving occurs at the bottom node regardless of the parity of p.For w0 = Mp−1MpMp−2Mp−3 · · · M1, the relevant scaling occurs at k = 4 and wk = Mp−1.Thus np = 1 and weaving occurs at the bottom node regardless of the parity of p.

Example 13.18 . Let us consider the explicit example p = 2 . Take an element of Conf × 

> 3

(AΘ)

represented by (A1, A 2, A 3) = ( UΘ, w 0UΘl2, F (x, v, y, w )w0UΘl3) with l2 = ˇβ1(a) ˇβ2(B), l3 =ˇβ1(c) ˇβ2(D) ∈ LΘ where a, c ∈ K′ and B, D ∈ Γ0(V, b ). Using Proposition 8.8(3) and Proposi-tion 9.1, we compute 

l(A3, A 2) = w0(l3)−1

ς1ς2ς1

  ˇβ2(ι(w∗)ς1ς2

  ˇβ1(y)ς1

  ˇβ2(ι(v∗))  ˇβ1(x)



l2

= w0(l3)−1 ˇβ2(ι(w)) · ˇβ1(y) ˇβ2(y) · ˇβ2(ι(v∗)) ˇβ1(N (v)) · ˇβ1(x)



l2

= w0(l3)−1 ˇβ1(xyN (v)) ˇβ2(yι (w)ι(τ (v))) l2

= ˇβ1

 acxyN (v) ˇβ2

 yτ (D)wvB 

where we used Lemmas 4.34 and 4.35 to compute the action of the Weyl group on the second line. We observe the first and last terms resulted in simple coroots. Therefore, the interpolating sequence for the reduced expression w0 = ς1ς2ς1ς2 is given by 

A02 = A2 = w0UΘl2

A12 = x1(x)w0UΘ ˇβ1

 cyN (v)N (B) ˇβ2

 B

A22 = x1(x)x2(v)w0UΘ ˇβ1

 cyN (v)N (B) ˇβ2

 cyveστ (B)

A32 = x1(x)x2(v)x1(y)w0UΘ ˇβ1

 c ˇβ2

 cyveστ (B)

A42 = A3 = F (x, v, y, w )w0UΘl3

The coordinate functions are easy to obtain from this: For instance, to the internal big node we assign 

Λ2(A1, A 22) = Λ 2



UΘ, x 1(x)x2(v)w0UΘ ˇβ1

 cyN (v)N (B) ˇβ2

 cyveστ (B)

= Λ 2

 ˇβ1

 cyN (v)N (B) ˇβ2

 cyveστ (B)

= cyveστ (B) .

All the functions together with the quiver are shown in Figure 40. 13.2.6. Four move. We now prove that the four move, ςp−1ςpςp−1ςp 7 → ςpςp−1ςpςp−1 can be realized as mutation which is the last remaining part of the proof of Theorem 11.11 in this case. We will see that cluster charts associated to two reduced expression which differ by a four move are related by a sequence of cluster mutations and a switch in the polygonal cluster algebra as defined in Definition 6.14 and Proposition 6.20. 

Proposition 13.19. The seeds given by two words which differ by the four move are related by a sequence of three mutations and a switch. If the mutable big node at height p is labeled 2 and the mutable small node is labeled 1, the mutation sequence is 1, 2, 1, then perform a switch at 2.

It suffices to consider Jordan split type B2, since the mutation sequence only sees levels p

and p − 1. In this case there are only two different decompositions of w0,

D1 := ς1ς2ς1ς2 D2 := ς2ς1ς2ς1.NONCOMMUTATIVE CLUSTER VARIETIES AND MODULI SPACES OF LOCAL SYSTEMS 97 

UΘ

w0UΘl2 F (x,v,y,w )w0UΘl3

B Da cacxyN (v) yτ (D)wvB cyN (v)N (B)

cyveστ (B)

Figure 40. Quiver and functions for p = 2 .Let u = FD1 (x, v, y, w ). Now consider a configuration of flags (A1, A 2, A 3) = ( UΘ, w 0UΘ, uw 0UΘ)

as in Example 13.18. Notice that we set l(A1, A 3) = l(A1, A 2) = 1 for simplicity. One can check by Proposition 8.8 that these L-distances factor out of every computation. We begin by computing the coordinates in Figure 41a. These are the coordinates we computed in Example 13.18, explicitly: 

X2 = yve X8 = ywv x5 = yN (v) x7 = xyN (v) .

Lemma 13.20. The chart QD1,1 is connected to QD2,2 by mutation at node 1 and a switch and weave at the frozen nodes X1, X 8.Proof. This mutation is easy to calculate since it happens at a commutative node. We have (22) x′ 

> 5

= xyN (v) + y2N (v)

yN (v) = x + y

Next we need to calculate the cluster chart associated to QD2,2. When we apply the twisted cyclic shift to our triple we obtain: 

(sGA2, A 3, A 1) =( sGw0UΘ, uw 0UΘ, U Θ)

which represents the same configuration as 

(u−1sGw0UΘ, w 0UΘ, U Θ) = ( u−1w0UΘ, w 0UΘ, U Θ) .

In this case the interpolating sequence of flags is easy to compute. We have 

A03 = A3, A13 = ς1ς2ς1UΘ, A23 = ς1ς2UΘ, A33 = ς1UΘ, A43 = A1 .

It suffices to show 

x′ 

> 5

=Λ 1(u−1w0UΘ, A 23)

X2 =Λ 2(u−1w0UΘ, A 13) = Λ 2(u−1w0UΘ, A 23) .

The last equality is by Corollary 10.3 and shows we can compute both values from the same 

L-distance. We observe l(u−1w0UΘ, ς 1ς2UΘ) = l(UΘ, w 0uς 1ς2UΘ), so computing the L-distance reduces to computing [uς 1ς2]0.

[uς 1ς2]0 = [ x1(x)x2(v)x1(y)x2(w)ς1ς2]0

Since x2(w)ς1ς2 = ς1ς2 exp( w′) for w′ ∈ uβ1+β2 , x2(w) escapes to the right. 

= [ x1(x)x2(v)x1(y)ς1ς2]0

Next, we decompose x1(y)ς1 = y1(y−1) ˇβ1(y)x1(−y−1) using Lemma 4.44. 

= [ x1(x)x2(v)y1(y−1) ˇβ1(y)x1(−y−1)ς2]098 ZACHARY GREENBERG, DANI KAUFMAN, MERIK NIEMEYER, AND ANNA WIENHARD 

Now x1(−y−1) escapes past ς2 as another element in UΘ and y1(y−1) commutes with x2(v).

= [ x1(x)y1(y−1)x2(v) ˇβ1(y)ς2]0

We use Lemma 4.44 to decompose x1(x)y1(y−1) and apply ς2 to ˇβ1(y) and obtain: 

= [ y1

 (x + y)−1 ˇβ1

 (x + y)y−1x1

 (x−1 + y−1)−1x2(v)ς2 ˇβ1(y) ˇβ2(y)] 0

Finally, we decompose x2(v)ς2 allowing all the remaining xi/y i to escape on the right/left. 

= ˇβ1(x + y) ˇβ2(yve ) .

Then applying the Jordan weights, we see 

Λ1(u−1w0UΘ, A 23) = x + y = x′ 

> 5

and Λ2(u−1w0UΘ, A 13) = yve = X2

as needed. The switch and weave at the frozen nodes happen since QD2,2 calculate the functions on the edge (A1, A 2) and (A2, A 3) in the opposite direction from QD1,1. □

Lemma 13.21. The chart QD1,1 is connected to the chart QD2,3 by mutation and weave at node 2 and a switch and weave at the frozen nodes X1, X 3.Proof. This is almost the same calculation as last time, except we have to use the noncommu-tative polygonal cluster algebra mutation rule. We have 

X′ 

> 2

= στ (X8)X−12 + σ(X2)−1x5 = yewve · y−1evN (v)−1 + y−1evN (v)−1 · yN (v) = e(w + v)

To compute QD2,3 we look at the configuration of flags (A3, s GA1, A 2) which is the same configuration as (uw 0UΘ, U Θ, w 0UΘ). The interpolating sequence of flags is given by 

A01 = UΘ A11 = ς2UΘ, A21 = ς2ς1UΘ, A31 = ς2ς1ς2UΘ, A41 = A2

As before, both interior functions can be computed at the second flag. So we want to show 

Λ1(uw 0UΘ, A 21) = x5

Λ2(uw 0UΘ, A 21) = στ (X′

> 2

)

We compute this time l(uw 0UΘ, ς 2ς1UΘ) = [ u−1ς2ς1]0 and so 

[u−1ς2ς1]0 = [ x2(−w)x1(−y)x2(−v)x1(−x)ς2ς1]0 = [ x2(−w)x1(−y)x2(−v)ς2ς1]0

= [ x2(−w)y2(−v−1)x1(−y)ς1 ˇβ2(ι(v)) ˇβ1(N (v))] 0 = ˇβ2(ι(v + w)) ˇβ1(yN (v)) .

Recalling that ι(v + w) = ( v + w)e we see that we needed to perform a weave at X′

> 2

. The switch and weave at the frozen nodes occurs since QD2,3 computes two of the edges in the opposite order from QD1,1. □

To complete the proof of the Proposition 13.19, we simply observe that mutating at nodes 

1, 2, 1 and weaving at node 2 moves us from QD1,1 to QD2,2 to QD1,3 and finally to QD2,1. Thus the two charts related by a four move are related by cluster mutation as needed. 

X1 X2 X3

x4

x5

x6

x7 X8

x0

(a) J(p − 1, p, p − 1, p )

X1 X′′  

> 2

X3

x4

x′′ 

> 5

x6

x7X8

x0

(b) J(p, p − 1, p, p − 1) 

Figure 41. Four move: The ordered quivers. NONCOMMUTATIVE CLUSTER VARIETIES AND MODULI SPACES OF LOCAL SYSTEMS 99 

B Da cacxyN (v) yτ (D)wvB cyN  (v)N (B)

> cyveτ  (B)

B Da cacxyN (v) yτ (D)wvB ac (x + y)

> cyveτ  (B)

B Da cacxyN (v) yτ (D)wvB cyN  (v)N (B)

> σ(D)e(v + w)B

B Da cacxyN (v) yτ (D)wvB ac (x + y)

> aσ (D)e x(v + w) +  yw 

B Da cacxyN (v) yτ (D)wvB aN  (D) xN  (v + w) +  yN  (w)

> σ(D)e(v + w)B

B Da cacxyN (v) yτ (D)wvB aN  (D) xN  (v + w) +  yN  (w)

> aσ (D)e x(v + w) +  yw 

B Da cacxyN (v) yτ (D)wvB aN  (D)( xN  (v + w) +  yN  (w)) 

> ae  x(v + w) +  yw D

μsmall μbig 

μbig μsmall 

μsmall μbig 

weave 

Figure 42. Cluster charts in the case p = 2 .100 ZACHARY GREENBERG, DANI KAUFMAN, MERIK NIEMEYER, AND ANNA WIENHARD 

13.2.7. Rotation. This section is dedicated to the proof of Proposition 11.19 for the Bp case. The case p = 2 has incidentally already been proven in the previous section. We will do this by considering a particular reduced expressions of w0. Let M = M1M2 . . . M p

be the reduced expression given by the product of the mountain blocks in order and let C =(ς1 · · · ςp)p be the Coxeter word. We denote by M ′, C′ the reversed words. 

Proposition 13.22. The cluster charts QiM and Qi+1   

> M′

are related by a sequence of cluster mutations at commutative nodes and switches and weaves at noncommutative nodes 

Proving this proposition will allow us to change to any rotated cluster chart since we can use two moves, three moves and four moves to change Q2  

> M′

into Q2 

> M

and then apply the same sequence to change to Q3  

> M′

.

Proof. In the split real case ( G = Spin( p, p + 1) ) Le [Le19] constructs an explicit sequence of mutations which relate the cluster charts Q1 

> C

and Q2 

> C′

. We will denote this sequence by L.There are two important facts to know about this sequence: (1) It only mutates at small nodes. (2) It flips all the arrows between big nodes which correspond to digons in Figure 39, i.e. reverses their direction and changes their color. The following lemma is a simple exercise in rearranging reduced expressions: 

Lemma 13.23. The reduced expression M can be changed into C only by using two moves and three moves. 

Let R be the sequence of mutations realizing the change from Q1 

> M

to Q1 

> C

and R′ the sequence which moves Q2 

> C′

to Q2  

> M′

. Our candidate sequence is given by RLR ′ (read as a sequence of mutations from left to right). Since the mutation corresponding to the three move does not change any arrows between the noncommutative nodes, this composite sequence also has the effect of flipping all of the arrows which are in the digons. We now want to compare directly the functions of our mutated chart RLR ′(Q1 

> M

) and those of 

Q2  

> M′

. Due to Le’s work we know that the functions on the small nodes transform correctly, and moreover we know that the norms of the noncommutative coordinates have not changed (and hence have transformed correctly). Therefore, we can make our lives much easier by considering a seed for which all of the commutative nodes and every norm is equal to 1 and explicitly computing the transformation. Consider the triple of flags (A1, A 2, A 3) = ( UΘ, w 0UΘl2, uw 0UΘl3) such that l2 = ˇβp(A), l 3 =ˇβp(B) and u = FM (t) such that N (A) = N (B) = 1 and all the real entries of t are 1 and the vector entries given in order by v1, . . . , v p with N (vi) = 1 . We will denote for convenience 

Vi := ι(vi) and we recall that σ(Vi) = Vi. We will also denote for convenience l∗ := στ p−1(l) for elements of LΘ.Then we can compute all of the coordinates of Q1 

> M

. We first see that Λi(A3, A 2) = 1 for i < p 

since all the norms and commutative factorization parameters are 1. Λp(A3, A 2) is given by 

Xp = Λ p(A3, A 2) = σ(B∗) · (M1 · · · Mp−1(Vp∗)) · (M1 · · · Mp−2(Vp−1∗)) · · · V1∗ · A

= σ(B∗)Vpτ (Vp−1)Vp−3 · · · V1∗A . 

The other noncommutative functions can be computed in order using the formulas for the potentials. We have 

X0 = A, X1 = τ (V1∗)στ (A), X2 = τ (V2∗)( V1∗)A, X3 = τ (V3∗)( V2∗)τ (V1∗)στ (A), . . . Xi = τ (Vi∗)( Vi−1∗) · · · στ i(A) Xp+1 = B . 

Now we compute the functions in the rotated chart, Q2  

> M′

which amounts to considering the configuration (u−1w0UΘl2, w 0UΘl3, U Θ). An interpolating sequence between w0UΘl3 and UΘ

using the word M ′ begins with A13 = M1 · · · Mp−1UΘ. This is where the scaling corresponding to ˇβp should happen and so l(M1 · · · Mp−1UΘ, A 3) = B = l(A1, A 3). Therefore writing M =

ςi1 · · · ςip2 , we have the interpolating sequence is just given by Ak 

> 3

= ςi1 · · · ςin−k UΘ. This makes it easy to compute the corresponding functions. NONCOMMUTATIVE CLUSTER VARIETIES AND MODULI SPACES OF LOCAL SYSTEMS 101 

The internal coordinates we are interested in are X′ 

> i

= Λ p(u−1w0UΘl2, M 1 · · · MiUΘ). To compute X′ 

> i

, we write u = u1(v1)u2(v2) . . . u p(vp) where each ui(vi) is the part of the product of 

FM (t) which corresponds to the mountain block Mi e.g u2(v2) = x2(1) x3(1) · · · xp(v2) · · · x2(1) .Now we manipulate 

Λp(u−1w0UΘl2, M 1 · · · MiUΘ) = w0(l−12 )Λ p(UΘ, w 0uM 1 · · · MiUΘ) = σ(A∗)[ uM 1 · · · Mi]0.

Next, we use the fact that uk(vk)Mi = Miuk(τ (vk)) for i̸ = k to write 

[uM 1 · · · Mi]0 = [ u1(v1)M1u2(τ (v2)) M2 · · · ui(τ i−1(vi)Mi]0

Looking at just Λp[ui(vi)Mi]0 we find that the only contribution happens when we decompose 

xp(vi)ςpςp−1 . . . ς i giving us a ˇβp(vi). We still have to worry about the remaining upper triangular part xp(−v−1 

> i

)ςp−1 . . . ς i. Luckily this reflected into a root space which commutes with all the other uk(t) and Mk for k > i and we can remove it. Therefore, we have 

[u1(v1)M1u2(τ (v2)) M2 · · · ui(τ i−1(vi)Mi]0 = ˇβp(V1) ˇβp(τ (V2)) . . . ˇβp(τ i−1(Vi)) .

Putting it all together, we have 

X′ 

> i

= σ(A)∗V1τ (V2) . . . τ i−1(Vi) ,

and the frozen variables X′ 

> 0

= σ(A)∗, X′ 

> p+1

= B, Xp = σ(A)∗V1τ (V2) . . . V p∗B.Therefore, we have to switch at every variable other than Xp. For p even we also weave at each X2i, but for p odd we weave at each X2i+1 except for the frozen variable Xp.Comparing the decorated quivers after weaving, we see that they agree, proving the theorem. 

□

13.3. Type G2. We now consider Jordan split type G2. As in Jordan split type Bp we only need to prove two lemmas in order to use the general theory to construct cluster charts for arbitrary configurations of flags. 

Theorem 11.11: The two charts on triples of flags related by the six move are connected by a sequence of cluster mutations. 

Proposition 11.19: Two charts related by twisted cyclic shift are connected by a sequence of cluster mutations. In this case, G is associated to a commutative Jordan algebra given by a field extension 

K′ associated to the root β1 and a degree 3 Jordan algebra over K′ which we denote simply by J = ( V, ι, 1) which is associated to the short root β2. The grading Weyl group, W (R), is generated by ς1, ς 2. For ease of reading in this section, we will denote β1 = α and β2 = β.For any Jordan algebra of degree 3, the norm map is degree 3, and the adjugate map is degree 2. We can define a trilinear form 3N (u, v, w ) := N (u + v + w) − N (u + v) − N (u + w) − N (v +

w) + N (u) + N (v) + N (w), and a bilinear product 2( v × w) := τ (v + w) − τ (v) − τ (w). This bilinear product is called the Freudenthal product. A choice of Jordan pinning consists of the following compatible collection of maps: 

x1 : K′ → Gx2 : V → G

ˇα : K′× → G

ˇβ : Γ( J) → Gy1 : K′ → Gy2 : V → G . 

There are two different Lusztig maps coming from the two reduced expressions of w0, D1, D 2:

F1(a, u, b, v, c, w ) = x1(a)x2(u)x1(b)x2(v)x1(c)x2(w)

F2(u, a, v, b, w, c ) = x2(u)x1(a)x2(v)x1(b)x2(w)x1(c)

with a, b, c ∈ K′ and u, v, w ∈ V .

Lemma 13.24. The opposition involution v → v∗ on uβ is trivial. Proof. It suffices to compute the action of ς2w0 = ς1ς2ς1ς2ς1 on ˇβ(v) using Lemmas 4.34 and 4.35. 

ς1ς2ς1ς2ς1 · ˇβ(v) = ς1ς2ς1ς2 · ˇα(N (v)) ˇβ(v) = ς1ς2ς1 · ˇα(N (v)) ˇβ(τ (v)) = ς1ς2 · ˇα(N (v)) ˇβ(τ (v)) = ς1 · ˇα(N (v)) ˇβ(v) = ˇβ(v) .

As in Corollary 13.13, the action on the coroot induces the action on the root space. □102 ZACHARY GREENBERG, DANI KAUFMAN, MERIK NIEMEYER, AND ANNA WIENHARD 

Corollary 13.25. The action of w0 on ˇβ2 is given by w0 · ˇβ2(v) = ˇβ2(σ(v−1)) .

13.3.1. Rotation and six move. We now wish to prove Theorem 11.11 for G2. Our proof strategy will incidentally also construct a rotation sequence and prove Proposition 11.19. Let u = F1(a, u, b, v, c, w ). For simplicity, we consider the triple of flags (A1, A 2, A 3) = (UΘ, w 0UΘ, uw 0UΘ) with two trivial L-distances. We now compute the functions associated to the cluster chart QD1,1 (Figure 43). First we compute the L-distance l(uw 0UΘ, w 0UΘ) as in Remark 9.2. We find l(A3, A 2) = ˇα  aN (u)b2N (v)2c ˇβ (ι(u)bι (τ (v)) cι (w)) and so 

∆1(A3, A 2) = ab 2cN (u)N (v) ∆2(A3, A 2) = bcι (w)ι(τ (v)) ι(u).

To keep the notation light, we will suppress the function ι and identify u = ι(u). This only affects the exceptional case, as we can take ι to be the identity map in all other cases. Using Lemma 10.4, the formulas for the potentials in terms of the coordinates, we obtain a series of equations each containing exactly one new interior node. Following the order of the terms in our reduced expression, we compute first a commutative variable we call x, then the non-commutative variable X, followed by y and finally Y . We label the nodes corresponding to these variables 1,2,3,4 respectively: 

a1 = x = b2cN (u)N (v)

a3 = y = b3c2N (v)2N (u)

a2 = X = b2cN (v)τ (u)

a4 = Y = bcτ (v)u. 

1

b2cN (u)N (v)2

b2cN (v)τ (u)3

b3c2N (v)2N (u)4

bcτ (v)ubcwτ (v)uab 2cN (u)N (v)

Figure 43. The seed QD1,1 for type G2.We now consider the mutation sequence, read left to right, S = μ3μ1μ2μ3.

Lemma 13.26. The mutation sequence S followed by a switch at 4 changes QD1,1 to QD2,2.Proof. This follows from a very similar calculation to Lemma 13.20. First we calculate the mutation sequence following our polygonal cluster algebra mutation rules (Figure 44). The first mutation happens at the variable y so we calculate 

y′ = b5c4N (v)3N (u)2 + b6c3N (v)3N (u)2

b3c2N (v)2N (u) = b2cN (v)N (u)( c + b).

The next two mutations commute with each other, and so in turn we find 

x′ = ab 2cN (u)N (v) + b2cN (v)N (u)( b + c)

b2cN (u)N (v) = a + b + c

and 

X′ = σ(X)−1τ (Y ) + X−1y′ = vc + u(c + b)

and finally 

y′′ = ab 2cN (u)N (v)N (X′) + ( a + b + c)( b3c3N (v)2N (u)) 

b2cN (v)N (u)( c + b) = (aN (X′) + bc 2N (v)( a + b + c)) 

b + c .

Next we need to calculate the cluster chart associated to QD2,2. Applying the twisted cyclic shift, we obtain (sGA2, A 3, A 1) = ( sGw0UΘ, uw 0UΘ, U Θ) which is the same configuration as NONCOMMUTATIVE CLUSTER VARIETIES AND MODULI SPACES OF LOCAL SYSTEMS 103 

(u−1sGw0UΘ, w 0UΘ, U Θ). As in Lemma 13.20, the interpolating sequence is given by successively removing generators from the end of D2:

A03 = A3, A13 = ς1ς2ς1ς2ς1UΘ, A23 = ς1ς2ς1ς2UΘ, . . . , A 53 = ς1UΘ, A63 = A1.

To see this is the same chart as the result of the mutation sequence we will show: 

∆1(u−1sGA2, A 43) = x′

(23) 

∆2(u−1sGA2, A 43) = X′

(24) 

∆1(u−1sGA2, A 33) = y′′ 

(25) 

∆2(u−1sGA2, A 13) = σ(Y ).(26) We begin by computing l(u−1sGA2, A 43) = l(UΘ, w 0uς 1ς2UΘ). So we decompose uς 1ς2 using properties of the Jordan pinning as follows: 

[uς 1ς2]0 = [ x1(a)x2(u)x1(b)x2(v)x1(c)x2(w)ς1ς2]0

= [ x1(a)x2(u)x1(b)x2(v)x1(c)ς1ς2]0

= [ x1(a)x2(u)x1(b)x2(v)y1(c−1)ˇ α(c)x1(−c−1)ς2]0

= [ x1(a)x2(u)x1(b)y1(c−1)y2(v−1) ˇβ(v)x2(−v−1)ˇ α(c) ˇβ(c)] 0

= [ x1(a)x2(u)y1(( b + c)−1)ˇ α(1 + bc −1)x1(( b−1 + c−1)−1)y2(v−1) ˇβ(v)ˇ α(c) ˇβ(c)] 0

= [ x1(a)y1(( b + c)−1)x2(u)y2((1 + bc −1)v−1)ˇ α(1 + bc −1)x1(( b−1 + c−1)−1) ˇβ(v)ˇ α(c) ˇβ(c)] 0

= [ˇ α(1 + a(b + c)−1)x1(( a−1 + ( b + c)−1)−1)x2(u)y2((1 + bc −1)v−1)ˇ α(c + b) ˇβ(vc )] 0

= [ˇ α(1 + a(b + c)−1)x1(( a−1 + ( b + c)−1)−1) ˇβ(1 + u(1 + bc −1)v−1)ˇ α(c + b) ˇβ(vc )] 0

= ˇ α(a + b + c) ˇβ(vc + u(c + b)) .

Thus ∆1(u−1sGA2, A 43) = a + b + c = x′ and ∆2(u−1sGA2, A 43) = vc + u(c + b) = X′, which proves Equations (23) and (24). Next we decompose uς 1ς2ς1 to compute l(u−1sGA2, A 33). We can use the previous calculation if we keep track of the xi which don’t escape past the new ς1:

[uς 1ς2ς1]0 = [ x1(a)x2(u)x1(b)x2(v)x1(c)x2(w)ς1ς2ς1]0

= [ˇ α(a + b + c) ˇβ(X′)x1

 aN (X′)( b + c)−1(a + b + c)−1 x2(z)x1(N (v)c2b(b + c)−1)ς1]0

= [ˇ α(a + b + c) ˇβ(X′)ˇ α(N (v)c2b(b + c)−1 + aN (X′)( a + b + c)−1)] 0

= [ˇ α(y′′ ) ˇβ(X′)] 0 .

Applying ∆1 we verify Equation (25). For Equation (26) we note the final x2(w) escapes leaving 

[x1(a)x2(u)x1(b)x2(v)x1(c)ς1ς2ς1ς2ς1]0 a product of root spaces against the opposite word. Thus we compute the L-distance step by step as in Corollary 8.13 to see: 

[uς 1ς2ς1ς2ς1]0 =[ x1(a)x2(u)x1(b)x2(v)x1(c)ς1ς2ς1ς2ς1]= ς1ς2ς1ς2(ˇ α(a)) · ς1ς2ς1( ˇβ(u)) · ς1ς2(ˇ α(b)) · ς1( ˇβ(v))ˇ α(c)= ˇ α  aN (u)b2N (v)c ˇβ(ubτ (v)c) .

Thus ∆2(u−1sGA2, A 13) = bcuτ (v) = σ(bcτ (v)u) = σ(Y ) as needed. □

Now we consider another mutation sequence T = μ2μ3μ4μ2. This sequence is obtained from 

S by switching the roles of the big and small nodes. 

Lemma 13.27. The mutation sequence T changes our cluster chart to QD2,3

Proof. This calculation is almost identical to the previous one, only the roles of the two roots are reversed. We first calculate the effect of the cluster mutations. We have 

X′ = σ(X)−1y + xX −1Y

= ( b2cN (v)τ (u)) −1b3c2N (v)2N (u) + b2cN (u)N (v)( b2cN (v)τ (u)) −1bcτ (v)u

= bcN (v)u + bcuτ (v)u . 104 ZACHARY GREENBERG, DANI KAUFMAN, MERIK NIEMEYER, AND ANNA WIENHARD 

> 1234

(a) 

> 1234

(b) 

> 1234

(c) 

> 1234

(d) 

Figure 44. Mutation sequence sending QD1,1 to QD2,2 in type G2

The next two mutations commute and we find 

Y ′ =σ(Y )−1σ(X′) + bcwτ (v)uY −1 = v + u + w , y′ = N (bcN (v)u + bcuτ (v)u) + b4c2N (u)2N (v)2

b3c2N (v)2N (u) = cN (v + u) + bN (u) .

The final mutation at 2 produces 

X′′ = xσ (Y ′)σ(X′)−1 + y′bcwτ (v)uX ′− 1 =  bN (u)( u + v + w) + y′wv −1u (u + uv −1u)−1 .

Now we want to compare these functions to those of the cluster chart QD2,3. This chart uses the configuration of flags (A3, s GA1, A 2) which is the same configuration as (uw 0UΘ, U Θ, w 0UΘ).The interpolating sequence of flags is given by adding one generator in D2 at a time: 

A01 = A11, A11 = ς2UΘ, A21 = ς2ς1UΘ, . . . , A 51 = ς2ς1ς2ς1ς2UΘ, A61 = A2.

Thus we want to prove that: 

∆1(uw 0UΘ, A 21) = y′

∆2(uw 0UΘ, A 21) = X′

∆2(uw 0UΘ, A 31) = X′′ 

∆1(uw 0UΘ, A 51) = x . NONCOMMUTATIVE CLUSTER VARIETIES AND MODULI SPACES OF LOCAL SYSTEMS 105 

First we compute l(uw 0Uθ , A 21) by decomposing [u−1ς2ς1]0:

[x2(−w)x1(−c)x2(−v)x1(−b)x2(−u)x1(−a)ς2ς1 ]0

= [ x2(−w)x1(−c)x2(−v)x1(−b)y2(−u−1) ˇβ(u)ς1]0

= [ x2(−w)x1(−c)x2(−v)y2(−u−1)y1(−b−1)ˇ α(b)ˇ α(N (u)) ˇβ(u)] = [ x2(−w)x1(−c)y2(−(v + u)−1) ˇβ(1 + vu −1)x2(−(v−1 + u−1)−1)y1(−b−1)ˇ α(b)ˇ α(N (u)) ˇβ(u)] 0

= [ x2(−w)y2(−(v + u)−1)x1(−c)y1(−b−1N (1 + vu −1)) ˇβ(1 + vu −1)ˇ α(b)ˇ α(N (u)) ˇβ(u)] 0

= [ ˇβ(1 + w(v + u)−1)ˇ α(1 + cb −1N (1 + vu −1)) ˇβ(1 + vu −1)ˇ α(b)ˇ α(N (u)) ˇβ(u)] 0

= ˇβ(u + v + w)ˇ α(bN (u) + cN (u + v)) .

This proves ∆1(uw 0UΘ, A 21) = bN (u) + cN (u + v) = y′ and ∆2(uw 0UΘ, A 21) = u + v + w = X′

as needed. To compare with A31, we add another ς2 on the right and find 

[u−1ς2ς1ς2]0 =[ ˇβ(u + v + w)ˇ α(y′) ˇβ  (u + v)w−1(u + v) + ( v + u)) −1(y′) + bN (u)( uv −1u + u)−1]0 .

By refactoring we see that 

(( u+v)w−1(u+v)+( v+u)) −1 = ( w+u+v)−1(w)( u+v)−1 = ( w+u+v)−1(w)v−1u(uv −1u+u)−1.

Thus 

[u−1ς2ς1ς2]0 = ˇβ(X′′ )ˇ α(y′)

as desired. For the final equation use Corollary 8.13 as before to compute l(uw 0UΘ, A 51):

[u−1ς2ς1ς2ς1]0 = ˇ α(cN (v)b2N (u)) ˇβ(wcτ (v)bu )

Thus ∆1(uw 0UΘ, A 51) = b2cN (u)N (v) = x as needed. □

> 1234

(a) 

> 1234

(b) 

> 1234

(c) 

> 1234

(d) 

Figure 45. Mutation Sequence sending Q1 

> D1

to Q3 

> D2

in G2106 ZACHARY GREENBERG, DANI KAUFMAN, MERIK NIEMEYER, AND ANNA WIENHARD 

Proposition 13.28 (Proposition 11.19 for G2). The twisted cyclic shift and the 6-move are realized by polygonal cluster mutations in Jordan split type G2.Proof. Each of the mutation sequences S, T are involutions. Starting at Q1 

> D1

and applying S we go to Q2 

> D2

. Next applying T we move to Q3 

> D1

. This is the rotation. Applying S again moves us to Q1 

> D2

, which is the 6-move. □

Remark 13.29 . The final mutated cluster variables appear to be rational functions in the fac-torization parameters. One can use the trilinear form and Freudenthal product to rewrite them as as polynomials in the factorization parameters, compare to [GW26b] 14. Higher noncommutative rank 

The key difference between groups of higher noncommutative rank and the previous groups is the lack of a unique system of Jordan weights. Previously the system of Jordan weights were used to define the coordinates associated to the nodes of the cluster chart. Instead, we use a Jordan pinning of the group to construct a noncommutative grounded wiring network (Section 7) which will parameterize configurations of flags, elements of G, and surface representations. This description will match the noncommutative cluster structure of [GK24]. 14.1. Type Ap. Recall that the recognition theorem (Theorem 3.13) states that for p > 2 any 

Ap graded Lie algebra is a central extension of sl p+1 (D) for an associative unital algebra D

over a field K. The corresponding Θ-simply connected group is SL p+1 (D). However it will be convenient to consider the central extension GL p+1 (D) of invertible (p + 1) × (p + 1) matrices with entries in D as well. We will assume for now that if p = 2 then we are in the classical case, so that G is not a form of the group E6.14.1.1. Θ-pinning. We now construct a Jordan pinning as discussed in Section 4.2. In this case, each Jordan algebra Ji is of associative type and we identify the structure group Γ( J) with a subgroup of D× × D×. Then a choice of pinning maps is the following: 

xi(M ) = 

  

> 1
> . . .
> 1M
> 1
> . . .1

 ˇβi(A, B ) = 

 

> 1
> . . .A B. . .1

 yi(M ) = 

   

> 1
> . . .1
> M1
> . . .1



In order to construct the corresponding network, we must make a choice of system of Jordan weights. One such system is to take Λ1(L1, · · · , L p+1 ) = ( L1, L 2) and Λi(L1, · · · , L p+1 ) = (1k, L i+1 ) for all i > 1.

Example 14.1 . Let G = GL 3k(R) and choose Θ as in A3k−1(2 , k ) to realize G as a central extension of the group of Jordan split type A2(Mk(R)) . The Jordan pinning then has the form 

x1(M ) = 

1k M 00 1k 00 0 1k

 ˇβ1(A, B ) = 



A 0 00 B 00 0 1k

 y1(M ) = 



1k 0 0

M 1k 00 0 1k



x2(M ) = 

1k 0 00 1k M

0 0 1k

 ˇβ2(A, B ) = 



1k 0 00 A 00 0 B

 y2(M ) = 



1k 0 00 1k 00 M 1k

 .

The following are two possible systems of Jordan weights: 

Λ1

ABC

 = ( A, B ) Λ2

ABC

 = ( 1k, C ) or 

Λ1

ABC

 = ( A, 1k) Λ2

ABC

 = ( B, C ) .NONCOMMUTATIVE CLUSTER VARIETIES AND MODULI SPACES OF LOCAL SYSTEMS 107 

Consider the triple of flags (UΘ, w 0UΘl2, uw 0UΘl3) with u = x1(M1)x2(M2)x1(M3). We write 

l2 = A B C and l3 = D E F . Using the first system of Jordan weights we calculate 

l(uw 0lU Θl3, w 0lU Θl2) = w0(l−13 )[( ς1ς2)∗ ˇβ1∗ (ι(M3))( ς1)∗ ˇβ2∗ (ι(M2)) ˇβ1∗ (ι(M1))] l2

=



F −1

E−1

D−1



M3

M −13

1k



M2

1k

M −12



1k

M1

M −11



ABC

 =



F −1M3M2AE−1M −13 M1BD−1M −12 M −11 C



= ˇβ1(F −1M3M2A, E −1M −13 M1B) ˇβ2(1k, D −1M −12 M −11 C).

If we choose the word ς1ς2ς1, we obtain the following interpolating sequence of flags: 

A03 = w0UΘ · ˇβ1(A, B ) ˇβ2(1k, C )

A13 = x1(M1)w0UΘ · ˇβ1(A, M 2D) ˇβ2(1k, M 1B)

A23 = x1(M1)x2(M2)w0UΘ · ˇβ1(D, M 2A) ˇβ2(1k, M 1B)

A33 = x1(M1)x2(M2)x1(M3)w0UΘ · ˇβ1(D, E ) ˇβ2(1k, F ).

The amalgamated network is shown in Figure 46a. Using the second system of Jordan weights, we obtain a slightly different interpolating se-quence: 

A03 = w0UΘ · ˇβ1(A, 1k) ˇβ2(B, C )

A13 = x1(M1)w0UΘ · ˇβ1(A, 1k) ˇβ2(M2D, M 3E)

A23 = x1(M1)x2(M2)w0UΘ ˇβ1(D, 1k) ˇβ2(M2A, M 3E)

A33 = x1(M1)x2(M2)x1(M3)w0UΘ ˇβ1(D, 1k) ˇβ2(E, F ).

The new amalgamated network is shown in Figure 46b. The difference between the two networks is only on the strands at level 3 between the two bridges and the legs labeled 2. They are clearly equivalent under leg slide and also both equivalent to the left slid network in Figure 47. 1                      

> AD−1
> 2
> BD−1M−12M2AE−1
> 3
> CB−1M−11M1BF−1
> 3221
> C−1M1M2D1B−1M−11M3EA−1M−12M−13F

(a) First system of Θ-weights.                       

> 1
> AD−1
> 2
> BD−1M−12M2AE−1
> 3
> CE−1M−13M3EF−1
> 3221
> C−1M1M2DB−1M−11M3E1A−1M−12M−13F

(b) Second system of Θ-weights. 

Figure 46. Networks for A2(Mk(R)) with different systems of Θ-weights. 14.1.2. Three move. 

Lemma 14.2. The networks given by two seeds which differ by a three move ςiςi+1 ςi → ςi+1 ςiςi+1 

are related by leg slides and a single square move at the single internal face of E(j + 1 , j, j + 1) 

where j = ( i + 1) ∗.Proof. We begin by fully sliding all the legs in each network to the right. Showing these left slid networks are related by a square move proves the result. In Figure 48, we see the portion of each network corresponding to the three move. In order to use the relations for the square move given in Equation (10), we identify the edges of the network as follows : 

a1 = M −12 M −13 M1

b1 = N2

a2 = M −11

b2 = N1

a3 = M1

b3 = N −11

a4 = M2

b4 = N1N −13 N −12 .108 ZACHARY GREENBERG, DANI KAUFMAN, MERIK NIEMEYER, AND ANNA WIENHARD 

1

A M −12 M −13 F D−1

2

B M −11 M3E D−1M −12 M −13 F E−1

1

C D−1M −12 M −11 E−1M −13M3E F −1

3 2 1

C−1M1M2DB−1M −11 M3EA−1M −12 M −13 F

Figure 47. Left slid network for A2(Mk(R)) .

j − 11 M1M2

j

1 M1 M2 M −11 M3

j + 1 1 1 M3M2 M −12 M −13

M −12 M −11

M −11 M −12 M −13 M1

1 N2N3

1 1 N1 N2 N3N −11 N1N −13

1 1 N2N1 N −11 N −12

N −11 N −12

N −11 N1N −13 N −12

Figure 48. The left slid networks E(j + 1 , j, j + 1) and E(j, j + 1 , j ).We then have 

N1 = b2 = (1 + a4a1a2a3)−1a4 = (1 + M −13 M1)−1M2 = ( M3 + M1)−1M3M2

N2 = b1 = (1 + a3a4a1a2)a−12 a−11 a−14 = (1 + M1M −13 )M3 = ( M3 + M1)

N3 = N −12 b−14 N1 = ( M3 + M1)−1[(1 + M3M −11 )−1M −11 ]−1(M3 + M1)−1M3M2

= ( M3 + M1)−1M1M2 .

Next we compare these relations to the information from the flags. The first network encodes the configuration of flags (UΘ, w 0UΘ, uw 0UΘ) where u is decomposed as xi(M1)xi+1 (M2)xi(M3).The second network instead decomposes u as xi+1 (N1)xi(N2)xi+1 (N3). We compute the portion of the matrix with rows and columns i, i + 1 , i + 2 as follows: 

xi(M1)xi+1 (M2)xi(M3) = 



1 M1 + M3 M1M2

1 M2

1

 =



1 N2 N2N3

1 N1 + N3

1

 = xi+1 (N1)xi(N2)xi+1 (N3).

For these decompositions to be equal we must have 

N1 = ( M1 + M3)−1M3M2, N2 = M1 + M3, N3 = ( M1 + M3)−1M1M2 ,

which agrees with the square move calculation above. □

14.2. Type Cp. Now consider a group G with a Cp grading. By the recognition theorem (Theorem 3.15), for p ≥ 4 the Lie algebra of G is sl 2(J) for J a Hermitian type Jordan algebra NONCOMMUTATIVE CLUSTER VARIETIES AND MODULI SPACES OF LOCAL SYSTEMS 109 

sitting inside an associative algebra R with anti-involution ⋆. Once again, we will assume that we are not in the exceptional case, i.e. G is not a form of the group E7.When we use the symplectic form 



> −11
> . . .
> −11

,

g sits inside a Lie algebra eg with an A2p−1 grading. 14.2.1. Θ-pinning. We can use a pinning and the networks from Section 14.1 to pin and param-eterize G as discussed in Section 10.3. Let exi, eyi, ˇγi be a A2p−1 pinning of eG. Then a pinning for G is given by: 

xi(M ) = exi(M )ex2p−i(⋆M )

xp(M ) = exp(M )ˇβi(A, B ) = ˇ γi(A, B )ˇ γ2p−i(⋆B, ⋆A )ˇβp(A) = ˇβp(A, ⋆A −1)

yi(M ) = eyi(M )ey2p−i(⋆M )

yp(M ) = eyp(M ) .

Example 14.3 . Concretely consider the group Sp 2∗6(R) which has a C3-grading with J = H2(R).We can choose the following pinning, 

x1 : M2(R) → Sp 2∗6(R)

M 7 →

      

> 1kM
> 1k0
> 1k0
> 1k0
> 1kMT
> 1k



x2 : M2(R) → Sp 2∗6(R)

M 7 →

      

> 1k0
> 1kM
> 1k0
> 1kMT
> 1k0
> 1k



x1 : H2(R) → Sp 2∗6(R)

M 7 →

     

> 1k0
> 1k0
> 1kM
> 1k0
> 1k0
> 1k



ˇβ1 : M2(R) × M2(R) → Sp 2∗6(R)(A, B ) 7 →

 

> A B1k
> 1k
> B−T
> A−T



ˇβ2 : M2(R) × M2(R) → Sp 2∗6(R)(A, B ) 7 →



> 1k
> A BB−T
> A−T
> 1k



ˇβ3 : M2(R) → Sp 2∗6(R)

A 7 →



> 1k
> 1k
> AA−T
> 1k
> 1k



y1 : M2(R) → Sp 2∗6(R)

M 7 →

      

> 1k
> M1k
> 01k
> 01k
> 01k
> MT1k



y2 : M2(R) → Sp 2∗6(R)

M 7 →

      

> 1k
> 01k
> M1k
> 01k
> MT1k
> 01k



y3 : H2(R) → Sp 2∗6(R)

M 7 →

     

> 1k
> 01k
> 01k
> M1k
> 01k
> 01k

.

If we chose the system of Jordan weights Λ1(A, B, C ) = ( A, 1) , Λ2(A, B, C ) = ( B, 1) , and 

Λ3(A, B, C ) = C and reduced expression ς1ς2ς3ς1ς2ς3ς1ς2ς3 we obtain the network in Figure 49 parameterizing Conf × 

> 3

(AΘ).1234561 2 3456

Figure 49. A network for Θ type C3.110 ZACHARY GREENBERG, DANI KAUFMAN, MERIK NIEMEYER, AND ANNA WIENHARD 

14.2.2. Four move. We now wish to prove Theorem 11.11 for Cp. For i < p , the three move 

ςi−1ςiςi−1 7 → ςiςi−1ςi is realized by two and three moves in the unfolded A2p−1 network. There-fore the calculation in Section 14.1.2 covers these cases. The remaining case is the four move 

ςp−1ςpςp−1ςp 7 → ςpςp−1ςpςp−1. This move lives inside a left slid network of type C2 and so it suffices to verify the following: 

Lemma 14.4. The left slid grounded wiring networks of type C2 for D1 = ςp−1ςpςp−1ςp and 

D2 = ςpςp−1ςpςp−1 are related by a sequence of four square moves. Proof. We begin by lifting both words to words in the A3 Weyl group. These words are related by a sequence of two moves and three moves and thus can be realized by a sequence of square moves. In Figure 50, we show an explicit sequence of square moves in faces 3, 2, 1, 3 which realizes the transformation from D1 to D2. Since the weighted network associated to a given word and choice of Jordan weights is unique it must be the case that the weights of the final network agree with those on the chart associated to D2 even though we passed though asymmetric charts to get there. □

123 

> eς1
> eς3

eς2 eς1 

> eς3

eς2

123

eς1 eς2 eς3 eς2 eς1 eς2

1 23

eς1 eς2 eς1 

> eς3

eς2 eς1

123

eς2 eς1 eς2 eς3 eς2 eς1

123

> eς1
> eς3

eς2 eς1

> eς3

eς2

Figure 50. Realizing the four move with square moves. 14.2.3. Rotation and Cp networks. We already proved that rotation by mutation for groups of type Cp is possible by simply rotating the associated chart in for the group of type A2p−1 which contains it. However, we make here an interesting observation. Groups of type B2 can also be considered as type C2 where the Jordan algebra on the long root is commutative. For type B2 we rotate in an entirely different way; a single mutation at either the small or large node has the effect of flipping to a rotated chart with the other reduced word, recall Figure 42. However in the C2 case we are entirely unable to do either of these options. In Figure 50 we see that we cannot mutate at the square labeled 2 (which would be the small node for B2) and we cannot mutate at square 1 immediately after mutating at 3 and obtain a network corresponding to a reduced expression in A3 (which would be like mutating at the large node). We propose the following remedy: define mutation at the square 2 by the composition of square moves and regrounding which rotates the C2 chart QD1,1 to QD2,2 and mutation at squares 1 and 3 by the composition moving QD1,1 to QD2,3. The composition of these two mutations clearly has order 3 in analogy to the B2 case. We could try to define a whole theory of type Cp networks using these rules as mutations. We note that one must work with grounded networks to make sense of this since the new composite mutations involve regrounding the network. NONCOMMUTATIVE CLUSTER VARIETIES AND MODULI SPACES OF LOCAL SYSTEMS 111 

14.3. Exceptional Groups. The exceptional groups with A2, C3 and F4 grading cannot be described using noncommutative networks or polygonal cluster algebras. They light their own path, following their own exceptional rules. However, our rules for constructing cluster charts still gives us a collection of L-distances which parametrize a given configuration of flags. However we are not aware of a simple set of rules for changing between charts that we could call cluster transformations. It would be interesting to try and isolate such a set of transformations. They would include 

• Octonionic 3 move for A2,

• Octonionic rotation for A2,

• Octonionic rotation for C3,

• Noncommutative rotation for F4.The flip and 4-move actually are already understood as they live in A1 and C2 types respectively. 

Remark 14.5 . The quaternionic F4 case is interesting to consider since it both contains a B3

which is given by a noncommutative polygonal cluster algebra and a C3 which is given by a noncommutative network. Somehow the correct structure here would marry these two worlds together. 

# Part 4. Applications 

We will now discuss some concrete applications of the theory developed in the preceding parts. First, we will use the coordinates from Part 3 to obtain coordinates on subsets of UΘ and G. We use the combinatorics to compute the Gauss decomposition of group elements, their opposite decomposition, as well as the decomposition of the product. This has useful applications to positivity which we will discuss in the subsequent section. There we will consider the special cases in which (G, Θ) is such that all Jordan algebras admit a positive structure. Then a positive Jordan pinning induces a positive structure on G and its decorated flag variety, which is actually the same as described in [GW25]. We will discuss how the cluster coordinates from Part 3 detect this positivity on the decorated flag variety. Using the previous discussion we will apply this to detect positivity of elements in G, allowing us to obtain alternative proofs for some statements about the positive semigroups from [GW25, GW26a, GW26b]. On the other hand, we will explain how to extend the coordinates to moduli spaces of decorated local systems. 15. Cluster-like coordinates on groups 

We will provide coordinates on an open dense subset of G using our previous construction of coordinates on Conf × 

> 4

(AΘ). This will eventually also give us positivity tests when G has a 

Θ-positive structure in the sense of Guichard-Wienhard [GW25]: given an element g ∈ G, we can decide whether g is in the positive semigroup by evaluating certain functions on G in g.15.1. Group elements as configurations of flags. Fix G, a Jordan split group of type R,with associated parabolic PΘ. For two elements w1, w 2 ∈ W (R) of the Weyl group of R, the 

double R-Bruhat cell is given by 

Cw1,w 2 := PΘw1PΘ ∩ P opp Θ w2P opp Θ .

In this case we note that G does not decompose as a disjoint union of these sets, which may not even be cells. If w0 ∈ W is the longest element, the set 

Ce,w 0 = PΘ ∩ P opp Θ w0P opp Θ

is open and dense in PΘ.112 ZACHARY GREENBERG, DANI KAUFMAN, MERIK NIEMEYER, AND ANNA WIENHARD 

The cluster structure we have given on Conf × 

> 3

(A ) is actually and extension of a cluster structure on PΘ which we describe in detail in the next section. In analogy to Proposition 11.2, we have 

Conf × 

> 3

(A ) ∼= Ce,w 0 × LΘ.

Under this isomorphism, the cell Ce,w 0 corresponds to configurations for which one L-distance is 1.Of course, one can carry out the same construction for the cell Cw0,e , which is open dense in P opp Θ . We will depict these correspondences as in Figure 51, where we think of three flags representing a configuration which corresponds to an element of PΘ or P opp Θ as sitting at the vertices of the triangles. As PΘ is a semidirect product of LΘ and UΘ, we may choose this correspondence such that one edge of the triangle essentially parametrizes LΘ as indicated.   

> 1
> LΘ
> UΘ
> 1
> LΘ
> Uopp Θ
> amalgamate
> 11
> Uopp Θ
> UΘ
> LΘ

Figure 51. Relating parabolic subgroups and configurations of 3 decorated flags; using cluster amalgamation to relate an open dense subset of G to con-figurations of 4 decorated flags. All of this will be made more precise in the subsequent sections but for now it suffices to know that open dense subsets of the two opposite parabolic subgroups are isomorphic to subsets of 

Conf × 

> 3

(A ). Consequently, we have cluster charts on these subsets. Using cluster amalgamation, we obtain charts on an open dense subset of G as indicated in Figure 51: Namely, there is a map 

G0 = U opp Θ LΘUΘ ⊃ Cw0,e Ce,w 0 → Conf 4(A )

which comes from identifying Cw0,e and Ce,w 0 with Conf × 

> 3

(A ).

Remark 15.1 . Generic elements of G0 lie in the domain and map to Conf × 

> 4

(A ) under this map. More precisely, we will see that this is the case for elements which lie in Cw0,e Ce,w 0 ∩UΘLΘU opp Θ ,i.e. also admit an opposite Gauss decomposition. Using this perspective and the cluster coordinates developed in the preceding section, one can concretely compute Gauss decompositions: Given g ∈ Cw0,e Ce,w 0 ⊂ G0, we can consider the corresponding configuration cg ∈ Conf 4(A ) and compute the cluster coordinates using the triangulation in Figure 51. Now a flip in the triangulation may be realized by cluster mutations, and the corresponding coordinates may be used to compute an opposite Gauss decomposition 

g = u+lu − whenever this exists.   

> 11
> Uopp Θ
> UΘ
> LΘ
> flip
> 11
> Uopp Θ
> UΘ
> LΘ

Figure 52. A flip in the triangulation of the square can be used to compute the opposite Gauss decomposition. Similarly, for two elements g1, g 2 ∈ Cw0,e Ce,w 0 , we can compute the Gauss decomposition of g1g2 whenever it exists: Use cluster amalgamation again and consider a configuration of NONCOMMUTATIVE CLUSTER VARIETIES AND MODULI SPACES OF LOCAL SYSTEMS 113 

6 decorated flags represented by gluing the two squares to obtain a hexagon as indicated in Figure 53. By retriangulating this, we may obtain a 4-gon corresponding to g1g2, which allows us to compute the Gauss decomposition of g1g2.

Figure 53. Using cluster amalgamation and coordinates to compute Gauss decomposition of products. We will now give more precise explanations of all the above. 15.2. Parabolic subgroups. We define the following map 

ιΘ : PΘ → Conf 3(AΘ)

b 7 →  b−1w0UΘ, w 0UΘ, s GUΘ

 =: cb .

Lemma 15.2. The map ιΘ is an embedding, which sends the double R-Bruhat cell PΘ ∩

P opp Θ w0P opp Θ to Conf × 

> 3

(AΘ).Proof. To see that ιΘ is injective, observe that cb = cb′ if and only if b′b−1w0UΘ = w0UΘ. This is equivalent to b′b−1 ∈ U opp Θ . But by assumption b′b−1 ∈ PΘ and thus b = b′.For given b ∈ PΘ, cb ∈ Conf × 

> 3

(AΘ) if and only if b−1w0UΘ ⋔ w0UΘ. Equivalently, bw 0 is Gauss-decomposable, i.e. bw 0 ∈ U opp Θ LΘUΘ = P opp Θ w0U opp Θ w0. This, in turn, is equivalent to 

b ∈ P opp Θ w0P opp Θ . □

Now, since we have cluster coordinates on Conf × 

> 3

(AΘ), we obtain cluster coordinates on PΘ

via the map ιΘ. Let us describe the coordinate functions a bit more explicitly from the point of view of UΘ:

Definition 15.3. Let w1, w 2 ∈ W (R), g ∈ w1G0 w2−1. For 1 ≤ i ≤ p the generalized R-minor ∆w1,w 2 

> i

is defined as 

∆w1,w 2 

> i

(g) := Λ i

 

w−11 gw 2



> 0



= Λ i



w−11 gw 2



.

This uses the Gauss decomposition with respect to PΘ. Note that these minors depend on the choice of Jordan weights. This is a straightforward generalization of the generalized minors introduced in [FZ99] and the quasideterminants of [GR91]. 

Proposition 15.4. Let D(w0) = ςi1 · · · ςin be a reduced expression of w0. The cluster coordinates of ιΘ(b) in the cluster chart associated to this reduced expression are given by ∆e,w k 

> ik

(b) where 

wk = ςin · · · ςik+1 .Remark 15.5 . These generalized minors correspond to the flag minors which are often used to characterize positivity in SL n(R).

Proof. Let us represent ιΘ(b) as (A1, A 2, A 3) = ( sGb−1w0UΘ, w 0UΘ, U Θ). Then the interpolating sequence A2 = A02, A 12, . . . , A n 

> 2

= A3 is given by Ak 

> 2

= wkUΘ. Consequently, the coordinates are 

Λik (sGb−1w0UΘ, w kUΘ) = Λ ik

 UΘ, w 0(bw k)UΘ

 = Λ ik (bw k)

as claimed. □

Analogously, one can define the map 

ιopp Θ : P opp Θ → Conf 3(AΘ)

b 7 →  w0UΘ, bU Θ, U Θ

 .114 ZACHARY GREENBERG, DANI KAUFMAN, MERIK NIEMEYER, AND ANNA WIENHARD 

Using the opposition involution, we may also write 

ιopp Θ (b) = tw 2 ιΘ(b∗).

Thus ιopp Θ has the same properties as ιΘ and we can carry out the analogous discussion. In this case, we can express the cluster coordinates as generalized R-minors by considering the configuration tw  ιopp Θ (b). For a reduced expression as above, the coordinates are given by 

∆e,w k 

> ik

(b∗) using the opposition involution. 15.3. Full group. Let us now combine the two maps ιΘ and ιopp Θ in order two associate a configuration of 4 decorated flags to a generic group element g ∈ G: Namely, we define the composite map 

IΘ : G → Conf 4(AΘ)

g 7 →  w0UΘ, gw 0UΘ, gU Θ, U Θ).

Lemma 15.6. The map IΘ is an embedding which sends the generic subset Ce,w 0 Cw0,e ∩

Cw0,e Ce,w 0 to Conf × 

> 4

(AΘ).Proof. Let g ∈ G. If IΘ(g) = IΘ(g′), then gU Θ = g′UΘ as well as gw 0UΘ = g′w0UΘ. Equiva-lently, g−1g′ ∈ UΘ ∩ U opp Θ = {1}.Suppose IΘ(g) ∈ Conf × 

> 4

(AΘ), i.e. the flags in the configuration are transverse. The nontrivial cases are: (1) UΘ ⋔ gw 0UΘ: This is equivalent to g ∈ PΘP opp Θ .(2) w0UΘ ⋔ gU Θ: This is equivalent to g ∈ P opp Θ PΘ.(3) UΘ ⋔ gU Θ: This is equivalent to g ∈ PΘw0PΘ.(4) w0UΘ ⋔ gw 0UΘ: This is equivalent to g ∈ P opp Θ w0P opp Θ .Consequently, g can be written as a product g = u−lu + for u− ∈ U opp Θ , l ∈ LΘ, u+ ∈ UΘ. Since 

g ∈ PΘw0PΘ, we have u− ∈ Cw0,e . Similarly, we find u+ ∈ Ce,w 0 and thus g ∈ Cw0,e Ce,w 0 .Analogously, one sees that g ∈ Ce,w 0 Cw0,e . □

The proof shows that we have in fact carried out the construction shown in Figure 51. 

Remark 15.7 . Choose a cluster chart as in Figure 36 and evaluate it on IΘ(g) for g = u−lu + ∈ G

as above. The functions can then be computed as in Proposition 15.4 to be the flag minors 

∆e,w k 

> ik

(g) = Λ ik (l)∆ e,w k 

> ik

(u+) ,

∆e,w ′ 

> k
> jk

(g∗) = Λ jk (l∗)∆ e,w ′ 

> k
> i

(u∗−) .

where D1(w0) = ςi1 · · · ςin and D2(w0) = ςj1 · · · ςjn are the two reduced expressions defining the cluster chart, and wk and w′ 

> k

are the reversed suffixes of these. 15.4. Gauss decompositions. The construction we presented above is adapted to the Gauss decomposition P opp Θ PΘ. One can carry out an analogous discussion for the opposite Gauss decomposition PΘP opp Θ (essentially exchanging the two opposite parabolics). In this case, one starts with the embeddings 

¯ιΘ : PΘ → Conf 3(AΘ)

b 7 → (bw 0UΘ, s GUΘ, w 0UΘ)

and ¯ιopp Θ (b) = tw 2 ¯ιΘ(b∗). Gluing the resulting configurations in an analogous fashion, we have a map 

¯IΘ : G 7 → Conf 4(AΘ)

g 7 → (gU Θ, s GUΘ, w 0UΘ, gw 0UΘ) .

We immediately see that 

IΘ(g) = ¯IΘ(g∗) .

By realizing the flip of the diagonal of the square as indicated in Figure 52, we can thus explicitly compute the Gauss decomposition g∗ = u′

> +

l′u′− from the Gauss decomposition g = u−lu +.Similarly, we can realize the flips indicated in Figure 53 by mutations. This allows us to compute the Gauss decomposition of a product g1g2 from the Gauss decompositions of g1 and g2.NONCOMMUTATIVE CLUSTER VARIETIES AND MODULI SPACES OF LOCAL SYSTEMS 115 

15.5. Generalized double R-Bruhat cells. We can generalize the cluster structure given on the full group to any double R-Bruhat cell, Cu,v = PΘuP Θ ∩ P opp Θ vP opp Θ for u, v ∈ W (R).

Definition 15.8. Let Conf u,v  

> 4

(AΘ) be the configurations of decorated flags (A1, A 2, A 3, A 4) ∈

Conf 4(AΘ) which satisfy (1) (A1, A 2) and (A4, A 3) are w0-transverse, (2) (A1, A 4) are u-transverse and (A2, A 3) are v-transverse. We write generators of W (R)×W (R) as i = ( e, ς i) and i = ( ςi∗ , e ). Given a reduced expression for (u, v ) we can make a cluster chart by replacing each generator i (resp. i) with E(i) (resp. 

E(¯ i)) and amalgamating. Denote by Au,v R the noncommutative cluster variety which has this as an initial seed. 

Theorem 15.9. 

(1) Au,v R is independent of the choice of reduced expression of (u, v ).(2) The {Ji} points of each cluster chart of Au,v R parameterize a dense open subset of 

Conf u,v  

> 4

(AΘ).(3) There is an injective map IΘ : Cu,v ∗

→ Conf u,v  

> 4

(AΘ) given by 

IΘ(g) = ( UΘ, w 0UΘ, gw 0UΘ, gU Θ).

The configurations in the image satisfy l(A1, A 2) = l(A4, A 3) = 1.(4) The {Ji} points of each cluster chart which land in the image of IΘ parameterize an open subset of Cu,v ∗

.Proof. The cluster variety is independent of the choice of reduced expression for (u, v ) by The-orem 11.11 and Theorem 12.3 which showed any two reduced expressions are related by cluster mutation. The second statement follows from our construction of the cluster charts; each cluster chart is built using elementary pieces which parameterize elementary configurations. Gluing these configurations gives the appropriate configuration space. For the third statement, first observe that the pair (PΘ, gP Θ) is u transverse if and only if 

g ∈ PΘuP Θ. Similarly, the pair (P opp Θ , gP opp Θ ) is v-transverse if and only if g ∈ P opp Θ v∗P opp Θ .So both transversality conditions occur exactly when g ∈ Cu,v ∗

and IΘ(g) lies in Conf u,v  

> 4

(AΘ).Moreover, the elements in the image of IΘ satisfy the condition on L-distances. To see that the map is injective, we observe that a configuration of flags in Conf u,v  

> 4

(AΘ) can be represented as a quadruple in (G/U Θ)4 in a unique way so that A1 = UΘ and A2 = w0UΘ with A3 and A4

fixed. Since the pairs (A1, A 2) and (A3, A 4) have the same transversality and L distance there must be a unique element of G which sends the pair (UΘ, w 0UΘ) to (A4, A 3). For each point in the image of IΘ, this determines a unique an element g ∈ Cu,v ∗

.The fourth statement now follows from the previous three statements. The {Ji} points describing configurations which land in the image of IΘ can be pulled back by IΘ to parameterize an open dense subset of Cu,v ∗

. □

The noncommutative cluster variety Au,v R is a noncommutative deformation of the cluster structures on double Bruhat cells for split groups described in [BFZ05]. The R = Ap case should recover much of the theory of noncommutative double Bruhat decompositions described in [BR05]. Furthermore, we expect that one can continue this entire story to a theory of “ R-Braid varieties” as a generalization of [CGG +25]. 16. Positivity 

For a split algebraic group G over a field K which contains a positive subset K>0, Lusztig introduced a positive semigroup G>0, as well as positive semigroups in the unipotent subgroup 

U∆ and U opp ∆ [Lus94]. In particular, this provides positive semigroups for any split-real Lie group using R>0. The construction relies on a pinning of the group G. We will now explain how a Jordan pinning can provide more general positive semigroups. This includes Lusztig’s construction and recover Guichard-Wienhard’s positive structures with respect to Θ [GW25]. 116 ZACHARY GREENBERG, DANI KAUFMAN, MERIK NIEMEYER, AND ANNA WIENHARD 

16.1. Positive Θ-pinnings. Recall from Definition 2.21 that a positive structure on a qua-dratic Jordan algebra J over a formally real field K is given by a choice of positive cone 

V >0 ⊂ V ×, which is closed under addition, scalar multiplication by positive elements, and inverse, and moreover contains 1 and is preserved by the action of the structure group Γ( J).If each isotopy class of Jordan algebra appearing contains a Jordan algebra with positive structure, we have a distinguished class of Jordan pinnings. 

Definition 16.1. A positive Jordan pinning of G with respect to a root system R is a Jordan pinning such that each Ji admits a positive structure. A choice of positive structure on each Ji identifies a positive cone in each simple R-root space by x(V >0 

> i

). This is reminiscent of Guichard-Wienhard’s notion of positivity with respect to Θ:Let Θ be a subset of simple restricted roots of a real Lie group G and ZΘ be the center of the corresponding Levi-subgroup. Let uβ be a weight space of the adjoint action of ZΘ on g.

Definition 16.2. G has a Θ-positive structure if each uβ contains a proper convex cone 

> ◦

c (uβ ) ⊂ uβ which is invariant under the action of L◦

> Θ

, the connected component of the identity in the Levi subgroup. It is not immediately obvious that the pairs (G, Θ) for which the grading induced by PΘ on G

admits a positive Jordan pinning are the same as those for which G admits a Θ-positive structure. However, we can obtain the same classification: Simply combine the classification of Jordan-compatible Θ (Figure 5) with that of Jordan algebras with a positive structure (Proposition 2.23) to obtain: 

Theorem 16.3 ([GW25],Theorem 1.1) . A simple Lie group, G, with root system grading induced by PΘ admits a positive Jordan pinning (respectively a Θ-positive structure) if and only if (G, Θ) 

belongs to the following list: (1) (Split Real) G is split real and Θ = ∆ .(2) (Type A1) G is a Hermitian Lie group of tube type (with restricted root system Cr ) and 

Θ = {αr } the unique long simple root. (3) (Type Bp) G is locally isomorphic to SO( p + 1 , q + p + 1) (with restricted root system 

Bp+1 ) and Θ = {α1, . . . , α p} the collection of all long simple roots. (4) (Type G2) G is one of the real forms F (4) 4 , E (2) 6 , E (−5) 7 , E (−24) 8 whose restricted root system is type F4 and Θ = {α1, α 2} is the set of long simple roots. Remark 16.4 . Observe that all pairs (G, Θ) in the classification are of NC rank 0 (split real) or NC rank 1 but never of higher noncommutative rank. 16.2. Positive semigroups. Let {xi, y i, ˇβi} be a positive Jordan pinning of G of type R, and fix a choice of positive structure V >0 

> i

on each Jordan algebra Ji. Following Lusztig [Lus94, GW25], we may define a positive subset of the unipotent subgroup UΘ.

Definition 16.5. Let D = ςi1 ςi2 · · · ςik be a reduced expression of w0, the longest element of the Weyl group W (R). Recall the maps 

FD : Vi1 × Vi2 × · · · × Vik → UΘ , (t1, . . . , t k) →

> k

Y

> j=1

xij (tj )

F opp  

> D

: Vi1 × Vi2 × · · · × Vik → U opp Θ , (t1, . . . , t k) →

> k

Y

> j=1

yij (tj )

which are called the R-Lusztig maps . The images of V >0 

> i1

× · · · × V >0 

> ik

are called the totally positive unipotent semigroups U >0Θ and U opp ,> 0Θ . The positive semigroup G>0 in G is defined as 

G>0 := U opp ,> 0Θ L◦

> Θ

U >0Θ

where L◦ 

> Θ

denotes the identity component of LΘ.NONCOMMUTATIVE CLUSTER VARIETIES AND MODULI SPACES OF LOCAL SYSTEMS 117 

Remark 16.6 . These are the same semigroups as the ones defined in [GW25] and investigated in [GW26a, GW26b]. In those works, they show that over R one can give a more geometric definition of the semigroup and address the question of a parametrization later. We can use our framework from Section 15 to give alternative proofs of some statements from [GW25, GW26a, GW26b]. 

Theorem 16.7. Let (G, Θ) be such that the grading induced by PΘ on G admits a positive Jordan pinning of G. Let D be a reduced expression of the longest element w0 ∈ W (R). Then (1) The maps FD and F opp  

> D

are injective on V >0 

> i1

× · · · × V >0 

> ik

.(2) The subsets U >0Θ ⊂ UΘ and U opp ,> 0Θ ⊂ U opp Θ are independent of D.(3) U >0Θ and U opp ,> 0Θ are semigroups. Proof. We will give all proofs for the unipotent subgroup UΘ. Of course they are completely analogous for U opp Θ .For statement (1), consider the configuration of decorated flags represented by (A1, A 2, A 3) =  UΘ, w 0UΘ, F D (t1, . . . , t k)w0UΘ

 with tj ∈ V >0 

> ij

. Using the reduced expression D to compute the interpolating sequence between A2 and A3, we get Al 

> 2

= Qlj=1 xij (tj ). Thus the partial potential for the elementary configuration (A1, A k−12 , A k 

> 2

) is tk. We know that this can be computed (as an angle) from the coordinates of the configuration. For statement (2), consider the same configuration of 3 decorated flags with coordinates computed with respect to the reduced expression D. We will see in the next subsection that the coordinates provide a positive J-point of the seed group (here we use that the noncommutative rank is at most 1, thus there is at most one noncommutative Jordan algebra J appearing). The coordinates for another reduced expression D′ can be computed through a sequence of mutations as explained in Section 11.3. Since mutations sends positive J-points to positive J-points, this means that the positive subset defined by the map FD′ is the same. For statement (3), take u1, u 2 ∈ U >0Θ and consider the configuration represented by 

(A1, A 2, A 3, A 4) = ( UΘ, w 0UΘ, u 1w0UΘ, u 1u2w0UΘ) .

If we compute coordinates as indicated in Section 16.2, we obtain a positive J-point of the corresponding seed group, just like above. 

A1

A2

A3

A4u1 u2

flip 

A1

A2

A3

A4

u1u2

Figure 54. Using coordinates to understand that U >0Θ is a semigroup. Using Section 12.1 we can realize the flip in the triangulation by mutations, meaning that in particular the triple (A1, A 2, A 4) provides a positive point. Thus u1u2 ∈ U >0Θ . □

This proof hints already at a notion of positive configurations of decorated flags, which can be detected by our coordinates. We will explore this next. 16.3. Configurations of Flags. Throughout this section assume that (G, Θ) is such that the grading on G induced by PΘ admits a positive Jordan pinning. Then the positive structure on 

UΘ induces a notion of positivity on the (decorated) flag variety: Any flag P ′ transverse to the fixed flag PΘ ∈ G/P Θ = PΘ can be written as uw 0PΘ with some u ∈ UΘ. We call a tuple 

(P1, ..., P n) ∈ Pn 

> Θ

of pairwise transverse flags positive if there exist g ∈ G and u2, . . . , u n−1 ∈

U >0Θ such that 

g(P1, . . . , P n) = ( PΘ, w 0PΘ, u 2w0PΘ, u 2u3w0PΘ, . . . , u 2 · · · un−1w0PΘ) .118 ZACHARY GREENBERG, DANI KAUFMAN, MERIK NIEMEYER, AND ANNA WIENHARD 

Since the fibers of π are LΘ-torsors, we need elements of LΘ into account when extending this definition to the decorated flag variety AΘ:

Definition 16.8. A tuple (A1, . . . , A n) ∈ A n 

> Θ

of pairwise transverse decorated flags is called 

positive if there exist g ∈ G, l2, . . . , l n ∈ L◦ 

> Θ

and u2, . . . , u n−1 ∈ U >0Θ such that 

g(A1, . . . , A n) = ( UΘ, w 0UΘl2, u 3w0UΘl3, u 3u4w0UΘl4, . . . , u 3 · · · unw0UΘln) .

Positivity is by definition invariant under the diagonal G-action on A n 

> Θ

. Thus, positivity descends to Conf × 

> n

(AΘ), and we can talk about positive configurations of decorated flags. 

Remark 16.9 . This setup also covers the case where G is split real and Θ = ∆ . Then, all the definitions agree with those given in [FG06]. More concretely, take PΘ = B, a Borel subgroup with unipotent subgroup UΘ = U , and use the Weyl group W = W (R) to define transverse flags in this case. The fibers of the projection π : A → B are H-torsors, where H = B ∩ Bopp is a Cartan subgroup. We can obtain a characterization of Θ-positive configurations of 3 decorated flags in terms of the cluster charts constructed in Part 3: 

Proposition 16.10. A configuration in Conf × 

> 3

(AΘ) is positive if and only if it is parameterized by a positive J-point. Explicitly, all the functions from any cluster chart take values in R>0,respectively the identity component of Γ0(J) and all the angles take values in V >0.Proof. Suppose a configuration in Conf × 

> 3

(AΘ) is parameterized by a positive J-point. Such a configuration can be represented as (UΘ, w 0UΘl2, uw 0UΘl3) with u ∈ UΘ, l2, l 3 ∈ LΘ. The elements l2 and l3 are computed as the product of ˇβi(si) where si is in the identity component by assumption. Thus l2, l 3 ∈ L◦

> Θ

. Furthermore u = FD (t1, · · · , t n) where ti are the partial potentials which are positive by assumption. Thus u ∈ U >0Θ as needed. Conversely, suppose (A1, A 2, A 3) = ( UΘ, w 0UΘl2, uw 0UΘl3) represents a positive configura-tion, i.e. l2, l 3 ∈ L◦ 

> Θ

and u = F (t1, . . . , t n) with ti ∈ K>0 or V >0 appropriately. Then the functions Λi(A1, A 2), Λi(A1, A 3) and Λi(A3, A 2) take values in K>0 or Γ◦(J). To see that all the other functions fulfill the positivity conditions, we proceed inductively along the interpola-tion sequence. At each elementary configuration we have the that all coordinates are positive except for the rightmost node. Moreover the potential of this configuration is tik is assumed to be positive. Thus the equation in Lemma 10.4 can be rearranged to recover the rightmost function as a product of positive functions. It remains to verify every other angle in each polyg-onal tile is positive. By construction, one angle in each tile recovers the potential and thus is positive. All other angles are obtained by operations which preserve the positive cone, since all the coordinates have been shown to lie in R>0, respectively the identity component of Γ0(J). □

Remark 16.11 . The positivity criterion from Proposition 16.10 is not minimal in the sense that there are too many conditions to check. From Proposition 11.2 we expect that it should be sufficient to check 2p + n conditions where n is the length of the longest word. Let k be the number of times p occurs in the reduced expression of the longest word. This is an invariant of the (non-split) Jordan split type (independent of the reduced expression) and is equal to 1 in type A1, p in type Bp and 3 in type G2. This number is also the number of polygonal tiles in any cluster chart for the triple of flags. 

Corollary 16.12. A configuration in Conf × 

> 3

(A ) is positive if and only if it fulfills the following 

2p + n conditions: (1) All the n − p + 1 − k functions associated to small nodes in the interior of the triangle take values in K>0.(2) The p − 1 function associated to small nodes on the bottom edge of the triangle take values in K>0.(3) The p functions on the left and right edges of the triangle take values in K>0 or Γ( J)◦

depending on the weight. (4) One angle in each of the k polygonal tiles is equal to ι(v) for v ∈ V >0.NONCOMMUTATIVE CLUSTER VARIETIES AND MODULI SPACES OF LOCAL SYSTEMS 119 

Proof. The forward implication is clear as the 2p + n conditions are a subset of the conditions in Proposition 16.10. To show the reverse implication, suppose that a configuration represented by (A1, A 2, A 3) fulfills the smaller set of conditions. We prove that this implies the full set of conditions from Proposition 16.10. First, we prove that all functions in the interior associated to weight r nodes take values in Γ( J)◦. This is proved inductively from each edge for each elementary seed of the form E◦(p). One angle in this tile is assumed to be positive. Moreover the angle can be expressed as a monomial where only one coordinate is not assumed to be in 

Γ( J)◦ by inductive assumption. As Γ( J)◦ is a subgroup, this proves the missing coordinate lies in Γ( J)◦ as well. The elementary seed E(p) occurs only once, and so the inductive proof above is enough to guarantee the left and right nodes are in Γ( J)◦. This leaves one missing node, the weight r node on the bottom edge of the triangle, which we can conclude is positive since the angle is positive. Every other angle can be constructed from the original angles by conjugation by weight r

nodes, which preserves positivity and these coordinates are in Γ( J)◦. The configuration then satisfies the condition of Proposition 16.10 and so is positive as needed. □

Of course this result extends to configurations of n decorated flags: 

Theorem 16.13. A configuration in Conf × 

> n

(AΘ) is positive if and only if it is parametrized by a positive J-point for some cluster chart. In this case, it provides a positive J-point for any cluster chart. Proof. From the definition it is clear that a configuration of decorated flags is positive if and only if all the configurations of three decorated flags defined by the fan triangulation (Figure 34) are positive. Now apply Proposition 16.10 to see that a configuration is positive if and only if it is parametrized by a positive J-point for any cluster chart coming from the fan triangulation. Combining Theorem 12.3 and Lemma 6.27 we conclude that this is the case for any cluster chart. □

16.4. Positive elements as configurations of flags. Recall the connection between group elements and configurations of flags described in Section 15. Let us briefly revisit this, now through the lens of positivity. Thus assume that G has a positive Jordan pinning. 

Lemma 16.14. The embedding ιΘ : PΘ → Conf 3(AΘ) preserves Θ-positivity, i.e. if b ∈ L◦

> Θ

U >0Θ ,then cb is a positive configuration. Proof. If b = lu ∈ L◦

> Θ

U >0Θ , then by definition the configuration 

 UΘ, l −1w0UΘ, uw 0UΘ



is positive. By applying the twisted cyclic shift, we obtain another positive configuration by Corollary 11.20, which is 

h l−1w0UΘ, uw 0UΘ, U Θ

i

=

h u−1l−1w0UΘ, w 0UΘ, s GUΘ

i

= cb ∈ Conf × 

> 3

(AΘ) .

□

This allows us to provide positivity test in terms of generalized R-minors, see Definition 15.3: 

Corollary 16.15 (Positivity test) . Let D(w0) = ςi1 · · · ςin be a reduced expression of w0. An element b ∈ PΘ is positive if and only if (1) all the functions ∆e,w k 

> ik

(b) take values in K>0 whenever ik̸ = p or Γ( J)◦ for k = 1 , . . . , n ,(2) the functions ∆e,w 0 

> j

(b) take values in K>0 for j = 1 , . . . , p − 1, and ∆e,w 0 

> p

(b) ∈ Γ( J)◦,(3) certain combinations of the noncommutative functions land in ι(V >0).

This is a direct consequence of Proposition 16.10, and the combinations in (3) correspond to the angles. Their explicit form depends on the choice of reduced expression. Moving on to the full group G we have similarly: 

Lemma 16.16. The embedding IΘ : G → Conf 4(AΘ) preserves positivity, i.e. sends Θ-positive elements to positive configurations. 120 ZACHARY GREENBERG, DANI KAUFMAN, MERIK NIEMEYER, AND ANNA WIENHARD 

Proof. Write g = u−lu + again. Using the approach developed in the previous sections, we know that IΘ(g) is positive iff the following configurations of 3 flags are positive: 

h w0UΘ, gw 0UΘ, gU Θ

i

=

h (lu +)−1w0UΘ, w 0UΘ, U Θ

i

= ιΘ(lu +)

h w0UΘ, gU Θ, U Θ

i

=

h w0UΘ, u −lU Θ, U Θ

i

= ιopp Θ (u−l) .

By our previous discussion this is the case exactly when u− ∈ U opp ,> 0Θ , l ∈ L◦

> Θ

, and u+ ∈ U >0Θ ,so when g is Θ-positive. □

Finally recall that we have related different Gauss decompositions to flips in triangulations. Since mutations and the opposition involution preserve positivity, we have the following imme-diate corollaries: 

Corollary 16.17. The Θ-positive part of G is 

G>0Θ = U opp ,> 0Θ L◦

> Θ

U >0Θ = U >0Θ L◦

> Θ

U opp ,> 0Θ .

Corollary 16.18. G>0Θ is a semigroup. 

17. Decorated twisted local systems 

In their pioneering work, Fock and Goncharov connected cluster algebras and positivity to local systems and higher Teichmüller theory [FG06]. For split algebraic groups G and a surface 

S with boundary, they considered two moduli spaces of G-local systems with additional ‘dec-oration’ associated to the boundary components. They proved that these spaces are positive varieties and that their positive parts may be considered as analogues of Teichmüller space. We will now explain how to adapt their discussion of one of these moduli spaces to any algebraic group which admits a unique system of Jordan weights. First, let us recall the basic setup. 17.1. Marked surfaces. Let S = ¯S \ (D1 ∪ · · · ∪ Dk) be a compact, connected, oriented surface obtained by removing finitely many non-intersecting open disks from the closed surface ¯S.

Definition 17.1. A marked surface bS consists of a surface S as above, together with a set 

M = {x1, . . . , x r } ⊂ ∂S of marked points . The punctured boundary is ∂ bS := ∂S \ M .Moreover, we will always assume that ∂S ̸ = ∅. A marked surface bS of genus g admits a finite area hyperbolic structure with nonempty geodesic boundary which takes each marked point xi

to a boundary cusp if and only if (27) 4g − 4 + 2 k + r > 0 .

Alternatively, we may consider the surface S′ obtained by shrinking all unmarked boundary components to punctures. Topologically it is the same as S, but the hyperbolic structure on S′

will have a cusp at each puncture. Now, let n be the number of components of ∂ bS, and pick a set of distinguished points 

{y1, . . . , y n} =: N , one per component. Let M ′ ⊂ S′ be the set of marked points after shrink-ing unmarked holes. Similarly let N ′ be the set of distinguished points after shrinking. The distinguished points on unmarked boundary components simply become the punctures of S′.

Definition 17.2. An ideal triangulation of bS, is a maximal collection of arcs in S′ \ M ′, all of which start and end at points in N ′, considered up to homotopy with fixed endpoints. 

Remark 17.3 . When Equation (27) holds, we can also choose a finite area hyperbolic metric on 

S′ \ N ′. Then an ideal triangulation of this hyperbolic surface in the usual sense is equivalent to an ideal triangulation of the marked surface. Using this alternative approach, endow S′ \ N ′ with a hyperbolic metric. This provides us with a developing map from the universal cover eS′ to the hyperbolic plane H. The preimage of the set N ′ of distinguished points under the covering map eS′ → S′, is a set F( bS) ⊂ ∂H, called the Farey set . It is a cyclic set on which π1(S) acts. NONCOMMUTATIVE CLUSTER VARIETIES AND MODULI SPACES OF LOCAL SYSTEMS 121 

17.2. Decorated twisted local systems. Let G be a reductive algebraic group over K and S

a surface. Recall that a G-local system on S is a flat principal G-bundle with base space S.

Remark 17.4 . The moduli space of G-local systems up to isomorphism can be identified with the space of representations π1(S) → G up to conjugation via the holonomy representation. Fock and Goncharov connected this to configurations of decorated flags by considering a slightly more complicated moduli space. We first need to handle the element sG. Instead of S,consider the punctured tangent bundle , denoted T ′S, which is obtained from the tangent bundle T S by removing the zero section. Its fundamental group provides a central extension of 

π1(S) described by the short exact sequence 

Z ι

→ π1(T ′S) → π1(S) .

The subgroup ι(Z) < π 1(T ′S) is generated by s, a loop around the fiber of T ′S → S.

Definition 17.5. A twisted G-local system on S is a G-local system on T ′S such that the holonomy around any fiber T ′S → S is sG.This is well-defined since sG is at most of order 2. 

Remark 17.6 . The moduli space of twisted G-local systems is isomorphic to the space of twisted representations up to conjugation: A twisted representation is a representation ϱ : π1(T ′S) →

G for which ϱ(s) = sG.

Remark 17.7 . If G is a group where sG = 1 , the twisting is trivial and we can safely consider local systems on S instead. Now assume that (G, Θ) is Jordan compatible. We will add some additional data to twisted local systems, which morally consists of a choice of decorated flag in AΘ at each distinguished point in N . This follows Le’s description for the split case [Le19], adapted to our setting. For a twisted G-local system L on a marked surface S, consider the associated flag bundle LA on T ′S,i.e. the associated bundle with fiber AΘ. We may lift the boundary of S to T ′S by considering the positively oriented unit tangent vector (after endowing S with an auxiliary metric). If bS

is a marked surface with underlying surface S, we may lift every component of the punctured boundary ∂ bS to T ′S in this way to obtain a set of arcs and loops, which we call the lifted boundary . Furthermore, we can restrict the flag bundle LA to these. 

Definition 17.8. A decorated twisted G-local system on a marked surface bS is a twisted local system L on S together with flat sections of LA restricted to any component of the lifted boundary. We call this choice the decoration . AG, bS denotes the moduli space of decorated twisted G-local systems on bS up to isomorphism. Suppose that bS has a boundary component with no marked point on it. The lifted boundary component represents an element of γ ∈ π1(T ′S). For any twisted G-local system L the asso-ciated holonomy ϱ(γ) ∈ G is obtained by considering a point p in the fiber of the local system over a base point x on γ. Parallel transport takes this to another point p.ϱ (γ) in the same fiber, using the right action of G. The decoration on this boundary component is a flat section of LA

along the lifted boundary γ. From the construction of the associated bundle LA , it is clear that the flat section is fully determined by its value at x which can be represented as (p, A ) for some 

A ∈ AΘ. Since it is a flat section, we can follow γ and arrive at the point  p.ϱ (γ), A  in the fiber over x, which is equivalently represented as  p, ϱ (γ)A. Since the section has to close up, the decorated flag A has to be fixed by ϱ(γ).We will now connect this to our previous discussion of configurations of decorated flags: 

Example 17.9 . Consider the marked surface bDn = ( D, {x1, . . . , x n}), i.e. a disk with n marked points on the boundary. Since π1(D) is trivial, there is a unique twisted local system L on 

D. Thus a point of AR, bDn is completely determined by the decoration. Denote by C1, . . . , C n

the boundary intervals as shown in Figure 55. The decoration consists of a flat section of LA122 ZACHARY GREENBERG, DANI KAUFMAN, MERIK NIEMEYER, AND ANNA WIENHARD 

along any lifted Ci, or equivalently a point ai in each fiber LA |vi with fixed distinguished points 

yi ∈ ∂D ∩ Ci, and vi ∈ T ′ 

> yi

D the counterclockwise oriented tangent vectors of ∂D at yi.In order to identify this data with a configuration of flags, we must move the points in the different fibers to a chosen common base point. Let γi be a path in D from yi to yi+1 as in Figure 55. These lift to paths in T ′S using their unit tangent vectors. Let Pi denote parallel transport along the lift of γi to T ′S. In this way we obtain n elements in LA |v1 :

(a1, P n · · · P2a2, P n · · · P3a3, . . . , P nan) .Dx1

x2

x3

x4

. . . xn

C1

C2

C3

Cn

y1

y2

y3

yn

v1

v2

v3

vn

γn

γ1

γ2

Figure 55. Setup for AG, bDn

Since LA |v1

∼= AΘ with the isomorphism determined up to the right G-action, the n-tuple of elements obtained in this way identifies with an element x ∈ Conf n(AΘ). If we used y2 as our base point instead, we would obtain the tuple 

(a2, P 1Pn · · · P3a3, . . . , P 1Pnan, P 1a1)

in LA |v2 . To compare with our original choice, we use parallel transport to obtain the tuple 

(Pn · · · P2a2, s GPn · · · P3a3, . . . , s GPnan, s Ga1) = tw( x)

in LA |v1 . This shows that the choice of base point only changes the tuple by the twists and thus 

AG, bDn

∼= Conf n(AΘ)/tw .

Remark 17.10 . We see here that the space AG, bDn is a more natural object to study then the configuration space Conf n(AΘ). This explains the complications related to choosing a vertex of the n-gon in our discussion of cluster coordinates for Conf n(AΘ).17.3. Cluster coordinates. We will now reduce the study of decorated twisted local systems to the study of (twisted) configurations of decorated flags, which we already discussed extensively in Part 3. This discussion follows [FG06]. Consider a marked surface bS as above, and fix an ideal triangulation T of bS. Denote the set of triangles by tr( T ) and the set of edges by ed( T ). For every t ∈ tr( T ), we obtain an element of AG, bD3 as follows. Given a decorated twisted local system on bS, we obtain a twisted local system on t via the pullback along the embedding given by the triangulation T . The decoration on S induces flat sections of the associated bundle near the vertices of t, which we consider distinguished points of t. By choosing a marked point xe on each edge of t, we identify bD3 with 

t. Similarly, we can thicken every edge e ∈ ed( T ) to obtain an embedded digon in S. This defines an element of AG, bD2 by pullback along the embedding. Therefore the triangulation T provides a map (28) ϕT,v : AG, bS → Y 

> t∈tr( T)

AG, bD3 × Y 

> e∈ed( T)

AG, bD2

∼=

Y 

> t∈tr( T)

^Conf 3(AΘ) × Y 

> e∈ed( T)

^Conf 2(AΘ)NONCOMMUTATIVE CLUSTER VARIETIES AND MODULI SPACES OF LOCAL SYSTEMS 123 

with ^Conf k(A ) := Conf k(A )/tw . The last identification was described in Example 17.9. Every point in the image clearly has the property that further restricting the decorated local system from a triangle to one of its edges yields the decorated local system associated to that edge. This can be seen as a gluing condition identifying the image of ϕT .We will amalgamate the cluster charts we defined on triples of flags to obtain a chart on AG, bS

via the embedding in Equation (28). However this chart is only defined on a generic subset of 

AG, bS which is determined by the triangulation. 

Definition 17.11. The space A TG, bS of T -transverse decorated twisted local systems is the maximal subspace of AG, bS such that 

ϕT (A TG, bS ) ⊂ Y 

> t∈tr( T)

^Conf × 

> 3

(A ) × Y 

> e∈ed( T)

^Conf × 

> 2

(A ) .

To obtain a cluster chart on the space A TG, bS , we choose (1) an orientation of every edge in ed( T ),(2) a vertex v(t) for every triangle t ∈ tr( T ),(3) a reduced expression of the longest word w0 for every t ∈ tr( T ).We write D for this set of extra choices. First, focus on a triangle t ∈ tr( T ): The choice of v(t)

fixes an identification of the local system restricted to t with Conf × 

> 3

(AΘ). Using the reduced expression for t, we obtain a cluster chart for the restriction via the construction in Section 11. For such charts the sides are always oriented as in Figure 56. Whenever this does not match the chosen orientations, we change the function as explained in Section 11.5 and perform a switch (and weave) at the corresponding node (depending on the type). 

A1

A2 A3

Figure 56. Default orientation of sides for cluster chart on Conf 3(AΘ).Since the orientation of each edge was fixed the values of the cluster coordinates agree along each edge shared by two triangles after applying this construction to all triangles. Consequently, the charts amalgamate together. 

Definition 17.12. A set of functions on A TG, bS arising from the above construction is called a 

cluster chart adapted to the triangulation T . We write AT, D for the noncommutative torus associated to this cluster chart. We write AR, bS for the noncommutative cluster variety which has this cluster chart as an initial seed. These actually provide coordinates for A TG, bS :

Theorem 17.13. 

(1) The {Ji} points of AT, D parametrize an open dense subset of A TG, bS .(2) AR, bS contains all possible cluster charts related to different choices T ′ and D′.Proof. We proved in Theorem 11.13 that an open dense subset of ]Conf 3(A ) ∼= AG, bD3 can be reconstructed from the cluster coordinates in each triangle. It remains to show that these restricted local systems determine the full local system. This follows identically to the split case [FG06], essentially by reconstructing the full local system from the restricted ones. Let us recall the argument for completeness: First, construct from the fixed triangulation T a groupoid GT which is equivalent to the fundamental groupoid of T ′S: Fix one point p(e) on every edge e ∈ ed( T ) and two vectors 124 ZACHARY GREENBERG, DANI KAUFMAN, MERIK NIEMEYER, AND ANNA WIENHARD 

v0(e), v 1(e) = −v0(e) ∈ T ′

> p(e)

S, which we can think of as being tangent to e. The collection 

{vi(e) | e ∈ ed( T ), i ∈ Z/2Z} defines the objects of GT . The set of morphisms is defined as being generated by the following two types: (1) In T ′

> p(e)

S there are two preferred homotopy classed of paths connecting v1(e) to v2(e),the counterclockwise and clockwise rotation. (2) Consider t ∈ tr( T ). For two sides e1, e 2 of t, such that e2 is clockwise from e1, sup-pose that vi1 (e1) and vi2 (e2) point at the same vertex of t. Define a morphism from 

vi1 (e1) to vi2 (e2) by picking the homotopy class of the path moving the minimal amount counterclockwise. The objects of GT and these generators of mor( GT ) for one triangle are shown in Figure 57. Observe that the path around the digon on a side of the triangle corresponds to a rotation of the vector by 2π while the path around the hexagon inside the triangle corresponds to a rotation by 4π.

> νε

Figure 57. Objects and morphisms in the category GT associated to a triangle. The idea of the proof is now to identify decorated twisted local systems on bS with certain functors GT → G. We first construct the functor for a decorated twisted G-local system L.Focusing on an edge e, the decoration determines a point ai(e) in the fibers LA |vi(e) for i ∈

Z/2Z of the associated bundle over the two points vi(e). The canonical projection AΘ → PΘ

determines two points bi(e) in the corresponding fibers of LB. Parallel transport of these points along either path from vi(e) to vi+1 (e), gives us, with a slight abuse of notation, a transverse pair  ai(e), b i+1 (e) ∈ (LA × LB)|vi(e), which defines a unique point li(e) ∈ L|vi(e) for i ∈ Z/2Z.Suppose that γ : vi1 (e1) ⇝ vi2 (e2) is an oriented path in the graph on S obtained by inscribing the hexagons as explained above. This is the same as a morphism in the category GT . To this we assign an element gγ ∈ G defined by 

li2 (e2) =  P γ li1 (e1).g γ

where P γ denotes the parallel transport along γ induced by the connection on L, and we have used the simply transitive G-action on the fibers of L. This clearly defines a functor GT → G,i.e. we have: (a) Reversing a path gives the inverse element: g¯γ = g−1 

> γ

.(b) It respects composition: gγ∗δ = gγ gδ .Since it comes from a twisted local system: (c) The loop around a digon is mapped to sG.(d) The loop around the hexagon is mapped to 1.Moreover, it satisfies: (e) For any path ε along a digon: gε ∈ w0H.(f) For any path ν connecting to sides of a triangle: gν ∈ U .The two types of edges are also indicated in Figure 57. Conversely, any functor which satisfies the conditions (c) and (d) defines a twisted local system. If it also has (e) and (f) one obtains a decorated twisted local system. In particular, we can reconstruct a decorated twisted local system from the functor obtained above. Since the construction only depends on the restrictions of L to the triangles, this concludes the proof of the first statement. NONCOMMUTATIVE CLUSTER VARIETIES AND MODULI SPACES OF LOCAL SYSTEMS 125 

For a fixed triangulation T , different cluster charts arise by choosing a different vertex or different reduced expressions of w0. In this case the theorem is implied by Theorem 11.11 and Proposition 11.19. Relating cluster charts for two different triangulations can be done by realizing a sequence of flips connecting the two triangulations. This was proved in Theorem 12.3. This finishes the proof of the second statement. □

17.4. Computing holonomies. The reconstruction procedure as reviewed in the proof of The-orem 17.13 works by inscribing a graph into the surface which is determined by the ideal tri-angulation, and assigning elements in G to every (oriented) edge. Then, the holonomy of the local system can be computed by homotoping a loop in T ′S onto the graph and taking the product of group elements along it. Here is a small example, which is related to our discussion in Section 15. 

w0u−11

l−1[u−12 w0]−1+ lw0[u−12 w0]0lw0[u−12 w0]−w0

w0 u2

l−1[w0u∗

> 1

]−1+ lw0sGl[w0u∗

> 1

]0

w0[w0u∗

> 1

]−1 

> −

w0

> w0lw0l

UΘw0UΘ

gw 0UΘ gU Θ

Figure 58. Local system on bD4 associated to an element g ∈ G.

Example 17.14 . Consider the space AG, bD4 . It is (non-canonically) isomorphic to Conf 4(AΘ) as described in Example 17.9. Thus we have an embedding 

G → AG, bD4 , g 7 → (w0UΘ, gw 0UΘ, gU Θ, U Θ)

induced by the map IΘ : G → Conf 4(AΘ) defined in Section 15. We picture the disk with 4 marked points as a square with distinguished points as the vertices, and fix an ideal triangulation to obtain the local system shown in Figure 58. Here, we the local system is identifies with the configuration by moving every section to the upper left corner of the square. Now we factorize g = u∗

> 1

lu 2 with u1, u 2 ∈ UΘ and l ∈ LΘ. Then the group elements associated to the oriented arcs can be computed explicitly from the two elements in Conf × 

> 3

(A ) associated to the two triangles. This also shows that the group element for the highlighted path in T ′S is 

w0u−11 w0lu 2 = u∗

> 1

lu 2 = g . 

Of course, this element is not a holonomy of the local system on the disk, where the only nontrivial loop is around the fiber of T ′S → S. However, since the upper and lower edge of the square correspond to the same configuration of two decorated flags, we may glue them to obtain a twisted decorated local system on the cylinder. This has nontrivial topology and the highlighted path closes up to represent the loop around the cylinder, lifted along its tangent vector to a loop in T ′S. Thus, the holonomy for this loop is g by our previous calculation. Before we discuss some further examples of how to compute holonomies, let us simplify the situation by passing from the group G to the centerless group G′ = G/Z G. A twisted G-local system L on T ′S, defines a G′-local system L′ on S. First, choose a nowhere vanishing vector field. This provides a pullback bundle on S′. Now, take the quotient by the ZG action on the fibers to obtain L′. Importantly, the isomorphism class of L′ is independent of the chosen vector field since the holonomy around fibers of L is sG, which is mapped to Id G′ . This construction induces a projection 

p : AG, bS → XG′, bS126 ZACHARY GREENBERG, DANI KAUFMAN, MERIK NIEMEYER, AND ANNA WIENHARD    

> (a) Contained in a cylinder. (b) Cutting off a surface without marked points.

Figure 59. Types of loops in S.of the A -space to the X -space of framed G′-local systems on S. For full details of the notion of a framed local system see [FG06]. We will only need the fact that a decoration of the twisted local system L determines a decoration of the local system L′.To compute the holonomy of the local system L′ = p(L), we consider the graph defined by the triangulation and project all the elements assigned to the edges to G′. Since the group elements for the two oriented edges of the graph along an edge of the triangulation only differ by sG, they are projected to the same element in G′, and we may collapse the edges together. After that, the holonomy is computed in the same way as before. Let us consider two types of loops in S as indicated in Figure 59. If the loop can be thickened into an annulus with one distinguished point on each boundary component, we can change the triangulation to be in the situation of Example 17.14 and can use the indicated path to compute the holonomy of the loop. Now suppose that the loop cuts off a surface which does not contain any marked points. Up to homotopy, we may assume that the boundary contains a distinguished point, so that the triangulation looks as in the pasting scheme shown in Figure 60 for a genus 2 surface. The path following the boundary, can be homotoped onto the graph coming from the triangulation as shown in the figure, which provides a way to compute its holonomy. 

Figure 60. Triangulation of a genus 2 surface with one boundary component and loop around the boundary. 17.5. LΘ-action at marked points and potentials. Given a decorated local system L we can alter its decoration at a particular marked point by rescaling the decorated flags there by an element of LΘ.Specifically let m be a marked point and l ∈ LΘ. We define (l)m · L by sending all flags A

which appear at the marked point m to Al ∗. Note that monodromy operators send A to gA 

which commutes with this scaling, so that this action is well-defined. This is an extension of the rescaling action on configurations of flags to the moduli space of decorated local systems. 

Lemma 17.15. This action is a monomial transformation of the cluster variables in every cluster chart. NONCOMMUTATIVE CLUSTER VARIETIES AND MODULI SPACES OF LOCAL SYSTEMS 127 

Proof. This follows from Proposition 11.10, as our cluster charts art built out of charts for triples of flags. □

We can choose a cluster chart for which the flag at the marked point m is always chosen to be opposite to the side to which the interpolating sequence is calculated. This identities a number of partial potentials δki : L → Vi which depend on the cluster chart chosen. 

Proposition 17.16. 

• The total potential, Wi(m) = P 

> k

δki , is independent of the chosen cluster chart. 

• The action of LΘ on this marked point satisfies that (l)m · δki = βi(ςi(l))( δki ) for each partial potential. Since βi is a linear map this applies to the total potential as well. Proof. Consider a single triangle (Am, A 2, A 3). The potentials do not depend on the decorations of A2, A 3 so we can write the configuration on the triangle as (UΘ, P opp Θ , uP opp Θ ) for some u.In Theorem 11.13, we saw the partial potentials within a single triangle recover the fac-torization parameters in the Θ-Luztig map for u. Their sum is independent of the choice of decomposition of w0, since this is the image under the quotient UΘ → UΘ/[UΘ, U Θ] ≃ Q 

> i

Vi

This proves that this part of the sum does not depend on the choice of w0 in the cluster charts. When we change triangulation by flipping an arc which touches m we create a singe triangle from two, see Section 16.2. In proving that this is realized by cluster mutations, we proved that the potential of the new triangle is the sum of the adjacent two potentials. Therefore the total sum is the same in all cluster charts. Since each partial potential sits inside a triple, the second statement follows from Proposi-tion 9.9. □

17.5.1. Cluster X coordinates. In noncommutative rank 0, there is a family of coordinates called 

X coordinates which are independent of the decorations of the flags. Analogous coordinates when G is Jordan split over A1 were studied in [AGRW21]. In general noncommutative rank, we propose that the set of all ratios 

Xm = {ι(δri )−1ι(δsi )}

of partial potentials in a given cluster chart associated with the same marked point m is a potential generalization. 

Lemma 17.17. The conjugacy classes of elements of Xm are independent of the rescaling action at m.Proof. We compute that ι(βi(ςi(l))( v)) = σi(βi(l)−1)ι(v)( βi(l)−1). So for any ration in Xm, (l)m·

(ι(δri )−1ι(δsi )) = βi(l)  ι(δri )−1ι(δsi ) βi(l)−1. This shows the rescaling action at m, conjugates the ratio as needed. □

We leave the noncommutative cluster structure of these ratios for future work. 17.6. Action of the cluster automorphism group. In commutative cluster algebra theory, a cluster homomorphism can be defined as a map between two cluster algebras which maps cluster variables to cluster variables. A quasi-cluster homomorphism the composition of a usual cluster homomorphism followed by a monomial transformation in the frozen cluster variables of the target algebra, see [Fra16]. A typical way to produce a quasi-cluster automorphism is to consider a sequence of cluster mutations which takes a starting seed to a new seed which has different cluster variables but with an isomorphic mutable portion of the quiver which defines it. For a split group G, Goncharov and Shen constructed a subgroup of the cluster automorphism group ΓG, bS which acts on AG, bS by [GS19]. This group contains the mapping class group of bS,the outer automorphism group Out( G), a copy of the Weyl group, W (G), for each puncture on bS, and a (possibly a quotient) of the Artin-Tits braid group of type G, Br (G), for each boundary component of bS. It is natural to conjecture that this group is in fact the entire cluster automorphism group. Now let G be Jordan split of type R and let ΓR, bS be the subgroup of cluster automorphism group associated to the split group of type R.128 ZACHARY GREENBERG, DANI KAUFMAN, MERIK NIEMEYER, AND ANNA WIENHARD 

Theorem 17.18. The group ΓR, bS acts on AR, bS by noncommutative (quasi) cluster automor-phisms. 

The proof follows the split case, by ensuring that the action of each part can be realized noncommutatively as a sequence of mutations. 

The mapping class group. The mapping class group acts on a triangulation of bS by sending it to another triangulation. Any two triangulations are related by a sequence of flips and we proved in Section 12.1 that each flip is realized by a sequence of generalized cluster mutations. Furthermore the resulting seed is isomorphic (including frozen nodes/ boundary faces) and so gives an isomorphism of the cluster structure. 

Out(G). Similarly Out( R) is realized by automorphisms of the Dynkin diagram R. This acts on reduced words for w0 by permuting the letters via the automorphism of R. This action on 

AR, bS acts by changing the reduced expression for w0 in each triangle in this way. Since we can realize this change by generalized mutations, we can realize this part of the action. 

Remark 17.19 . The only noncommutative rank greater than 1 group with a nontrivial automor-phism group is type Ap.

Weyl Group action. Consider a surface, bS, with a puncture p. There is a birational action of the Weyl group, W (R), on AR, bS associated to p as follows: 

Construction 17.20. Each decorated local system L ∈ AG, bS determines a decorated flag, A,associated to the puncture p. Without loss of generality, we can assume that π(A) = PΘ. Its decoration determines total potentials wi ∈ Vi. For ςi ∈ W (R), define ςi · L by changing the decoration of A to A [ ˇβi(ι(wi))] ∗.

Lemma 17.21. The construction above is actually an action of the Weyl group. Proof. The fact that ι(a−1)( a) = a−1 implies that ςi · (ςi · L ) = L. The rest of the Weyl group relations can each be checked in the A2, B 2/C 2, G 2 cases respectively. □

Proposition 17.22. The action of W (R) is realized by generalized mutations. Proof. Consider bS a punctured disk with two marked points on its boundary and suppose that 

G is Jordan split of type A1. We consider the mutation sequence which switches the usual triangulation of this punctured bigon with a tagged triangulation. [BHR25, Example 5.15], computes the noncommutative cluster algebra in this situation, from which it is easy to see that the potential (called the total noncommutative angle there) is transformed to its inverse by this mutation sequence, which is the result of the change of decoration described above. The A1 case on any surface (with at least 2 marked points) can be reduced to this situation by moving to a triangulation which contains the desired marked point in a bigon. Now consider G Jordan split of general type. As before we can reduce to the punctured bigon case. Choose a cluster chart where the interpolating flags are placed on the sides away from the puncture. Let m be the number of instances of the reflection ςi∗ in these interpolating sequences. Consider the level i subquiver or the subnetwork between strands i and i + 1 which surrounds the puncture. This subquiver/subnetwork is exactly the one which is associated to a group of type A1 on a punctured disk with m marked points on the boundary. We use the mutation sequence applied only to this subquiver/network which changes the tagging at the central puncture. Since this only changes the cluster variables at level i, the L-distances must change as desired by the A1 calculation. □

Braid Group action. Consider a surface, bS, with a boundary component b. There is a birational action of the Artin-Tits braid group of type R, B(R), on AG, bS associated to b as follows: 

Construction 17.23. Suppose that there are d marked points on this boundary component and choose a particular one as a basepoint. A decorated local system L ∈ AG, bS determines a sequence of decorated flags {A1, A 2, . . . , A d, A d+1 = gA 1, . . . } where g ∈ G is the monodromy of L around the boundary. Write {Bi} for the corresponding sequence of undecorated flags. Assume now that NONCOMMUTATIVE CLUSTER VARIETIES AND MODULI SPACES OF LOCAL SYSTEMS 129 

d is even or the opposition involution is trivial. For ϑi a braid generator we define the action 

ϑi · L in the following way: Pick i a reduced expression of w0 which starts with ςi. We can find an interpolating sequence of flags from Bi → Bi+1 following alternatively i and i∗. Call the first new flags found along these interpolations B′ 

> i

so that (Bi, B ′

> i

) are ςi- or ςi∗ -transverse. Let A′ 

> i

be the decorated flag over B′ 

> i

with l(Ai, A ′

> i

) = 1 . We define the action of ϑi · L by transforming the flags {Ai} to 

{A′

> i

}.If d is odd and the opposition involution is nontrivial, we only define the action for the sub-group generated by positive braids ω ∈ B(Θ) which are invariant under the opposition involution. In this case, the previous construction still works. 

Proposition 17.24. The braid group action is realized by quasi-cluster isomorphisms. Proof. We follow the same proof as [GS19, Section 14]. The proof breaks into several cases depending on bS. In each case the mutation sequence realizing the braid symmetry is built using mutation sequences which change reduced expressions, flip edges, and the (left) reflection map, which is a monomial map. To understand the quasi-cluster nature, we first see that if all of the L-distances around the boundary we are considering are 1 then this action is a cluster automorphism on the nose. This is because the reflection map does not change any cluster variables in this case, and that the new flags A′ 

> i

from the construction are actually the flags that would be found in an interpolating sequence between Ai and Ai+1 which starts with ςi(∗) .Finally the situation when the boundary L-distances are not equal to 1 can be remedied by first rescaling the decorations so that they are 1 i.e. change A1 to A1l(A2, A 1)−1 and so on, then compute the mutation sequence, and put the scaling back. By Lemma 17.15 this amounts to a monomial transformation in the frozen variables which come from the boundary L-distances. □

17.7. Spectral description of types Ap or Cp. Goncharov and Kontsevich give a spectral description of the space of twisted decorated local systems on a surface. Each plabic network, P , encodes a topological surface called the spectral surface. 

Definition 17.25. The spectral surface ΣP associated to P is obtained as follows: we put a disk around each white and black vertices and connect them by a strip with a right-hand twist oriented from ◦ to •.The spectral surface is invariant under the local equivalence moves. 

Definition 17.26. Goncharov and Kontsevich define a twisted version of the seed group QP

(Definition 7.3) that we denote by ¯QP . The twisted seed group on a plabic graph P is the quotient of the free group generated by edges of P by the following relations: 

• The clockwise products around the the ◦ vertices is −1.

• The clockwise products around the the • vertices is (−1) v(•)−1, where v(•) is the valency of the vertex. Denote by ¯AP the noncommutative torus with group of functions given by ¯QP .The only difference between this torus and the torus AP is in the sign of the product around each vertex, which is always +1 in the case of AP .Now let S be a marked surface and fix a triangulation T . The coordinates of Goncharov and Kontsevich are given by embedding the honeycomb network Pm (Definition 7.8) in each triangle and amalgamating the twisted seed groups. 

Definition 17.27. A local system is fully twisted if the monodromy around each contractable loop is −1.

Theorem 17.28 ([GK24] Lemma 4.2,Theorem 1.6,Theorem 6.2) .

(1) Let R be a noncommutative ring. The R× valued points of ¯QP parameterize fully twisted rank 1 R-local systems on ΣP . Equivalently, ¯AP the moduli space of fully twisted rank 1 local systems on ΣP .(2) The space ¯APm is birationally equivalent to the space of configurations of complete dec-orated flags in an m-dimensional vector space over R.130 ZACHARY GREENBERG, DANI KAUFMAN, MERIK NIEMEYER, AND ANNA WIENHARD 

Figure 61. An untwisting of the honeycomb network P4 is given by multiply-ing all dashed blue edges by −1.

(3) Let Σ be a marked surface and ∆ a triangulation of Σ. We get a plabic network on Σ by inscribing Pm into each triangle of ∆, which we denote by P∆,m . Then the space ¯AP∆,m 

is birationally equivalent to the moduli space of fully twisted rank m local systems on Σ.

For G Jordan split of type Ap, we have sG = ( −1) p. The group SL m(R) is Jordan split of type Am−1 When we turn our eyes back to our coordinates, we find 

Corollary 17.29. 

(1) AP is the moduli space of rank 1 (untwisted) local systems on ΣP .(2) The space APp is birationally equivalent to the space of configurations of complete dec-orated flags in an p + 1 -dimensional vector space over R.(3) The space AP∆,p +1 is birationally equivalent to the moduli space of ( sG) twisted rank 

p + 1 local systems on Σ.

These statements seem at odds with each other when p itself is odd; how can the space of twisted and untwisted local systems on the spectral cover parameterize the same space of configurations of flags? The solution to this is that there is a (generally non-canonical) way to 

untwist a local system. One isomorphism is given by taking a point of AP∆,p +1 for p odd and multiplying some of the edges by −1 so that the products around the black and white vertices satisfy Definition 17.26. For example in Figure 61, multiplying the dashed blue edges by −1

gives an untwisting of p = 3 . There are multiply ways to pick these edges so the untwisting is not canonical. In Jordan split type Cp, our cluster charts are really charts from A2p−1 which satisfy an extra symmetry. This symmetry corresponds to a symmetry of the spectral surface, and the local systems on the spectral surface which are invariant under this symmetry parametrize the appropriate spaces of configurations decorated flags and moduli of decorated local systems. 17.8. Positivity. Now assume that G has a Θ-positive structure, i.e. each Ji is formally real. We have now endowed the subset A TG, bS ⊂ AG, bS defined by an ideal triangulation with a coordi-nate chart. We use this to define a positive structure on AG, bS :

Definition 17.30. A decorated twisted local system L ∈ AG, bS is Θ-positive if it provides a positive {Ji}-point of AR, bS . The set of these is denoted A >0  

> G, bS

.

Theorem 17.31. The set A >0  

> G, bS

is well-defined, i.e. independent of all the choices made in the construction. Proof. This is a direct consequence of Theorem 17.13 and Lemma 6.27. □

Θ-positive decorated twisted local systems may be understood in a more geometric fashion: Recall the Farey set for a surface S, F( bS) which can be realized as a subset of ∂H ∼= S1. The 2:1 cover S1 → S1 induces a double cover eF( bS) → F ( bS) with nontrivial automorphism α. eF( bS)NONCOMMUTATIVE CLUSTER VARIETIES AND MODULI SPACES OF LOCAL SYSTEMS 131 

is a cyclic set with an action of π1(T ′S), defined by s.x = α(x) where s ∈ π1(T ′S) denotes the generator of the central subgroup Z as before. 

Definition 17.32. A π1(T ′S)-equivariant configuration of flags is a map η : eF( bS) → A 

such that for each γ ∈ π1(T ′S) the configurations η and η ◦ γ agree. Formally for each γ there is a fixed gγ ∈ G such that for any x ∈ eF( bS):

η(γ.x ) = gγ .η (x)

A π1(T ′S)-equivariant configuration of flags defines a twisted representation by ϱ(γ) = gγ .

Theorem 17.33. The space AG, bS parametrizes π1(T ′S) equivariant configurations of flags. 

We call the elements ϱ and η corresponding to L ∈ AG, bS its holonomy representation and 

boundary map , respectively. The proof of this theorem is completely analogous to the split case, see [FG06]. We can use this to give a different characterization of the space A >0  

> G, bS

:

Theorem 17.34 ([FG06], Section 8.6) . The elements of A >0  

> G, bS

are those with a positive boundary map. 

Here, a map η : eF( bS) → A is called positive if any coherent lift of a cyclically ordered tuple in F( bS) to the double cover is mapped to a positive configuration of decorated flags. A coherent lift of a tuple (x1, . . . , x k) is one obtained as follows: Take the path going through the points in F( bS) in order, and lift it to a path in eF( bS) starting at a lift ex1 of x1. This passes through exactly one preimage under the projection of every point in the tuple. These define the lift. The notion of positivity is independent of the chosen coherent lift. Finally, let us consider the holonomy representation of a positive local system. Recall the projection p : AG, bS → X G′, bS . The holonomy representation ρ of the image of a decorated twisted local system under p is a map ρ : π1(S) → G′.

Theorem 17.35. Let ρ be the holonomy representation of a local system in p



A >0

> G,S



. Let γ

be a simple closed curve on S which is not homotopic to a puncture. Then ρ(γ) is conjugated to an element of the Θ-positive semigroup of G′.Proof. Simply consider the two types of loops shown in Figure 59. We may compute their holo-nomy in the way described in Section 17.4, i.e. by fixing any ideal triangulation and considering the corresponding graph. Since we assume that we are working with a positive local system, we see from Figure 58 that following the graph counterclockwise around a vertex of the triangulation gives us an element of 

U >0Θ . Following an edge of the triangulation on the other hand gives us an element of the form 

w0l with l ∈ L◦

> Θ

. Moreover we have for u ∈ U >0Θ that 

u∗ = w0u−1w0 ∈ U opp ,> 0Θ .

For the different kinds of loops, consider the setup as in Figure 58 and Figure 60, respectively. By making all the choices as indicated, we see that ρ(γ) lies in U opp ,> 0Θ L◦

> Θ

U >0Θ L◦ 

> Θ

= G>0 or 

U >0Θ L◦

> Θ

U opp ,> 0Θ L◦ 

> Θ

= G>0. □

References            

> [ABR +22] Daniele Alessandrini, Arkady Berenstein, Vladimir Retakh, Eugen Rogozinnikov, and Anna Wien-hard. Symplectic groups over noncommutative algebras. Selecta Math. (N.S.) , 28(4):Paper No. 82, 119, 2022. [AGRW21] Daniele Alessandrini, Olivier Guichard, Eugen Rogozinnikov, and Anna Wienhard. Noncommutative coordinates for symplectic representations. Memoirs of the American Mathematical Society , 2021. [BB05] Anders Björner and Francesco Brenti. Combinatorics of Coxeter groups , volume 231. Springer, 2005. [BFZ05] Arkady Berenstein, Sergey Fomin, and Andrei Zelevinsky. Cluster algebras III: Upper bounds and double Bruhat cells. Duke Mathematical Journal , 126(1):1 – 52, 2005. [BGL +24] Jonas Beyrer, Olivier Guichard, François Labourie, Beatrice Pozzetti, and Anna Wienhard. Positiv-ity, cross-ratios and the collar lemma. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.06294 , 2024. 132 ZACHARY GREENBERG, DANI KAUFMAN, MERIK NIEMEYER, AND ANNA WIENHARD

[BHR25] Arkady Berenstein, Min Huang, and Vladimir Retakh. Noncommutative marked surfaces II: Tagged triangulations, clusters, and their symmetries. https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.20393v4, July 2025. [BM92] S. Berman and R. V. Moody. Lie algebras graded by finite root systems and the intersection matrix algebras of Slodowy. Invent. Math. , 108(2):323–347, 1992. [BR05] Arkady Berenstein and Vladimir Retakh. Noncommutative double Bruhat cells and their factoriza-tions. Int. Math. Res. Not. , (8):477–516, 2005. [BR18] Arkady Berenstein and Vladimir Retakh. Noncommutative marked surfaces. Advances in Mathe-matics , 328:1010–1087, 2018. [BT72] Armand Borel and Jacques Tits. Compléments À L’Article: «Groupes Réductifs». Publications Math-ématiques de l’Institut des Hautes Études Scientifiques , 41(1):253–276, December 1972. [BZ96] Georgia Benkart and Efim Zelmanov. Lie algebras graded by finite root systems and intersection matrix algebras. Inventiones Mathematicae , 126(1):1–45, 1996. [BZ97] Arkady Berenstein and Andrei Zelevinsky. Total positivity in Schubert varieties. Comment. Math. Helv. , 72(1):128–166, 1997. [CGG +25] Roger Casals, Eugene Gorsky, Mikhail Gorsky, Ian Le, Linhui Shen, and José Simental. Cluster structures on braid varieties. Journal of the American Mathematical Society , 38(2):369–479, 2025. [Del79] Pierre Deligne. Variétés de Shimura: interprétation modulaire, et techniques de construction de modèles canoniques. In Automorphic forms, representations and L-functions (Proc. Sympos. Pure Math., Oregon State Univ., Corvallis, Ore., 1977), Part 2 , volume XXXIII of Proc. Sympos. Pure Math. , pages 247–289. Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 1979. [Dic19] L. E. Dickson. On quaternions and their generalization and the history of the eight square theorem. 

Ann. of Math. (2) , 20(3):155–171, 1919. [FG06] Vladimir Fock and Alexander Goncharov. Moduli spaces of local systems and higher Teichmüller theory. Publications Mathématiques de l’IHÉS , 103:1–211, 2006. [FG07] Vladimir V Fock and Alexander Goncharov. Dual Teichmüller and lamination spaces. In Handbook of Teichmüller Theory, Volume I , pages 647–684. European Mathematical Society-EMS-Publishing House GmbH, 2007. [Fra16] Chris Fraser. Quasi-homomorphisms of cluster algebras. Advances in Applied Mathematics , 81:40–77, 2016. [FST08] Sergey Fomin, Michael Shapiro, and Dylan Thurston. Cluster algebras and triangulated surfaces. Part I: Cluster complexes. Acta Mathematica , 201, 2008. [FWZ21] Sergey Fomin, Lauren Williams, and Andrei Zelevinsky. Introduction to Cluster Algebras. Chapters 7, August 2021. arXiv:2106.02160 [math]. [FZ99] Sergey Fomin and Andrei Zelevinsky. Double Bruhat cells and total positivity. Journal of the Amer-ican Mathematical Society , 12(2):335–380, 1999. [FZ02] Sergey Fomin and Andrei Zelevinsky. Cluster algebras I: Foundations. Journal of the American mathematical society , 15(2):497–529, 2002. [Gil21] S Gilles. Fock–Goncharov coordinates for semisimple Lie groups . PhD thesis, University of Maryland, College Park, 2021. [GK24] Alexander Goncharov and Maxim Kontsevich. Spectral description of non-commutative local sys-tems on surfaces and non-commutative cluster varieties. In Arithmetic and Algebraic Geometry: A Mathematical Tribute to Yuri Manin , pages 109–238. Springer, 2024. [GKNW26] Zachary Greenberg, Dani Kaufman, Merik Niemeyer, and Anna Wienhard. Noncommutative polyg-onal cluster algebras. Journal of the London Mathematical Society , 113(4):e70511, 2026. [GKW25] Zachary Greenberg, Dani Kaufman, and Anna Wienhard. SL2-like properties of matrices over non-commutative rings and generalizations of Markov numbers. Advances in Mathematics , 482:110556, 2025. [GLW21] Olivier Guichard, François Labourie, and Anna Wienhard. Positivity and representations of surface groups. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.14584 , 2021. [GR91] I. M. Gel’fand and V. S. Retakh. Determinants of matrices over noncommutative rings. Functional Analysis and Its Applications , 25(2):91–102, April 1991. [GS19] Alexander Goncharov and Linhui Shen. Quantum geometry of moduli spaces of local systems and representation theory. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.10491 , 2019. [GW25] Olivier Guichard and Anna Wienhard. Generalizing Lusztig’s total positivity. Invent. Math. ,239(3):707–799, 2025. [GW26a] Olivier Guichard and Anna Wienhard. Generalizing lusztig’s total positivity II: geometric properties, 2026. [GW26b] Olivier Guichard and Anna Wienhard. Generalizing lusztig’s total positivity III : algebraic properties, 2026. [JvNW34] P. Jordan, J. von Neumann, and E. Wigner. On an algebraic generalization of the quantum mechan-ical formalism. Annals of Mathematics. Second Series , 35(1):29–64, 1934. [Kac84] Victor Kac. Infinite Dimensional Lie Algebras , volume 44 of Progress in Mathematics . Birkhäuser Boston, MA, 1984. [Kna96] Anthony W. Knapp. Lie groups beyond an introduction , volume 140. Springer, 1996. [Koe67] Max Koecher. Imbedding of Jordan algebras into Lie algebras. I. American Journal of Mathematics ,89:787–816, 1967. NONCOMMUTATIVE CLUSTER VARIETIES AND MODULI SPACES OF LOCAL SYSTEMS 133 

[Koe99] Max Koecher. The Minnesota notes on Jordan algebras and their applications , volume 1710 of 

Lecture Notes in Mathematics . Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1999. [Le19] Ian Le. Cluster structures on higher Teichmüller spaces for classical groups. In Forum of Mathemat-ics, Sigma , volume 7, page e13. Cambridge University Press, 2019. [LM16] H Blaine Lawson and Marie-Louise Michelsohn. Spin Geometry (PMS-38), Volume 38 , volume 20. Princeton university press, 2016. [Lus94] George Lusztig. Total positivity in reductive groups. In Lie theory and geometry: in honor of Bertram Kostant , pages 531–568. Springer, 1994. [McC65] K. McCrimmon. Norms and noncommutative Jordan algebras. Pacific Journal of Mathematics ,15(3):925 – 956, 1965. [McC04] Kevin McCrimmon. A taste of Jordan algebras . Universitext. Springer-Verlag, New York, 2004. [Neh96] Erhard Neher. Lie algebras graded by 3-graded root systems and Jordan pairs covered by grids. 

American Journal of Mathematics , 118(2):439–491, 1996. [Pen87] R. C. Penner. The decorated Teichmüller space of punctured surfaces. Commun. Math. Phys. ,113:299–339, 1987. [Pos06] Alexander Postnikov. Total positivity, Grassmannians, and networks, 2006. [Rog20] Evgenii Rogozinnikov. Symplectic groups over noncommutative rings and maximal representations .PhD thesis, Universität Heidelberg, 2020. [Rog25] Eugen Rogozinnikov. Symplectic groups over Lie subgroups of involutive algebras. Preprint, arXiv:2510.11267 [math.DG] (2025), 2025. [War12] Garth Warner. Harmonic analysis on semi-simple Lie groups I , volume 188. Springer Science & Business Media, 2012. [Wie25] Anna Wienhard. Positivity and Non-commutativity. Preprint, arXiv:2511.12771 [math.GR] (2025), 2025. 

Max Planck Institute for Mathematics in the Sciences, Inselstr. 22, 04103 Leipzig, Germany 

Email address : greenberg@mis.mpg.de https://zngzag42.github.io 

Max Planck Institute for Mathematics in the Sciences, Inselstr. 22, 04103 Leipzig, Germany 

Email address : kaufman@mis.mpg.de https://sites.google.com/view/danikaufman/jordan 

Max Planck Institute for Mathematics in the Sciences, Inselstr. 22, 04103 Leipzig, Germany 

Email address : niemeyer@mis.mpg.de 

Max Planck Institute for Mathematics in the Sciences, Inselstr. 22, 04103 Leipzig, Germany 

Email address : wienhard@mis.mpg.de