Title: K-STEMIT: Knowledge-Informed Spatio-Temporal Efficient Multi-Branch Graph Neural Network for Subsurface Stratigraphy Thickness Estimation from Radar Data

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.09922v1

Published Time: Tue, 14 Apr 2026 00:23:10 GMT

Number of Pages: 20

Markdown Content:
# K-STEMIT: Knowledge-Informed Spatio-Temporal Efficient Multi-Branch Graph Neural Network for Subsurface Stratigraphy Thickness Estimation from Radar Data 

## Zesheng Liu a, Maryam Rahnemoonfar a,b ,∗

> a

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Lehigh University, 113 Research Drive, Bethlehem, 18015, Pennsylvania, USA 

> b

Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Lehigh University, 19 Memorial Drive W., Bethlehem, 18015, Pennsylvania, USA 

A R T I C L E I N F O 

Keywords :Deep Learning Spatio-Temporal Learning Knowledge-Informed Graph Neural Network Ice Thickness Remote Sensing Radar Stratigraphy 

A B S T R A C T 

Spatio-temporal patterns in subsurface stratigraphy encode key information about accumulation, deformation, and layer formation processes. For polar ice sheets and corresponding subsurface ice layer stratigraphy, variations in layer thickness provide quantitative constraints that support snow mass balance estimation, improved projections of ice sheet change, and reduced uncertainty in climate and engineering models. Radar sensors capture these layered structures as depth-resolved radargrams; however, convolutional neural networks applied directly to radargrams are often sensitive to speckle noise and acquisition artifacts. More broadly, purely data-driven approaches tend to underuse known physical knowledge, which can produce inconsistent or unrealistic thickness estimates when extrapolating across space and time. To address these challenges, we develop K-STEMIT, a novel knowledge-informed, efficient, multi-branch spatio-temporal graph neural network that combines a geometric framework for spatial learning with temporal convolution to capture temporal dynamics, and incorporates physical data synchro-nized from the Model Atmospheric Regional physical weather model. An adaptive feature fusion strategy is employed to dynamically combine features learned from different branches. Extensive experiments have been conducted to compare K-STEMIT against current state-of-the-art methods in both knowledge-informed and non-knowledge-informed settings, as well as other existing methods. Results show that K-STEMIT consistently achieves the highest accuracy while maintaining near-optimal efficiency. Most notably, incorporating adaptive feature fusion and physical priors reduces the root mean-squared error by 21.01% with negligible additional cost compared to its conventional multi-branch variants. Additionally, our proposed K-STEMIT achieves consistently lower per-year relative MAE, enabling reliable, continuous spatiotemporal assessment of snow accumulation variability across large spatial regions. 

## 1. Introduction 

As the global temperature rises, researchers have revealed that the rate of mass loss of polar ice has been accelerated[10]. If the current trend continues, it is estimated that the Arctic Ocean will be ice-free by the 2030s[7], and the global sea level will rise about 1 meter by 2100[45]. Polar ice sheets comprise several internal ice layers formed over different years. A better understanding of the internal ice layers, particularly their thickness and variability, provides valuable insights into snowfall accumulation and melting. This knowledge is vital for monitoring changes in snow mass balance, interpreting hard-to-observe processes, and minimizing uncertainties in climate model predictions. The traditional method to capture internal ice layers and measure their properties involves extracting onsite ice cores[38]. Researchers drill holes in specific locations of the polar regions, and large cylindrical ice cores are manually extracted. However, this method has a few limitations. Considering the extreme climate conditions in the polar region and the fact that ice cores need to be manually drilled from ice sheets, the coverage of ice cores is limited to certain parts of the polar region. Even in the areas where ice cores are available, the measurements are discrete and sparse, making it impossible to study the continuous changes of the internal layers. Moreover, onsite ice cores are expensive and time-consuming to obtain, and the drilling process causes destructive damages. In recent years, airborne radar sensors[1] have proved to be a more effective tool. Airborne radar scientific campaigns in polar regions are conducted using aircraft equipped with specialized radar systems designed to penetrate 

> ∗

Corresponding author 

zel220@lehigh.edu (Z. Liu); maryam@lehigh.edu (M. Rahnemoonfar) 

> ORCID

(s): 0009-0004-6978-7160 (Z. Liu); 0000-0001-9358-2836 (M. Rahnemoonfar) 

Zesheng Liu, Maryam Rahnemoonfar: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 1 of 20             

> arXiv:2604.09922v1 [cs.LG] 10 Apr 2026 Knowledge-Informed Spatio-Temporal Efficient Multi-Branch Graph Neural Network (a) Airborne radar sensor captures
> the status of internal layers
> (b) Radargram (c) Labeled
> images
> Figure 1: Diagram of capturing radargrams and generating corresponding labels. ( a) How airborne radar sensor is used to capture the status of internal ice layers (Image adapted from [35]) ( b) Example of a radargram captured by the airborne radar sensor. ( c) Corresponding labeled images, where each ice layer is manually annotated. Each layer is formed in a certain year.

ice and snow layers to collect high-resolution data on ice sheet structures and dynamics. These campaigns employ advanced radar systems mounted on aircraft to investigate subsurface features such as internal ice stratigraphy, basal topography, and snow accumulation. One example of airborne radar for polar region measurements is the Snow Radar[12] operated by the Center for Remote Sensing of Ice Sheets (CReSIS), as part of NASA’s Operation IceBridge Mission. The Snow Radar can capture the location of snow or firn layers at different depths by measuring the backscatter power of the electromagnetic wave reflections[2], resulting in radargrams that reveal the stratigraphy of shallow and near surface accumulation such as the one shown in Figure 1 ( a). Figure 1 ( b) shows the radargram captured by the airborne radar sensor. This helps to visualize subsurface features, particularly the accumulation pattern beneath the ice sheet’s surface along the flight path. The horizontal axis of the radargram represents the direction of the aircraft flight, often referred to as the along-track axis, while the vertical axis is the fast-time axis, revealing the occurring depth of the snow layers. The value of each pixel is determined by its reflected signal strength, where brighter pixels mean a higher reflection power[2]. These radargrams are then annotated to create corresponding training labels (Figure 1( c)), where annotated lines represent the ice layer boundaries formed by different years of snow accumulation[62]. With the development of deep learning techniques, various convolutional-based neural networks [18, 20, 40, 50, 51, 52, 54, 62, 63] have been proposed to detect ice layer boundaries from the radargram. However, noise in the radargrams has been proven to be a major obstacle for achieving high-quality results. Instead of convolutional-based networks, Zalatan et al.[64, 66, 65] proposed to represent internal ice layers as individual fully-connected graphs and learn the spatio-temporal relationships between shallow and deep ice layers through graph neural networks(GNNs). In the most recent work, Liu et al.[30] proposed a two-stage “Locate and Extend” strategy that significantly reduces the training time while maintaining a competitive prediction accuracy. Graph transformer is a special type of graph neural network where the self-attention mechanism and transformer blocks are applied to graph data. Liu et al.[29, 31] applied two types of graph transformer networks and further improved the accuracy compared with Zalatan et al.[66, 64, 65]. Although their proposed methods have achieved notable success, a critical problem lies in their purely data-driven nature. These data-driven neural networks are trained on multi-fidelity observational data, relying heavily on the availability and quality of such data to extract patterns. However, trained neural networks often lack the ability to generalize to unseen conditions, which can lead to unrealistic or physically inconsistent predictions. This limitation undermines their reliability and interpretability. To address this problem, we adopt a knowledge-informed learning approach, where domain knowledge is integrated into a purely data-driven deep neural network. By incorporating domain-specific components into the model design and training process, a knowledge-informed neural network leverages the expressive power of deep learning to extract patterns from large volumes of observational data, while being guided by contextual information that reflects the underlying physical processes of the system. Such domain knowledge can be introduced into deep learning models in various forms, often conceptualized as biases that help improve generalization. As outlined by Karniadakis et al. [22], these include: observational biases,   

> Zesheng Liu, Maryam Rahnemoonfar: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 2 of 20 Knowledge-Informed Spatio-Temporal Efficient Multi-Branch Graph Neural Network

which incorporate domain-specific data or measurements into the input of the deep neural network; inductive biases, which inform the network architecture; and learning biases, which influence the training objective. In this work, we incorporate domain knowledge in the form of observational biases by using physical variables simulated from physical climate models as part of the node features in the graph neural network. These physically grounded features guide the network in learning the spatio-temporal relationships between shallow and deep internal ice layers, without explicitly embedding physical equations into the architecture or loss function. Liu et al.[28] and Rahnemoonfar et al.[41] demonstrate that incorporating additional physical characteristics as node features in graph neural networks leads to improved accuracy, compared to the fused spatio-temporal GNNs developed by Zalatan et al. Building upon these advancements, this work extends their methods by proposing K-STEMIT, namely Knowledge-informed Spatio-Temporal Efficient Multi-branch graph neural network for Ice layer 

Thickness. K-STEMIT separates the learning of spatial and temporal features, allowing each branch to specialize. An adaptive feature fusion strategy is applied to dynamically combine features learned from different branches, enabling more effective integration of complementary information, resulting in better generalization to unseen data. In addition, our method incorporates physical features synchronized from the Model Atmospheric Regional (MAR) physical weather model. Our major contributions are: 

• We developed K-STEMIT, a knowledge-informed efficient multi-branch spatio-temporal graph neural network designed to learn from the upper 𝑚 ice layers to predict the thickness of the underlying 𝑛 layers. 

• K-STEMIT adopted a multi-branch strategy that explicitly decouples spatial feature extraction and temporal dynamics into dedicated branches, enabling specialized learning tasks and enhancing accuracy and efficiency. 

• We applied an adaptive feature fusion strategy that dynamically combined the learned features from different branches, enabling more effective information integration and better generalization to unseen data. 

• We incorporated physical node features synchronized from the Model Atmospheric Regional (MAR) weather model as prior domain knowledge, which significantly boosts the predictive performance of our network. 

• We conducted comprehensive experiments to benchmark K-STEMIT and its non-knowledge-informed coun-terpart, STEMIT, with current state-of-the-art methods and other existing methods for deep ice layer thickness prediction. This paper is organized as follows: Section 2 will discuss a few related works. Section 3 will introduce the snow Radar Echogram Dataset (SRED) radargram dataset that we use, how physical data is obtained from the Model Atmospheric Regional physical weather model and synchronized with radargram measurements, and how we generate our graph data based on the SRED dataset. Section 4 will explain all the key designs of our proposed multi-branch network architecture. Section 5 will state details of our experiments. Section 6 and Section 7 will evaluate our proposed method in different aspects, and Section 8 will conclude the article. 

## 2. Related Work 

2.1. Internal Ice Layer Tracking 

Tracking the internal ice layers from radargrams is a complex task. Layers formed long ago may be broken, incomplete, melted, or have fewer contrast variations[49], heavily increases the difficulty of extracting ice layers from radar results. Several works utilized traditional non-learning algorithms to process radargram images and detect ice layers[3, 36, 32, 25]. However, these automatic algorithms cannot be scaled and applied to larger datasets. In recent years, deep learning techniques, especially convolutional neural networks and generative adversarial networks, have also been developed to precisely extract ice layer boundary positions from radargrams[18, 20, 40, 50, 51, 52, 54, 62, 63]. Varshney et al. use different kinds of fully conventional networks[50, 52] or multi-output convolution-based regression network[51] to estimate internal layer depth directly from radargram images. Rahnemoonfar et al. applied a multi-scale convolutional neural network to segment ice layers from radargram images[40]. The results of these works show that the major problems are the noise in the radargram images and the limited amount of high-quality datasets and annotations. Unlike previous convolutional-based networks, our proposed K-STEMIT represents internal ice layers as individual graphs and uses a knowledge-informed graph neural network to learn the shallow layer thickness patterns, where the graph neural network is shown to be less sensitive to noise and has a more stable performance.   

> Zesheng Liu, Maryam Rahnemoonfar: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 3 of 20 Knowledge-Informed Spatio-Temporal Efficient Multi-Branch Graph Neural Network

2.2. Graph Neural Network for Ice Thickness Prediction 

Deep learning has demonstrated remarkable success with Euclidean data, like the famous convolutional neural network (CNN) and recurrent neural network (RNN) for images and sequences. Building on these successes, researchers have increasingly focused on adapting these concepts to graphs, which are composed of nodes and edges. While CNNs are well-suited for processing data with a regular, grid-like structure, such as images, graph convolutional networks (GCNs) are specifically designed to handle complex graph data where the relationships between elements are irregular and non-Euclidean[60]. Graph neural networks have been widely applied to different tasks, including molecular property prediction [39], drug recommendation [16], and diseases analysis [61]. Among them, spatio-temporal graph neural networks (ST-GNNs) have emerged as a powerful paradigm for modeling dynamic graph-structured data, achieving state-of-the-art performance in applications such as motion prediction [58], traffic data imputation [44] and rainfall forecasting[17]. Recent advances (2023–2025) in ST-GNNs have focused on building more powerful networks and have been applied in more domains. Cini et al.[4] and Tang et al.[47] focus on the scalability and explainability of spatio-temporal graph neural networks. Wang et al.[57] integrated more advanced transformer networks or diffusion-based models into ST-GNNs. In the application aspect, Verdone et al.[55] proposed a novel explainable spatio-temporal graph neural network for energy forecasting by applying a spectral graph convolution network and a state-of-the-art explainer. Li et al.[27] proposed a multimodal adaptive spatio-temporal graph neural network for airspace complexity prediction, introducing a novel multimodal adaptive graph convolution module and a dilated causal temporal convolution with multi-step self-attention. Given the irregular and non-Euclidean characteristics of ice layers, representing them as graphs and leveraging graph neural networks (GNNs) offers a more suitable approach for effectively modeling and processing such complex data structures. Zalatan et al. [66, 64, 65] developed a network that combines an LSTM structure with a graph convolutional network (GCN) to solve the problem of ice layer tracking and ice thickness estimation. They used the fused spatio-temporal graph neural network, GCN-LSTM[43], with an additional Evolve-GCN layer[37] as a prior adaptive layer. The fusion of LSTM and GCN architectures allows this network to learn both the temporal changes of the relationships between nodes in a graph and their spatial relationships at the same time, while the use of an adaptive layer improves the model performance by enabling the model to learn more complicated features and be more robust to noise. In the most recent work, Liu et al. proposed a novel “Locate and Extend” strategy[30] that reduces the computation time while maintaining a competitive accuracy compared with Zalatan et al.[64, 66, 65]. To further improve the accuracy of Zatalan et al.[64, 66, 65], Liu et al.[29, 31] combine the self-attention mechanism with a geometric deep learning framework and apply graph transformers on the task of deep ice layer thickness prediction. Compared with Zalatan et al. [66, 64, 65] that uses a fused spatio-temporal graph neural network, our proposed method uses different branches to learn spatial and temporal patterns separately. This multi-branch design enables a decoupled approach to spatial and temporal learning, allowing each branch to focus on extracting its respective features more effectively. Compared with Zalatan et al. [66, 64, 65] and Liu et al.[28, 29, 31], our methods is more training-efficient while maintaining competitive accuracy, achieving a better trade-off between model’s accuracy and computational cost. 

2.3. Combining Domain Knowledge with Deep Learning 

Although machine learning algorithms have achieved great success in various domains, their pure data-driven nature often limits generalizability and interpretability, which are key requirements for scientific discovery. While machine learning excels at analyzing data, it can yield unrealistic or physically inconsistent predictions when applied to unseen data [22]. To address these limitations, researchers have explored knowledge-informed learning, where prior domain knowledge, such as insights from scientific models, empirical rules, or expert understanding, is integrated into machine learning workflows. This combination enhances the model’s generalizability, interpretability, and supports more meaningful outcomes in scientific discovery and engineering tasks [6]. Some researchers have already applied the concept of knowledge-informed machine learning to study polar ice[48, 21, 49, 41, 28]. However, given the scope of this paper, we focus specifically on prior studies that utilize knowledge-informed machine learning for processing radargrams and identifying ice layer boundaries[53, 21, 49, 41, 28]. Varsheny et al.[53] integrates a physical wavelet transform block as a denoising part to a convolutional neural network designed to detect ice layer boudaries. Kamangir et al.[21] applied wavelet transformation as the pre-processing stage and developed a novel convolutional neural network to detect the layer boundaries more effectively. Varsheny et al.[49] highlights that regression-based neural networks can benefit from pretraining on labels simulated from physical models   

> Zesheng Liu, Maryam Rahnemoonfar: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 4 of 20 Knowledge-Informed Spatio-Temporal Efficient Multi-Branch Graph Neural Network

and have better accuracy on the thickness prediction. For the task of deep ice layer thickness prediction, in some recent work, liu et al.[28] proposed a physics-informed GraphSAGE-LSTM network, and Rahnemoonfar et al.[41] applied a physics-informed AGCN-LSTM network that improves the model’s accuracy by introducing physical node features synchronized from the physical weather model. In this paper, we applied a similar idea that incorporates data from a physical weather model as observational biases. This approach ensures that the model adheres to underlying physical principles as prior domain knowledge, enhances its generalization ability on unseen data, and thereby improves accuracy. Compared with Rahnemoonfar et al.[41] and liu et al.[28], our method improves both the accuracy and efficiency. 

## 3. Radargram Datasets and Graph Generation 

3.1. Radargram Dataset 

In this work, we use the Snow Radar Echogram Dataset (SRED) dataset[19]. It contains radargrams captured over the Greenland region in 2012 via an airborne snow radar sensor, operated by CReSIS[13] as part of NASA’s Operation Ice Bridge project[26]. The Snow Radar radargrams and the labeled images can be accessed at the CReSIS website. Ice-penetrating radar transmits electromagnetic waves into the ice sheet, leveraging their ability to propagate through dielectric media and reflect off interfaces where there are changes in dielectric constants. Depending on the radar system’s frequency, bandwidth, and processing techniques, the captured reflections can be used to reconstruct the subsurface structure of the mapped topography with precision. The primary principle underpinning the radar campaigns is the analysis of the time-delay and amplitude of the reflected radar signals. The time delay represents the travel time of the electromagnetic wave from the transmitter to the reflecting interface and back to the receiver, scaled by the radar wave’s velocity in snow or ice. This velocity varies with temperature, density, and the presence of unique subglacial structures such as melted or refrozen water. Using the time-delay and a corresponding density-depth model, accurate depth estimation can be achieved. Similarly, the received signal amplitude provides insight into the snow temporal deposition and material properties at each reflecting interface, dictated by the Fresnel reflection coefficient, which quantifies the magnitude of the dielectric discontinuity. Together, time delay and amplitude enable a detailed reconstruction of subsurface features, ranging from internal stratigraphic layers to basal hydrology. As shown in Figure 1 ( a), the Snow Radar transmits electromagnetic waves towards the polar ice sheet’s surface as the radar-equipped aircraft flies over the ice sheet region with predefined flight routes. The S-C frequency band and 6 GHz bandwidth of the radar are optimized to penetrate the shallow snow layers while capturing backscatter from distinct internal stratigraphy due to its crisp vertical resolution of about 4 cm in snow. Interface between the late summer and early winter snowfall appears characteristically different to the radar receiver, resulting in annual layering seen in the resulting images. This is attributed to the difference in the seasonal weather patterns, creating a snow permittivity change that causes detectable backscatter towards the receiving radar antenna. Distinct peaks in the processed backscatter are further enhanced with various digital filtering and signal processing methods to create the radargram. This is one of the most effective ways to directly and distinctly measure internal snow layer stratigraphy attributed to annual snow accumulation. The layer’s stratigraphy orientation and degree of curvature hold significant information about the historical deposition and subsequent metamorphosis of the snow at each location. This varies significantly across different regions of Greenland in response to factors such as topographic and climatic features. Areas with sloped and uneven terrain may have layers that display significant curvature due to gravitational settling and compaction. As such, the layer orientation in another radargram in the dataset may appear very different from the example in Figure 1. By analyzing and tracking these curved contours, inferences about past climatic conditions and accumulation rate can be made. The depth of radargrams in the training set used varies from 1200 pixels to 1700 pixels, with a fixed 256 pixels in width. Using the radargrams, corresponding labeled images are manually generated by tracking each layer in the radargram, as illustrated in Figure 1( c). Based on the position of ice layer boundaries, layer thickness can be calculated as the difference between its upper and lower boundaries. Additional onboard equipment, such as the Inertial Measurement Units (IMUs), is used to track the aircraft’s orientation and motion for precise data alignment, while the Global Navigation Satellite System GPS receiver is also used for real-time geolocation tagging of the aircraft’s motion to simultaneously record the current latitude and longitude. Furthermore, integrating auxiliary data such as climate model outputs with annotated radargrams for deep learning model training holds the potential for enhancing model performance by embedding broader environmental context   

> Zesheng Liu, Maryam Rahnemoonfar: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 5 of 20 Knowledge-Informed Spatio-Temporal Efficient Multi-Branch Graph Neural Network

and knowledge-informed realism. Climate data often capture variability in temperature, precipitation, and other climatic conditions, which provide additional crucial contextual information that helps the model’s robustness and generalization across regions and seasons. In this work, we demonstrate the efficacy of knowledge-informed learning by integrating climatic data from a regional climate model. 

3.2. Model Atmospheric Regional climate model 

The MAR (Modèle Atmosphérique Régional) is a high-resolution atmospheric regional climate model (RCM) specifically designed to simulate fine-scale meteorological and cryospheric processes. Particularly for polar and glaciated regions, including the Greenland ice sheet, MAR excels at modeling the complex interactions between the atmosphere, surface, and subsurface, which is crucial for studying climate dynamics [5, 9]. At its core, MAR employs a non-hydrostatic dynamical framework that solves the primitive equations of atmospheric motion, enabling accurate simulation of vertical and horizontal atmospheric processes over Greenland’s complex topography. The climate model uses the sigma-coordinate vertical discretization numerical weather prediction model to resolve surface-atmosphere interactions effectively, making it particularly adept at capturing mesoscale phenomena such as localized snow redistribution. MAR incorporates advanced physics parameterization to simulate cloud microphysics, radiation transfer, turbu-lence, and convection. Its coupling with the SISVAT (Soil Ice Snow Vegetation Atmosphere Transfer) scheme enables detailed representation of surface energy and mass exchanges, including snow densification, melt, refreezing, and sublimation. This fidelity is crucial for modeling the surface mass balance (SMB) of ice sheets, a key metric for understanding sea level rise and polar climate changes. MAR is also driven by lateral boundary conditions from global climate models (GCMs) [34, 59, 33] or reanalysis datasets such as ERA-5 [15, 46], allowing it to integrate large-scale atmospheric dynamics while resolving fine-scale local features. MAR provides a rich source of physically consistent data, which can serve as knowledge-informed priors to provide observational biases for machine learning models. Its ability to resolve surface-atmosphere interactions at fine resolutions positions it as a good candidate to improve the robustness of data-driven models with knowledge-informed constraints. 

3.3. Synchronizing Physical Data with Radargrams 

In this study, the dataset used contains radargrams whose along-track geolocations were already synchronized with the MAR version 3.10 model data that provides climate data across the entire Greenland ice sheet at 15 km grid resolution. Concretely, the radargram dataset has five key physical features: snow mass balance, surface temperature, meltwater refreezing, height change due to melting, and snowpack heights total provided as yearly measurements synchronized with each column of the radargram data. These features have been identified by researchers [8, 56, 42] as critical metrics that provide insights into the dynamics of polar ice sheets and are central to understanding and monitoring the effect of climate change on polar ice sheets. Snow mass balance is the net difference between accumulation (snowfall) and ablation (melting, sublimation, and runoff). Consequently, a negative snow mass balance in Greenland signals a contribution to global sea level rise. Similarly, rising surface temperature directly influences snow mass balance by increasing melting rates, reducing snow cover, and lowering the albedo effect, which in turn, amplifies warming in the region to further increase melt rate. Meltwater refreezing, however, can contribute to snowpack mass because it is generated from surface melting that percolates into the snowpack but refreezes to partially offset the loss due to surface melting. The changes in the extent of meltwater refreezing are indicative of surface warming trends, with less freezing suggesting that warming snowpacks are unable to retain the meltwater. Height change due to melting is a measure of the mass loss due to ablation, and it is used to estimate the rate of ice loss and its contribution to sea level rise, while total snowpack height estimates all accumulated snow layers, affected by snowfall, compaction, and melt-refreeze cycles. The changes in the snowpack height reflect both seasonal and long-term changes in precipitation and temperature patterns. These features are provided in the MAR data as daily outputs, but to synchronize with annual layering seen in radargrams, these outputs are summed using an annual interval that approximately coincides with the chronology of the radargram layers. An annual cycle that spans from September of one year to September of the following year was used to correctly reflect the snow layer captured by the sensor during the summer-to-winter transition. Conclusively, using latitude and longitude coordinates for each radargram, the estimated annual MAR data are aligned with the airborne measurements using the 2D Delaunay triangulation interpolation technique. This alignment   

> Zesheng Liu, Maryam Rahnemoonfar: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 6 of 20 Knowledge-Informed Spatio-Temporal Efficient Multi-Branch Graph Neural Network

enables the annual climate data to serve as supplementary information for improved predictions of internal layer thickness. 

3.4. Graph Data Generation 

Our graph dataset is constructed based on thickness and geographical information extracted from radargram images, along with physical data obtained from the MAR climate reanalysis model. Each ground-truth radargram image is converted into a temporal sequence of 𝑚 spatial graphs, where each graph represents a shallow internal ice layer formed in a specific year. Each spatial graph contains 256 nodes, corresponding to the width of 256 pixels in the radargram images. We denote this sequence as 𝐗 = { 𝐗 1, 𝐗 2, … , 𝐗 𝑚 }, where 𝐗 𝑖 ∈ ℝ256× 𝑑 represents the spatial graph at the 𝑖 -th internal layer from the top, and 𝑑 is the total number of node features. Each row in 𝐗 𝑖 , denoted as 𝐱 (𝑣 ) 

> 𝑖

∈ ℝ𝑑 , corresponds to the feature vector of node 𝑣 in the 𝑖 -th spatial graph. In this work, the node feature vector 𝐱 (𝑣 ) 

> 𝑖

includes three non-physical base features—the latitude 𝜙 (𝑣 ), longitude 𝜆 (𝑣 ), and ice thickness ℎ(𝑣 ) 

> 𝑖

at year 𝑖 —as well as five physical features from the MAR model: surface mass balance, annual surface temperature, meltwater refreezing-induced height change, melt-induced height change, and snowpack depth. For the explanation of these physical features, please refer to Section 3.2. Thus, the node feature vector is given by 

𝐱 (𝑣 ) 

> 𝑖

= [ 𝜙 (𝑣 ), 𝜆 (𝑣 ), ℎ (𝑣 ) 

> 𝑖

, 𝑓 (𝑣 ) 

> 𝑖, 1

, 𝑓 (𝑣 ) 

> 𝑖, 2

, 𝑓 (𝑣 ) 

> 𝑖, 3

, 𝑓 (𝑣 ) 

> 𝑖, 4

, 𝑓 (𝑣 ) 

> 𝑖, 5

] ∈ ℝ8.

All nodes within each spatial graph are fully connected by undirected edges. The edge weight between node 𝑢 and 

𝑣 is defined as the inverse of their geometric distance, computed using the haversine formula: 

𝑤 𝑢,𝑣 = 12 arcsin (hav( 𝜙 (𝑣 ) − 𝜙 (𝑢 )) + cos 𝜙 (𝑢 ) cos 𝜙 (𝑣 )

hav( 𝜆 (𝑣 ) − 𝜆 (𝑢 ))) (1) where hav( 𝜃 ) = sin 2 ( 𝜃 

> 2

)

.

## 4. Knowledge-Informed Spatio-Temporal Efficient Multi-Branch Graph Neural Network 

In this paper, we introduce K-STEMIT, a novel knowledge-informed spatio-temporal efficient multi-branch graph neural network for ice thickness prediction. K-STEMIT integrates key ideas from knowledge-informed machine learning and multi-branch network architecture, designed to learn from the top 𝑚 internal ice layer and predict the thickness of 𝑛 layers beneath. Unlike pure data-driven deep learning methods, knowledge-informed machine learning leverages domain knowl-edge, like physical laws or observations, to achieve physically consistent and reliable predictions. In this work, we introduce physical features for ice sheets synchronized from the MAR physical weather model as prior knowledge, ensuring the predicted ice layer thickness aligns with underlying physical phenomena. The multi-branch network architecture is the core innovation of our network architecture. It allows each branch to focus on a specific task, enabling more effective and specialized learning. By separating the spatial and temporal learning processes, the model optimizes weight allocation for each branch, avoiding the compromise inherent in joint learning. This separation further enhances the model’s ability to independently capture localized spatial relationships and temporal trends, leading to a more comprehensive understanding of the data. Figure 2 illustrates an overview of our proposed K-STEMIT. The network takes a temporal sequence 𝐗 ={𝐗 1, 𝐗 2, … , 𝐗 𝑚 } as input, where each 𝐗 𝑖 is a spatial graph representing an internal ice layer formed at a specific year. These graphs are processed in parallel through two branches: a GraphSAGE-based spatial branch that captures localized spatial relationships, and a gated temporal convolution branch that extracts temporal trends across the sequence. Dimensionality reduction is applied at the beginning of each branch to eliminate irrelevant or redundant node features, promoting efficient feature extraction. The outputs from both branches are then combined adaptively and passed through a sequence of three fully connected layers with hardswish activation to predict the thickness of 𝑛 deeper ice layers. 

4.1. Dimensionality Reduction 

To ensure that each branch focuses on the most relevant features, we introduce dedicated dimensionality reduction modules at the beginning of both the spatial and temporal branches, as illustrated in Figure 2. These dimensionality   

> Zesheng Liu, Maryam Rahnemoonfar: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 7 of 20

Knowledge-Informed Spatio-Temporal Efficient Multi-Branch Graph Neural Network A temporal sequence of 𝑚 spatial   

> graphs
> Temporal Convolution Layer
> GraphSAGE Layer Dimension Reduction

+     

> Spatial Branch
> Temporal Branch
> Linear Layer
> Linear Layer
> Linear Layer
> 𝑛 Ice Layer Thickness
> Predictions
> HardSwish Activation
> HardSwish Activation
> HardSwish Activation
> Dimension Reduction

## +Height change      

> due to metling
> Surface
> Temperature
> Snowpack
> Height
> Meltwater
> Refreezing
> Snow Mass
> Balance
> Physical data from MAR weather model

Figure 2: Architecture of our proposed K-STEMIT. Aggregate  

> A temporal sequence of
> 𝑚 spatial graphs
> Compressed spatial graph with
> concatenated node features

Figure 3: Dimension reduction in the spatial branch, where the graph sequence is compressed into a single graph with concatenated node features. 

reduction strategies help disentangle spatial and temporal dependencies, allowing each branch to operate on the most informative feature subsets while minimizing redundancy. For the spatial branch, we leverage the structural characteristics of radargrams: nodes located in the same column across different layers share the same geographic coordinates. In previous section, we denoted the input temporal sequence of spatial graphs as 𝐗 = { 𝐗 1, 𝐗 2, … , 𝐗 𝑚 }, where each 𝐗 𝑖 ∈ ℝ256×8 represents a spatial graph at the 𝑖 -th internal layer from the top, and each node has 3 base features (latitude, longitude, thickness) and 5 physical features. In the spatial branch, we apply an aggregation operation to construct a compressed spatial graph, as shown in Figure 3. To build this compact spatial representation, we concatenate the node features across the temporal dimension: ̃

𝐗 spatial = Concat (𝐗 1, 𝐗 2, … , 𝐗 𝑚 ) ∈ ℝ256×8 𝑚 . (2) Since latitude and longitude are identical across all 𝑚 layers for each node, we retain only a single copy of these two features. The effective input dimensionality to the spatial branch is thus reduced to 8𝑚 − 2( 𝑚 − 1) = 6 𝑚 + 2 , where 8𝑚 

represents the total number of features in the input temporal sequence of 𝑚 spatial graphs and 2( 𝑚 − 1) corresponds to the repeated latitude and longitude features. The resulting feature matrix ̃ 𝐗 spatial ∈ ℝ256×(6 𝑚 +2) , along with the original graph connectivity, is then passed to a GraphSAGE layer to capture localized spatial dependencies. In contrast, the temporal branch models the evolution of dynamic features over time. To construct its input, we start from the original input sequence 𝐗 = { 𝐗 1, 𝐗 2, … , 𝐗 𝑚 }, where each 𝐗 𝑖 ∈ ℝ256×8 contains 3 base features and 5 physical features. We remove the static geographic components—latitude and longitude—from all 𝐗 𝑖 , retaining only the dynamic thickness and physical features. We define the resulting input as: ̃

𝐗 temporal = { ̃𝐗 1,̃ 𝐗 2, … ,̃ 𝐗 𝑚 } ∈ ℝ256× 𝑚 ×6 , (3) where each ̃ 𝐗 𝑖 ∈ ℝ256×6 represents the reduced feature matrix at a certain year, excluding latitude and longitude. This temporal representation is then processed by a gated temporal convolution block to model the temporal dynamics of each node across layers. 

Zesheng Liu, Maryam Rahnemoonfar: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 8 of 20 Knowledge-Informed Spatio-Temporal Efficient Multi-Branch Graph Neural Network 

4.2. Multi-Branch Architecture and Adaptive Feature Fusion 

After applying dimensionality reduction, the spatial and temporal branches process their respective inputs in parallel to extract complementary structural information. The spatial branch takes the compressed representation ̃

𝐗 spatial ∈ ℝ256×(6 𝑚 +2) , along with the original spatial connectivity, and passes it through a GraphSAGE layer to learn localized spatial dependencies among nodes. The temporal branch operates on the reduced input ̃ 𝐗 temporal ∈ ℝ256× 𝑚 ×6 ,which preserves the temporal evolution of dynamic features for each node, and processes it using a gated temporal convolution block. The outputs from the two branches—denoted as 𝐡 spatial ∈ ℝ256× 𝑑 ′

and 𝐡 temporal ∈ ℝ256× 𝑑 ′

, respectively—are adaptively fused to form a unified representation. Instead of simple averaging or concatenation, we introduce a learnable scalar parameter 𝛼 ∈ [0 , 1] to control the contribution of each branch. The final fused feature is computed as: 

𝐡 = 𝛼 ⋅ 𝐡 spatial + (1 − 𝛼 ) ⋅ 𝐡 temporal . (4) This adaptive mechanism allows the model to dynamically balance spatial and temporal cues based on the learning objective. The fused feature 𝐡 is then passed through three fully connected layers with hardswish activation to produce the final prediction for the thickness of the bottom 𝑛 ice layers. Overall, this multi-branch design enables the model to leverage both localized spatial structures and temporal dynamics in a complementary manner, leading to more accurate and physically consistent predictions. 

4.3. GraphSAGE Inductive Framework 

GraphSAGE [14] is an inductive GNN framework that generates node embeddings by aggregating information from a node’s local neighborhood [67]. In our spatial branch, we apply GraphSAGE to the compressed spatial graph with node feature matrix ̃ 𝐗 spatial ∈ ℝ256×(6 𝑚 +2) , where each node corresponds to a fixed location across layers and has concatenated feature vectors derived from all top 𝑚 internal layers. Let ̃ 𝐱 (𝑣 ) ∈ ℝ6𝑚 +2 denote the input feature of node 𝑣 in ̃ 𝐗 spatial , and let  (𝑣 ) denote its neighborhood. GraphSAGE updates the node representation as follows: 

𝐱 ′( 𝑣 ) = 𝐖 1̃ 𝐱 (𝑣 ) + 𝐖 2 ⋅ AGG 𝑢 ∈ (𝑣 )̃ 𝐱 (𝑢 ), (5) where 𝐱 ′( 𝑣 ) ∈ ℝ𝑑 ′

is the updated node embedding, 𝐖 1 and 𝐖 2 are learnable weight matrices, and AGG is an aggregation function such as mean , max , or LSTM . Here we use mean as the aggregation function. This formulation allows the model to capture localized spatial dependencies while enabling inductive generalization to unseen radargram inputs. Compared to Graph Convolutional Network (GCNs)[24], GraphSAGE offers several advantages that make it a more suitable choice for our deep ice layer thickness prediction task. GCNs operate in the spectral domain, relying on the graph Laplacian and assuming a fixed global graph structure[14, 67]. This assumption becomes problematic in our task, where the underlying graph topology may vary significantly between radargrams collected from different regions. In contrast, GraphSAGE is a spatial method that performs feature aggregation directly in the graph domain, without dependence on a fixed global structure. This flexibility allows it to generalize more effectively across diverse ice layer graphs. Another key distinction between GraphSAGE and GCN is the use of separate weight matrices in GraphSAGE. As shown in Equation 5, the transformation applied to a node’s own features is decoupled from the transformation applied to its aggregated neighbor features. This separation enables the model to independently learn how a node integrates contextual information while preserving its unique identity. We view the term 𝐖 1̃ 𝐱 (𝑣 ) as functionally analogous to a residual connection, which is particularly important in our setting where each node encodes geophysically meaningful properties, such as ice thickness and localized physical variables. Preserving these features throughout the network helps maintain node-specific signals and mitigates early-stage over-smoothing before deeper layers like attention-based encoders. As a result, GraphSAGE better supports generalization and robustness in learning from spatially and temporally varying radargram data. 

4.4. Temporal Convolution 

In this paper, we use a gated temporal convolution block[11] that extracts temporal patterns from node features via gated 2D convolution and skip connection.     

> Zesheng Liu, Maryam Rahnemoonfar: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 9 of 20 Knowledge-Informed Spatio-Temporal Efficient Multi-Branch Graph Neural Network 𝑿 "!"#$%&'(
> GLU
> ReLU
> Conv_1
> 𝑷
> 𝑸
> 𝑹
> 𝒉 !"#$%&'(
> Conv_2 Conv_3
> Figure 4: Diagram of Temporal Convolution Block.

As shown in Figure 4, the input tensor ̃ 𝐗 temporal ∈ ℝ256× 𝑚 ×6 is passed into three two-dimensional convolutions 

conv _1, conv _2, conv _3, producing intermediate outputs 𝐏 , 𝐐 , 𝐑 , respectively. These three outputs are used at different levels with skip connections. 𝐏 and 𝐐 are passed into a Gated Linear Unit (GLU) to introduce non-linearity, defined as 𝐏 × 𝜎 (𝐐 ), where 𝜎 is the sigmoid function and × denotes element-wise Hadamard product. The output of GLU is added to the original convolution output 𝐑 , and a ReLU activation is applied to obtain the learned temporal feature 

𝐡 temporal . Therefore, we can express the gated temporal convolution as: 

𝐡 temporal = ReLU (GLU (𝐏 , 𝐐 ) + 𝐑 ), (6) where GLU (𝐏 , 𝐐 ) = 𝐏 × 𝜎 (𝐐 ).

## 5. Experiment Details 

5.1. Data Preprocessing 

We evaluated our proposed K-STEMIT in a specific test case where 𝑚 = 5 and 𝑛 = 15 . In this scenario, we used the thickness and geometric information from the top 5 ice layers (2007-2011) to predict the thickness of the underlying 15 layers (1992-2006). To ensure the high quality and sufficient information in our dataset, we take the necessary preprocessing steps to exclude images with fewer than 20 complete layers. Eliminated images include those with fewer layers and incomplete layers. As a result, the total number of images is reduced to 1660. These high-quality images are then randomly divided into 996 training images, 332 validation images, and 332 testing images. 

5.2. Training Details 

To evaluate the effectiveness of our proposed K-STEMIT, we compare it with the non-knowledge-informed version STEMIT, current state-of-the-art methods for deep ice layer thickness prediction, and other existing models. The selection of physical node features in K-STEMIT also plays a crucial role in model performance. A recent study [41] demonstrated that incorporating snow mass balance, meltwater refreezing, and height change due to melting significantly improves the performance of AGCN-LSTM. Motivated by this insight, we include these three features by default in all our experiments. Additionally, we conduct an ablation study to examine the effect of including two more physical variables: average surface temperature and snowpack height. This allows us to assess the contribution of each physical feature and the generalizability of our model under varying input conditions. All the graph neural networks are trained on 8 NVIDIA A5000 GPUs and an Intel(R) Xeon(R) Gold 6430 CPU. The loss function is the mean-squared error loss. The Adam optimizer[23] is used as the optimizer for all the networks. For AGCN-LSTM, GCN-LSTM, and GraphSAGE-LSTM, we set the initial learning rate to be 0.01, the weight decay coefficient to be 0.0001, and use a learning rate scheduler that halves the learning rate every 75 epochs. For our proposed multi-branch spatio-temporal graph neural network and physics-informed multi-branch spatio-temporal graph neural network, we set 0.005 as the initial learning rate, 10 −5 as the weight decay coefficient, and use a cosine annealing learning rate scheduler with a minimum learning rate of 10 −7 . We train each model for 450 epochs to guarantee its convergence. To reduce the effect of randomness, five different versions of training, validation, and test datasets are generated by applying distinct random permutations to the full set of 1660 radargram images before train-test splitting. All the   

> Zesheng Liu, Maryam Rahnemoonfar: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 10 of 20 Knowledge-Informed Spatio-Temporal Efficient Multi-Branch Graph Neural Network

graph neural networks are trained using all five versions. Let (𝑘 ) = {( ̂ 𝐲 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑖

, 𝐲 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑖

)} 𝑁 𝑘  

> 𝑖 =1

denote the test set from the 𝑘 -th permutation, where ̂ 𝐲 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑖

, 𝐲 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑖

∈ ℝ256× 𝑛 are the predicted and ground-truth ice thicknesses for the bottom 𝑛 layers across 256 spatial nodes of the 𝑖 -th radargram in the test dataset, and 𝑁 𝑘 is the total number of radargrams in version 𝑘 test dataset, for 𝑘 = 1 , 2, … , 5. More specifically, for this paper, we have 𝑁 𝑘 = 332 , for 𝑘 = 1 , 2, … , 5.The Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE) and Mean Absolute Error (MAE) for each version are computed as: 

RMSE (𝑘 ) =

√√√√ 1

𝑁 𝑘 ⋅ 256 ⋅ 𝑛 

> 𝑁 𝑘

∑

> 𝑖 =1

‖‖‖̂

𝐲 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑖

− 𝐲 (𝑘 )

> 𝑖

‖‖‖ 

> 2
> 𝐹

, (7) 

MAE (𝑘 ) = 1

𝑁 𝑘 ⋅ 256 ⋅ 𝑛 

> 𝑁 𝑘

∑

> 𝑖 =1

‖‖‖̂

𝐲 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑖

− 𝐲 (𝑘 )

> 𝑖

‖‖‖1 . (8) where 𝑁 𝑘 is the total number of radargrams in version 𝑘 test dataset, 256 refers to the 256 pixels per radargram, and 𝑛 

refers to the number of deep ice layers that we predict. We report the final performance as the mean and standard deviation of these metrics across the five runs: 

RMSE = 15

> 5

∑

> 𝑘 =1

RMSE (𝑘 ),

Std RMSE =

√√√√ 15

> 5

∑

> 𝑘 =1

(

RMSE (𝑘 ) − RMSE 

)2

.

(9) 

MAE = 15

> 5

∑

> 𝑘 =1

MAE (𝑘 ),

Std MAE =

√√√√ 15

> 5

∑

> 𝑘 =1

(

MAE (𝑘 ) − MAE 

)2

.

(10) To stabilize the training process and allow our proposed multi-branch spatio-temporal graph neural network to naturally learn the relative contribution of each branch, we do not apply any constraints to the learnable fusion parameter 𝛼 

in Equation 4. After training, we verify that 𝛼 consistently remains positive across all runs, indicating stable and interpretable adaptive fusion between the spatial and temporal branches. 

## 6. Result 

6.1. Overall Performance 

We start by evaluating the overall performance of different methods. The mean of the training time and the mean and standard deviations of the prediction error (RMSE, MAE) over the five versions of the training, validation, and testing datasets are reported as the model efficiency and accuracy. From Table 1, we see that our proposed K-STEMIT outperforms both current state-of-the-art methods with and without physical node features, with the lowest RMSE error and nearly the lowest average computation time. Figure 5 presents qualitative results of thickness predictions generated by our proposed K-STEMIT network. The results demonstrate the network’s ability to effectively learn patterns from shallow ice layers and accurately predict those in deeper layers. Compared with the current state-of-the-art non-physical ST-GRIT, K-STEMIT achieves a 15.23% reduction in RMSE and is about 2.4 times faster than ST-GRIT. These results highlight the effectiveness of knowledge-informed learning. By introducing those physical node features from the MAR physical weather model as prior knowledge, our proposed K-STEMIT can yield better network capacity without any tradeoff between accuracy and computational time. These auxiliary physical features act as domain-informed priors during training, providing weak constraints that guide   

> Zesheng Liu, Maryam Rahnemoonfar: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 11 of 20

Knowledge-Informed Spatio-Temporal Efficient Multi-Branch Graph Neural Network 

Figure 5: Qualitative results of our proposed K-STEMIT. The blue line is used to generate the graphs. The green line is the groundtruth (manually-labeled ice layers) and the red line is the model prediction. 

Table 1 

Experiment results of AGCN-LSTM, GCN-LSTM, GraphSAGE-LSTM, Multi-Branch Graph Neural Network (fundamental variant of K-STEMIT that only applies the multi-branch architecture), and K-STEMIT. Results are reported as the mean and standard deviation of the RMSE and MAE on the test dataset over five individual trials. Train time is reported as the average train time over five individual trials. N/A means that metrics are not available from the published paper.                                                                                     

> Model Physical Node Feature? RMSE MAE Average Computation Time (Seconds)
> AGCN-LSTM[65] x3.4808 ±0.0397 2.4486 ±0.0438 9404 GCN-LSTM[66] x3.1745 ±0.1045 2.2400 ±0.0923 7441 GraphSAGE-LSTM[28] x3.3837 ±0.1103 2.4380 ±0.1171 4579 Locate and Extend[30] x3.1958 ±0.0267 2.2226 ±0.0204 993 GRIT[29] x3.0597 ±0.0326 2.0713 ±0.0200 1649 ST-GRIT[31] x2.8866 ±0.0569 1.9141 ±0.0304 2459 Multi-Branch (Ours) x3.0980 ±0.0857 2.1234 ±0.0410 990 Physics-Informed AGCN-LSTM[41] ✓3.2862 ±0.0279 2.2910 ±0.0282 9147 Physics-Informed GraphSAGE-LSTM[28] ✓2.9037 ±0.0890 2.0216 ±0.0987 4837 K-STEMIT(Ours) ✓2.4471 ±0.0552 1.5853 ±0.0293 1018

the model toward more physically plausible predictions and help mitigate unrealistic outputs. Therefore, K-STEMIT can achieve better generalization ability on unseen data and outperform the most advanced network architectures with no knowledge integrated. Compared with the current state-of-the-art knowledge-informed graph neural networks, K-STEMIT gets a 15.72% reduction in RMSE and is about 4.75 times faster. Compared with the fundamental variant of K-STEMIT, which only applies the multi-branch architecture, our proposed K-STEMIT achieves 21.01% RMSE reduction by integrating physical node features and applying the adaptive feature fusion strategy. We attribute the improvement in efficiency to the use of a multi-branch architecture. Compared with those fused spatio-temporal graph neural networks (AGCN-LSTM, GCN-LSTM, GraphSAGE-LSTM) and graph transformers (GRIT, ST-GRIT), the multi-branch architecture used in K-STEMIT dramatically reduces the total number of operations in the network’s forward pass. Instead of jointly processing both spatial and temporal features within a single, often over-parameterized fusion module, K-STEMIT decouples the learning process into dedicated branches for spatial and temporal modeling. This allows each branch to use a more specialized network design, reducing redundant computations and avoiding unnecessary entanglement between spatial and temporal representations. We 

Zesheng Liu, Maryam Rahnemoonfar: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 12 of 20 Knowledge-Informed Spatio-Temporal Efficient Multi-Branch Graph Neural Network                              

> Table 2
> Ablation study on the choice of different additional physical features
> Snow Mass Balance Meltwater Refreezing Height Change Due To Melting Average Surface Temperature Snowpack Height Average RMSE
> ✓✓✓2.7458 ±0.0665
> ✓✓✓✓2.7491 ±0.0595
> ✓✓✓✓2.4471 ±0.0553
> ✓✓✓✓✓2.4931 ±0.0647

also notice that this decoupled multi-branch network brings about 2.4% reduction in RMSE compared with previous fused spatio-temporal graph neural networks, GCN-LSTM. Unlike previous methods, where the model learned spatial and temporal features as a mixture, the multi-branch architecture allows each branch to focus on its specific strengths and optimize its performance on either the spatial or temporal domain. Moreover, unlike graph transformers that rely on attention mechanisms with quadratic complexity in the number of nodes or tokens, each branch in K-STEMIT only uses lightweight and specialized layers like GraphSAGE and temporal convolutions with less complexity, resulting in a more efficient training process. Having established the strong overall performance of K-STEMIT, we next conduct a series of ablation studies to investigate the impact of specific design choices. We begin by analyzing the impact of physical feature selection, isolating its effect on model performance, and subsequently exploring the contribution of different architecture branches. 

6.2. Ablation study: Choice of Physical Features 

With the network architecture fixed, we first examine how the inclusion of various physical features influences the model’s predictive capability. Specifically, we conduct an ablation study to assess the contribution of adding surface temperature and snowpack height to the three base physical features identified by Rahnemoonfar et al.[41], such as snow mass balance, meltwater refreezing, and height change due to melting. As shown in Table 2, we find that including the snowpack density together with snow mass balance, meltwater refreezing, and height change due to melting as node features gives the overall best performance for our proposed K-STEMIT. This highlights the complementary role of physical inputs in enhancing the capability of the network architecture. The varying RMSE observed across different feature combinations suggests that the model benefits most from a balanced set of physical features, where the added variables provide useful context without introducing excessive noise or redundancy. 

6.3. Ablation Study: Choice of Branches 

Having evaluated the impact of physical feature selection, we now turn to the architectural design of the network itself. In this ablation study, we systematically examine different branch combinations to validate the effectiveness of the multi-branch structure. Specifically, we test all possible combinations of three candidate branches: the GCN branch, the GraphSAGE branch, and the temporal branch. Across both our proposed K-STEMIT and its non-knowledge-informed version STEMIT, the results consistently show that the two-branch spatial-temporal combination—illustrated in Figure 2—offers the most effective and balanced design. For the three-branch case where GCN is also used as a spectral branch, we introduced two learnable scalar parameters, 𝛼 and 𝛽 , to combine the output of each branch as a weighted sum: 

𝐡 = 𝛼 ⋅ 𝐡 𝑠𝑝𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑎𝑙 + 𝛽 ⋅ 𝐡 𝑠𝑝𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑙 + (1 − 𝛼 − 𝛽 ) ⋅ 𝐡 𝑡𝑒𝑚𝑝𝑜𝑟𝑎𝑙 (11) , where 𝐡 𝑠𝑝𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑎𝑙 is the learned feature from the GraphSAGE branch, 𝐡 𝑠𝑝𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑙 is the GCN learned features and 𝐡 𝑡𝑒𝑚𝑝𝑜𝑟𝑎𝑙 

is the output of the temporal convolution branch. For the other two-branch cases, we will still use the adaptive feature fusion with a single learnable parameter, similar to Equation 4. To stabilize the training process and allow the model to fully explore the solution space, we trained all variants under no constraints on the values of 𝛼 or 𝛽 . After training, we inspected the learned 𝛼 and 𝛽 values. If any model assigned a negative value to a branch (i.e., 𝛼 < 0 or 𝛽 < 0), or any model assigned a value that is greater than 1, we considered this an indication of potential instability or destructive interference from that branch. In such cases, we retrained the corresponding variant using a constrained fusion strategy, where 𝛼 and 𝛽 are clamped to 0-1 during training. All experiments were conducted using the same training settings and hyperparameters outlined in Section 5.2.   

> Zesheng Liu, Maryam Rahnemoonfar: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 13 of 20

Knowledge-Informed Spatio-Temporal Efficient Multi-Branch Graph Neural Network 

Table 3 

Experiment results of ablation study on the combination of different branches for STEMIT and K-STEMIT. Results are reported as the mean and standard deviation of the RMSE on the test dataset over five individual trials.                                                   

> Model Results for STEMIT Results for K-STEMIT
> GCN+GraphSAGE+TempConv (Three-branch, No Clamp) 3.1204 ±0.0801 2.4757 ±0.0648 GCN+GraphSAGE+TempConv (Three-branch, Clamp) 3.1089 ±0.0569 2.4662 ±0.0850 GCN+TempConv (Spectral + Temporal) 3.2461 ±0.0529 2.5504 ±0.0557 GCN+GraphSAGE (Spectral + Spatial) 3.2195 ±0.1183 2.7869 ±0.0451 GCN (Spectral) 5.0573 ±0.0874 5.0199 ±0.2401 GraphSAGE (Spatial) 3.1873 ±0.0588 2.5043 ±0.0715 TempConv (Temporal) 3.2961 ±0.0491 2.4757 ±0.0648 GraphSAGE+TempConv (Spatial+Temporal, Proposed choice of branch) 3.1170 ±0.0780 2.4471 ±0.0553

Table 4 

RMSE values and percentage improvements for different variants. Model Average RMSE Improvement (%) Multi-Branch Network 3.0980 ± 0.0857 0.00 STEMIT(Multi-Branch + Adaptive Feature Fusion) 3.1170 ± 0.0780 -0.61 Knowledge-Informed Multi-Branch 2.5084 ± 0.0638 19.03 K-STEMIT(Multi-Branch + Adaptive Feature Fusion + Knowledge-informed) 2.4471 ± 0.0552 21.01 

As shown in Table 3, the multi-branch architectural configuration—consisting of a GraphSAGE spatial branch and a gated temporal convolution branch—outperforms other branch combinations for both STEMIT and K-STEMIT. While the three-branch variant (GCN + GraphSAGE + TempConv) achieves comparable accuracy with only marginal differences, the learned fusion weight for the GCN branch ( 𝛽 in Equation 11) is consistently around 1%, indicating that it contributes minimally to the overall performance. We attribute this to the fact that both GCN and GraphSAGE perform graph convolution to extract spatial features from the graph, leading to substantial redundancy between their outputs. In particular, GraphSAGE uses a more flexible neighborhood feature aggregation scheme in the spatial domain, which offers stronger generalization and allows it to capture local structural variations more effectively than the spectral-based GCN. Consequently, the GCN branch provides limited complementary information when fused with the GraphSAGE and TempConv branches. Given the additional computational resource needed for having an additional GCN branch, we consider the two-branch design (GraphSAGE + TempConv) to be the overall optimal choice for both STEMIT and K-STEMIT in terms of both efficiency and accuracy. 

## 7. Discussion 

7.1. Contribution of Each Component 

We conduct a comprehensive ablation study to evaluate the contribution of each individual component in our proposed K-STEMIT. Specifically, we isolate the impact of the multi-branch architecture, the adaptive feature fusion strategy, and the integration of physical node features (i.e., knowledge-informed components). Our experiments include the following variants: a multi-branch network that uses the multi-branch architecture but directly concatenates the output features from each branch, representing the simplest form of our framework with only the multi-branch design; STEMIT, which combines the multi-branch architecture with the adaptive feature fusion strategy; the knowledge-informed version of the multi-branch network; and our proposed K-STEMIT, which integrates all components, including physical node features, multi-branch architecture and adaptive feature fusion strategy. As shown in Table 4, the multi-branch network serves as the foundational variant of our proposed design, incorporating only the multi-branch design. Adding the adaptive feature fusion strategy in a non-knowledge-informed scenario, as in STEMIT, results in a slight decline in performance, suggesting that feature fusion alone may not consistently yield benefits. We believe this is because, in the absence of domain knowledge, current available features are already limited in expressiveness. As a result, the adaptive feature fusion strategy, which merges outputs from different branches, may amplify redundant features shared across branches while diminishing the influence of unique features captured by each individual branch. This can lead to a less distinctive and less informative representation. 

Zesheng Liu, Maryam Rahnemoonfar: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 14 of 20 Knowledge-Informed Spatio-Temporal Efficient Multi-Branch Graph Neural Network 

Introducing physical node features into the multi-branch network results in a 19.03% improvement in RMSE, demonstrating the value of domain knowledge. Notably, when applying the adaptive feature fusion strategy in the knowledge-informed setting, it provides an additional 1.98% reduction in RMSE by effectively integrating complementary information across branches, further enhancing prediction accuracy. This can be attributed to the richer, more comprehensive feature space introduced by the physical node features, which allows distinctions to be drawn between learned spatial and temporal representations from each branch. In this setting, our proposed adaptive feature fusion strategy can learn to selectively weigh and combine the most relevant aspects of each branch, preserving each branch’s distinct contributions while reducing potential feature redundancy. 

7.2. Comparison with other models 

In order to gain a better understanding of how our proposed K-STEMIT outperforms current state-of-the-art models and other existing methods, we create qualitative samples of each model prediction on the same radargram image, shown in Figure 6. We observe that while all the networks achieve decent accuracy in predicting ice layer thickness, those non-knowledge-informed fused spatio-temporal graph neural networks exhibit significant error accumulation. This accumulation leads to noticeable shifts in the visualization of deeper ice layers on the radargram, as the coordinates of deeper ice layer boundaries are calculated cumulatively by adding the predicted thickness values from the top to the bottom. The figure illustrates that, in comparison to previous models, the multi-branch architecture significantly improves the predictions for deeper ice layers and the predictions of the boundary regions of the radargram. This results in more precise and reliable visualizations of the ice layers. Additionally, by comparing Figure 6 (d) and (e), we observe that integrating physical features as domain-specific knowledge further enhances the performance, particularly in the left and right boundary regions of each radargram. This suggests that the inclusion of physical features enables the model to better capture fine-grained, pixel-level local patterns. 

7.3. Interpretation of physical features 

The result in Table 1 confirms that the inclusion of physical features from MAR improves the overall model’s performance; however, the ablation study in Table 2 indicates that the exclusion of average surface temperature led to improved performance. This may be attributed to the potential redundancy and the indirect nature of its relationship with the radargram internal snow layer features. Surface temperature strongly correlates with all the other MAR parameters investigated, all of which likely directly reflect the physical processes captured in the radargram image. Hence, including average surface temperature may have introduced redundant and noisy signals that obscure the unique contributions of the other physical parameters, thereby hurting the model’s performance. Additionally, average surface temperature primarily represents surface-level phenomena, which may not align well with the subsurface dynamics captured in the radargrams, hence causing a mismatch in the data fusion process. It may be worth considering future research exploring the integration of average surface temperature as a boundary condition or secondary feature to enhance model interpretability without introducing redundancy or noise. 

7.4. Performance For Each Individual Ice Layer 

To further evaluate the prediction performance of our proposed K-STEMIT, we compute the relative mean absolute error (relative MAE) for each of the 𝑛 predicted ice layers ( 𝑛 = 15 for this paper). This metric allows us to assess how the model performs at different depths. In previous sections, we denote 𝐲 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑖

∈ ℝ256× 𝑛 and ̂ 𝐲 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑖

∈ ℝ256× 𝑛 as the ground truth and predicted outputs for the 𝑖 -th test radargram sample in version 𝑘 test dataset (where 𝑘 refers to the 𝑘 -th permutation of the dataset used to generate distinct train, validation, and test sets; see Section 5.2 for details). Here, we further define 𝑦 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑖,𝑣,𝑗

and ̂𝑦 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑖,𝑣,𝑗

as the ground truth and predicted thickness values at node 𝑣 ∈ {1 , … , 256} and layer 𝑗 ∈ {1 , … , 𝑛 }, respectively. The relative MAE for the 𝑗 -th predicted layer is computed as: 

𝛿 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑗

= 1

𝑁 𝑘 ⋅ 256 

> 𝑁 𝑘

∑

> 𝑖 =1 256

∑

> 𝑣 =1

||||||̂𝑦 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑖,𝑣,𝑗

− 𝑦 (𝑘 )

> 𝑖,𝑣,𝑗

𝑦 (𝑘 )

> 𝑖,𝑣,𝑗

||||||

, (12) where 𝑁 𝑘 is the number of radargrams in version 𝑘 test dataset, and 𝛿 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑗

represents the relative error for layer 𝑗 in that split. Unlike RMSE, where larger errors from outliers disproportionately affect the total error, relative MAE treats   

> Zesheng Liu, Maryam Rahnemoonfar: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 15 of 20

Knowledge-Informed Spatio-Temporal Efficient Multi-Branch Graph Neural Network (a) Original (b) AGCN -LSTM (c) GCN -LSTM (d) GraphSAGE -             

> LSTM
> (e)Locate and
> Extend
> (f)Simple Multi -
> Branch (Ours)
> (g)GRIT (h)ST -GRIT (i)Physical
> AGCN -LSTM
> (j)Physical
> GraphSAGE -LSTM
> (k)K-STEMIT
> (Ours, Best )

Figure 6: Comparison between qualitative results of different graph models. The blue line is used to generate the graphs. The green line is the groundtruth (manually-labeled ice layers) and the red line is the model prediction. 

all error terms equally by normalizing each residual by its ground truth value. Evaluating 𝛿 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑗

across layers provides insights into the error consistency of the model, revealing whether deeper layers tend to be harder to predict than shallower ones. To report the final results, we take the mean and standard deviation of 𝛿 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑗

across the five data splits for each layer 𝑗 , defined as: ̄𝛿 𝑗 = 15

> 5

∑

> 𝑘 =1

𝛿 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑗

, Std 𝛿 𝑗 =

√√√√ 15

> 5

∑

> 𝑘 =1

(

𝛿 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑗

−̄ 𝛿 𝑗 

)2

. (13) 

Zesheng Liu, Maryam Rahnemoonfar: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 16 of 20 Knowledge-Informed Spatio-Temporal Efficient Multi-Branch Graph Neural Network  

> Figure 7: Relative MAE on individual ice layers for each model.

As shown in Figure 7, we can find an overall negative slope. This trend indicates that overall, shallow layers’ physical structure and thickness are easier to predict. This is a reasonable result, as in the radargram, deep layers are typically less contrasty due to the low signal-to-noise ratio, making them more difficult to distinguish. Compared with current state-of-the-art methods and other existing methods, our proposed K-STEMIT consistently achieves lower, more stable relative MAE across different ice layers. This result supports the conclusion that incorporating domain knowledge enhances both the accuracy and robustness of deep ice layer thickness prediction. 

## 8. Conclusion 

In this work, we developed K-STEMIT, a knowledge-informed spatio-temporal efficient multi-branch graph neural network to learn from the geographical and thickness information of the top 𝑚 ice layers and predict the thickness of the underlying 𝑛 layer. Our multi-branch architecture integrates a GraphSAGE-based inductive framework in the spatial branch, gated temporal convolution in the temporal branch, and dimensionality reduction at the start of each branch to eliminate irrelevant features, and physical node features are incorporated from the MAR physical model. We also implement an adaptive feature fusion strategy that combines features from different branches dynamically through learnable parameters. We evaluated our proposed K-STEMIT on a specific case that uses the information of Greenland ice layers formed from 2007-2011 to predict the thickness of ice layers formed from 1992 to 2006. Notably, our proposed network can be generalized to any number of ice layers and radargrams of different sizes. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our proposed K-STEMIT outperforms both knowledge-informed and non-knowledge-informed state-of-the-art methods with the lowest RMSE error and nearly the lowest average computation time. More importantly, we found that when combined with physical node features as prior domain knowledge and applied an adaptive feature fusion strategy, K-STEMIT achieves a 21.01% reduction in RMSE with negligible additional cost compared with the non-knowledge-informed multi-branch network. Through ablation studies, we identified the optimal combination of physical features—snow mass balance, meltwater refreezing, height change due to melting, and snowpack height—which achieves the lowest RMSE. Additionally, we evaluate the MAE error across layers formed in different years. Lastly, we observe that our K-STEMIT yields the lowest relative MAE compared to current state-of-the-art methods and other existing methods, demonstrating a stable error distribution across ice layers and a consistent performance across different years. 

## CRediT authorship contribution statement 

Zesheng Liu: Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology, Software, Validation, Visualization, Writing-original draft, Writing-review&editing. Maryam Rahnemoonfar: Conceptualization, Funding acquisition, Project adminis-tration, Resources, Supervision, Writing-review&editing.   

> Zesheng Liu, Maryam Rahnemoonfar: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 17 of 20

Knowledge-Informed Spatio-Temporal Efficient Multi-Branch Graph Neural Network 

## Acknowledgement 

This work is supported by NSF BIGDATA awards (IIS-1838230, IIS-2308649), NSF Leadership Class Computing awards (OAC-2139536), NSF PFI awards (2423211). We acknowledge data and data products from CReSIS generated with support from the University of Kansas and NASA Operation Ice-Bridge. We also acknowledge Oluwanisola Ibikunle for providing necessary dataset descriptions and physical analysis of the experiment results. 

## References 

[1] Arcone, S.A., 2009. Chapter 12 - glaciers and ice sheets, in: Jol, H.M. (Ed.), Ground Penetrating Radar Theory and Applications. Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp. 361–392. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780444533487000120 , doi: https: //doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-444-53348-7.00012-0 .[2] Arnold, E., Leuschen, C., Rodriguez-Morales, F., Li, J., Paden, J., Hale, R., Keshmiri, S., 2020. Cresis airborne radars and platforms for ice and snow sounding. Annals of Glaciology 61, 58–67. doi: 10.1017/aog.2019.37 .[3] Carrer, L., Bruzzone, L., 2017. Automatic enhancement and detection of layering in radar sounder data based on a local scale hidden markov model and the viterbi algorithm. IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens. 55, 962–977. doi: 10.1109/TGRS.2016.2616949 .[4] Cini, A., Marisca, I., Bianchi, F.M., Alippi, C., 2023. Scalable spatiotemporal graph neural networks, in: Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, pp. 7218–7226. [5] Delhasse, A., Kittel, C., Amory, C., Hofer, S., van As, D., S. Fausto, R., Fettweis, X., 2020. Brief communication: Evaluation of the near-surface climate in era5 over the greenland ice sheet. The Cryosphere 14, 957–965. URL: https://tc.copernicus.org/articles/14/ 957/2020/ , doi: 10.5194/tc-14-957-2020 .[6] Desai, S., Strachan, A., 2021. Parsimonious neural networks learn interpretable physical laws. Scientific Reports 11, 12761. URL: 

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-92278-w , doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-92278-w .[7] Diebold, F.X., Rudebusch, G.D., Göbel, M., Goulet Coulombe, P., Zhang, B., 2023. When will arctic sea ice disappear? projections of area, extent, thickness, and volume. Journal of Econometrics 236, 105479. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/ pii/S0304407623001951 , doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeconom.2023.105479 .[8] Fettweis, X., Franco, B., Tedesco, M., Van Angelen, J., Lenaerts, J.T., van den Broeke, M.R., Gallée, H., 2013. Estimating the greenland ice sheet surface mass balance contribution to future sea level rise using the regional atmospheric climate model mar. The Cryosphere 7, 469–489. [9] Fettweis, X., Hofer, S., Séférian, R., Amory, C., Delhasse, A., Doutreloup, S., Kittel, C., Lang, C., Van Bever, J., Veillon, F., Irvine, P., 2021. Brief communication: Reduction in the future greenland ice sheet surface melt with the help of solar geoengineering. The Cryosphere 15, 3013–3019. URL: https://tc.copernicus.org/articles/15/3013/2021/ , doi: 10.5194/tc-15-3013-2021 .[10] Forsberg, R., Sørensen, L., Simonsen, S., 2017. Greenland and Antarctica Ice Sheet Mass Changes and Effects on Global Sea Level. Springer International Publishing, Cham. pp. 91–106. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-56490-6_5 , doi: 10.1007/ 978-3-319-56490-6_5 .[11] Gehring, J., Auli, M., Grangier, D., Yarats, D., Dauphin, Y.N., 2017. Convolutional sequence to sequence learning. arXiv:1705.03122 .[12] Gogineni, S., Yan, J.B., Gomez, D., Rodriguez-Morales, F., Paden, J., Leuschen, C., 2013a. Ultra-wideband radars for remote sensing of snow and ice, in: IEEE MTT-S International Microwave and RF Conference, pp. 1–4. doi: 10.1109/IMaRC.2013.6777743 .[13] Gogineni, S., Yan, J.B., Gomez, D., Rodriguez-Morales, F., Paden, J., Leuschen, C., 2013b. Ultra-wideband radars for remote sensing of snow and ice, in: IEEE MTT-S International Microwave and RF Conference, pp. 1–4. doi: 10.1109/IMaRC.2013.6777743 .[14] Hamilton, W.L., Ying, R., Leskovec, J., 2018. Inductive representation learning on large graphs. arXiv:1706.02216 .[15] Hersbach, H., Bell, B., Berrisford, P., Hirahara, S., Horányi, A., Muñoz-Sabater, J., Nicolas, J., Peubey, C., Radu, R., Schepers, D., et al., 2020. The era5 global reanalysis. Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society 146, 1999–2049. [16] Hou, W., Liu, X., Li, L., Fu, C., 2026. Hierarchy-aware graph neural network and inverse-variance reinforcement learning for drug recom-mendation. Neurocomputing 676, 132989. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0925231226003863 ,doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neucom.2026.132989 .[17] Humphries, U.W., Waqas, M., Ahmad, S., 2026. Novel deep learning framework for rainfall forecasting integrating generative adversarial and spatiotemporal graph neural networks. Results in Engineering 29, 108616. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/ article/pii/S2590123025046602 , doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rineng.2025.108616 .[18] Ibikunle, O., Paden, J., Rahnemoonfar, M., Crandall, D., Yari, M., 2020. Snow radar layer tracking using iterative neural network approach, in: IGARSS 2020 - 2020 IEEE International Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium, pp. 2960–2963. doi: 10.1109/IGARSS39084. 2020.9323957 .[19] Ibikunle, O., Talasila, H., Varshney, D., Li, J., Paden, J., Rahnemoonfar, M., 2025. Ai-ready snow radar echogram dataset (sred) for climate change monitoring. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00786 , arXiv:2505.00786 .[20] Ibikunle, O., Talasila, H.M., Varshney, D., Paden, J.D., Li, J., Rahnemoonfar, M., 2023. Snow radar echogram layer tracker: Deep neural networks for radar data from nasa operation icebridge, in: 2023 IEEE Radar Conference (RadarConf23), pp. 1–6. doi: 10.1109/ RadarConf2351548.2023.10149734 .[21] Kamangir, H., Rahnemoonfar, M., Dobbs, D., Paden, J., Fox, G., 2018. Deep hybrid wavelet network for ice boundary detection in radra imagery, in: IGARSS 2018 - 2018 IEEE International Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium, pp. 3449–3452. doi: 10.1109/IGARSS. 2018.8518617 .[22] Karniadakis, G.E., Kevrekidis, I.G., Lu, L., Perdikaris, P., Wang, S., Yang, L., 2021. Physics-informed machine learning. Nature Reviews Physics 3, 422–440. URL: https://doi.org/10.1038/s42254-021-00314-5 , doi: 10.1038/s42254-021-00314-5 .[23] Kingma, D.P., Ba, J., 2017. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv:1412.6980 .

Zesheng Liu, Maryam Rahnemoonfar: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 18 of 20 Knowledge-Informed Spatio-Temporal Efficient Multi-Branch Graph Neural Network 

[24] Kipf, T.N., Welling, M., 2016. Semi-supervised classification with graph convolutional networks. CoRR abs/1609.02907. URL: http: //arxiv.org/abs/1609.02907 , arXiv:1609.02907 .[25] Koenig, L.S., Ivanoff, A., Alexander, P.M., MacGregor, J.A., Fettweis, X., Panzer, B., Paden, J.D., Forster, R.R., Das, I., McConnell, J.R., Tedesco, M., Leuschen, C., Gogineni, P., 2016. Annual greenland accumulation rates (2009–2012) from airborne snow radar. The Cryosphere 10, 1739–1752. URL: https://tc.copernicus.org/articles/10/1739/2016/ , doi: 10.5194/tc-10-1739-2016 .[26] Leuschen, C., Panzer, B., Gogineni, P., Rodriguez, F., Paden, J., Li, J., 2011/2024. Icebridge snow radar l1b geolocated radar echo strength profiles. Boulder, Colorado USA: National Snow and Ice Data Center. Digital media. Accessed on 2024. [27] Li, B., Li, Z., Chen, J., Yan, Y., Lv, Y., Du, W., 2024. Mast-gnn: A multimodal adaptive spatio-temporal graph neural network for airspace complexity prediction. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies 160, 104521. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/ science/article/pii/S0968090X24000421 , doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trc.2024.104521 .[28] Liu, Z., Rahnemoonfar, M., 2024. Learning spatio-temporal patterns of polar ice layers with physics-informed graph neural network. URL: 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.15299 , arXiv:2406.15299 .[29] Liu, Z., Rahnemoonfar, M., 2025a. Grit: Graph transformer for internal ice layer thickness prediction, in: IGARSS 2025 - 2025 IEEE International Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium, pp. 1–5. doi: 10.1109/IGARSS55030.2025.11243115 .[30] Liu, Z., Rahnemoonfar, M., 2025b. Locate and extend: a geometric deep learning strategy for predicting polar ice layer structures using graph neural networks, in: Pattern Recognition and Prediction XXXVI, SPIE. p. 1346402. [31] Liu, Z., Rahnemoonfar, M., 2025c. St-grit: Spatio-temporal graph transformer for internal ice layer thickness prediction, in: 2025 IEEE International Conference on Image Processing (ICIP), pp. 1109–1114. doi: 10.1109/ICIP55913.2025.11084445 .[32] MacGregor, J.A., Fahnestock, M.A., Catania, G.A., Paden, J.D., Prasad Gogineni, S., Young, S.K., Rybarski, S.C., Mabrey, A.N., Wagman, B.M., Morlighem, M., 2015. Radiostratigraphy and age structure of the greenland ice sheet. Journal of Geophysical Research: Earth Surface 120, 212–241. URL: https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/2014JF003215 , doi: https://doi.org/ 10.1002/2014JF003215 , arXiv:https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/2014JF003215 .[33] McGuffie, K., Henderson-Sellers, A., 2014. The climate modelling primer. John Wiley & Sons. [34] Morel, P., 1988. An introduction to three-dimensional climate modeling. [35] NASA Scientific Visualization Studio, 2015. Greenland ice sheet stratigraphy. NASA Scientific Visualization Studio. Available online. [36] Panton, C., 2013. Automated mapping of local layer slope and tracing of internal layers in radio echograms. Annals of Glaciology 55. doi: 10.3189/2014AoG67A048 .[37] Pareja, A., Domeniconi, G., Chen, J., Ma, T., Suzumura, T., Kanezashi, H., Kaler, T., Leiserson, C.E., 2019. Evolvegcn: Evolving graph convolutional networks for dynamic graphs. CoRR abs/1902.10191. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1902.10191 , arXiv:1902.10191 .[38] PATERSON, W., 1994. 15 - ice core studies, in: PATERSON, W. (Ed.), The Physics of Glaciers (Third Edition). third edition ed.. Pergamon, Amsterdam, pp. 378–409. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780080379449500212 ,doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-08-037944-9.50021-2 .[39] Qin, B., Zhu, X., Fan, C.Y., Xue, X., Wang, M.M., Tang, H.Y., 2026. Feature-enhanced graph neural network with multiple attention for molecular property prediction. Neurocomputing 669, 132426. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/ S092523122503098X , doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neucom.2025.132426 .[40] Rahnemoonfar, M., Yari, M., Paden, J., Koenig, L., Ibikunle, O., 2021. Deep multi-scale learning for automatic tracking of internal layers of ice in radar data. Journal of Glaciology 67, 39–48. doi: 10.1017/jog.2020.80 .[41] Rahnemoonfar, M., Zalatan, B., 2024. Physics-informed machine learning for deep ice layer tracing in sar images, in: IGARSS 2024 - 2024 IEEE International Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium, pp. 6938–6942. doi: 10.1109/IGARSS53475.2024.10641831 .[42] Reeh, N., 1991. Parameterization of melt rate and surface temperature in the greenland ice sheet. Polarforschung 59, 113–128. [43] Seo, Y., Defferrard, M., Vandergheynst, P., Bresson, X., 2016. Structured sequence modeling with graph convolutional recurrent networks. 

arXiv:1612.07659 .[44] Shen, G., Zhou, W., Zhang, W., Liu, N., Liu, Z., Kong, X., 2023. Bidirectional spatial–temporal traffic data imputation via graph attention recurrent neural network. Neurocomputing 531, 151–162. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/ S0925231223001558 , doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neucom.2023.02.017 .[45] Shepherd, A., Ivins, E., Rignot, E., Smith, B., van den Broeke, M., Velicogna, I., Whitehouse, P., Briggs, K., Joughin, I., Krinner, G., Nowicki, S., Payne, T., Scambos, T., Schlegel, N., A, G., Agosta, C., Ahlstrøm, A., Babonis, G., Barletta, V.R., Bjørk, A.A., Blazquez, A., Bonin, J., Colgan, W., Csatho, B., Cullather, R., Engdahl, M.E., Felikson, D., Fettweis, X., Forsberg, R., Hogg, A.E., Gallee, H., Gardner, A., Gilbert, L., Gourmelen, N., Groh, A., Gunter, B., Hanna, E., Harig, C., Helm, V., Horvath, A., Horwath, M., Khan, S., Kjeldsen, K.K., Konrad, H., Langen, P.L., Lecavalier, B., Loomis, B., Luthcke, S., McMillan, M., Melini, D., Mernild, S., Mohajerani, Y., Moore, P., Mottram, R., Mouginot, J., Moyano, G., Muir, A., Nagler, T., Nield, G., Nilsson, J., Noël, B., Otosaka, I., Pattle, M.E., Peltier, W.R., Pie, N., Rietbroek, R., Rott, H., Sandberg Sørensen, L., Sasgen, I., Save, H., Scheuchl, B., Schrama, E., Schröder, L., Seo, K.W., Simonsen, S.B., Slater, T., Spada, G., Sutterley, T., Talpe, M., Tarasov, L., van de Berg, W.J., van der Wal, W., van Wessem, M., Vishwakarma, B.D., Wiese, D., Wilton, D., Wagner, T., Wouters, B., Wuite, J., Team, T.I., 2020. Mass balance of the greenland ice sheet from 1992 to 2018. Nature 579, 233–239. URL: 

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-019-1855-2 , doi: 10.1038/s41586-019-1855-2 .[46] Soci, C., Hersbach, H., Simmons, A., Poli, P., Bell, B., Berrisford, P., Horányi, A., Muñoz-Sabater, J., Nicolas, J., Radu, R., et al., 2024. The era5 global reanalysis from 1940 to 2022. Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society 150, 4014–4048. [47] Tang, J., Xia, L., Huang, C., 2023. Explainable spatio-temporal graph neural networks, in: Proceedings of the 32nd ACM International Conference on Information and Knowledge Management, pp. 2432–2441. [48] Teisberg, T.O., Schroeder, D.M., MacKie, E.J., 2021. A machine learning approach to mass-conserving ice thickness interpolation, in: 2021 IEEE International Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium IGARSS, pp. 8664–8667. doi: 10.1109/IGARSS47720.2021.9555002 .[49] Varshney, D., Ibikunle, O., Paden, J., Rahnemoonfar, M., 2022. Learning snow layer thickness through physics defined labels, in: IGARSS 2022 - 2022 IEEE International Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium, pp. 1233–1236. doi: 10.1109/IGARSS46834.2022.9884370 .

Zesheng Liu, Maryam Rahnemoonfar: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 19 of 20 Knowledge-Informed Spatio-Temporal Efficient Multi-Branch Graph Neural Network 

[50] Varshney, D., Rahnemoonfar, M., Yari, M., Paden, J., 2020. Deep ice layer tracking and thickness estimation using fully convolutional networks, in: 2020 IEEE International Conference on Big Data (Big Data), pp. 3943–3952. doi: 10.1109/BigData50022.2020.9378070 .[51] Varshney, D., Rahnemoonfar, M., Yari, M., Paden, J., 2021a. Regression networks for calculating englacial layer thickness, in: 2021 IEEE International Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium IGARSS, pp. 2393–2396. doi: 10.1109/IGARSS47720.2021.9553596 .[52] Varshney, D., Rahnemoonfar, M., Yari, M., Paden, J., Ibikunle, O., Li, J., 2021b. Deep learning on airborne radar echograms for tracing snow accumulation layers of the greenland ice sheet. Remote Sensing 13. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/2072-4292/13/14/2707 ,doi: 10.3390/rs13142707 .[53] Varshney, D., Yari, M., Chowdhury, T., Rahnemoonfar, M., 2021c. Refining ice layer tracking through wavelet combined neural networks, in: ICML 2021 Workshop on Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learning. URL: https://www.climatechange.ai/papers/ icml2021/49 .[54] Varshney, D., Yari, M., Ibikunle, O., Li, J., Paden, J., Gangopadhyay, A., Rahnemoonfar, M., 2024. Skip-wavenet: a wavelet based multi-scale architecture to trace snow layers in radar echograms. Environmental Data Science 3, e39. doi: 10.1017/eds.2024.25 .[55] Verdone, A., Scardapane, S., Panella, M., 2024. Explainable spatio-temporal graph neural networks for multi-site photovoltaic energy production. Applied Energy 353, 122151. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0306261923015155 ,doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2023.122151 .[56] Vernon, C.L., Bamber, J., Box, J., Van den Broeke, M., Fettweis, X., Hanna, E., Huybrechts, P., 2013. Surface mass balance model intercomparison for the greenland ice sheet. The Cryosphere 7, 599–614. [57] Wang, H., Chen, J., Pan, T., Dong, Z., Zhang, L., Jiang, R., Song, X., 2024. Stgformer: Efficient spatiotemporal graph transformer for traffic forecasting. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.00385 , arXiv:2410.00385 .[58] Wang, X., Liu, L., 2026. Stgnet: A spatio-temporal graph neural network for motion prediction in autonomous driving. Neurocomputing 676, 133063. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0925231226004601 , doi: https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.neucom.2026.133063 .[59] Washington, W.M., Parkinson, C., 2005. Introduction to three-dimensional climate modeling. University science books. [60] Wu, Z., Pan, S., Chen, F., Long, G., Zhang, C., Yu, P.S., 2021. A comprehensive survey on graph neural networks. IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst. 32, 4–24. doi: 10.1109/TNNLS.2020.2978386 .[61] Yang, H., Huang, R., Ye, S., Zhang, P., Guo, Y., Pan, S., Zhang, Y., 2026. A review of graph neural networks for brain diseases analy-sis. Neurocomputing , 133174URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0925231226005710 , doi: https: //doi.org/10.1016/j.neucom.2026.133174 .[62] Yari, M., Ibikunle, O., Varshney, D., Chowdhury, T., Sarkar, A., Paden, J., Li, J., Rahnemoonfar, M., 2021. Airborne snow radar data simulation with deep learning and physics-driven methods. IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth Observ. Remote Sens. 14, 12035–12047. doi: 10.1109/JSTARS.2021.3126547 .[63] Yari, M., Rahnemoonfar, M., Paden, J., 2020. Multi-scale and temporal transfer learning for automatic tracking of internal ice layers, in: IGARSS 2020 - 2020 IEEE International Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium, pp. 6934–6937. doi: 10.1109/IGARSS39084.2020. 9323758 .[64] Zalatan, B., Rahnemoonfar, M., 2023a. Prediction of annual snow accumulation using a recurrent graph convolutional approach, in: IGARSS 2023 - 2023 IEEE International Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium, pp. 5344–5347. doi: 10.1109/IGARSS52108.2023. 10283236 .[65] Zalatan, B., Rahnemoonfar, M., 2023b. Prediction of deep ice layer thickness using adaptive recurrent graph neural networks, in: 2023 IEEE International Conference on Image Processing (ICIP), pp. 2835–2839. doi: 10.1109/ICIP49359.2023.10222391 .[66] Zalatan, B., Rahnemoonfar, M., 2023c. Recurrent graph convolutional networks for spatiotemporal prediction of snow accumulation using airborne radar, in: 2023 IEEE Radar Conference (RadarConf23), pp. 1–6. doi: 10.1109/RadarConf2351548.2023.10149562 .[67] Zhou, J., Cui, G., Hu, S., Zhang, Z., Yang, C., Liu, Z., Wang, L., Li, C., Sun, M., 2020. Graph neural networks: A review of methods and applications. AI Open 1, 57–81. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2666651021000012 , doi: https: //doi.org/10.1016/j.aiopen.2021.01.001 .

Zesheng Liu, Maryam Rahnemoonfar: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 20 of 20