Title: 2605.22310v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.22310v1

Published Time: Fri, 22 May 2026 01:00:10 GMT

Number of Pages: 35

Markdown Content:
1

# Pattern -and -root inflectional morphology : t he Arabic broken plural 

Alexis Amid Neme  1 - Éric Laporte  2

Abstract 

We present a substantially implemented model of description of the inflectional morphology of Arabic noun s, 

with special attention to the management of dictionaries and other language resources by Arabic -speaking 

linguists . Our model includes broken plurals (BPs), i.e. plural s formed by modifying the stem. 

It is based on the traditional notions of root and pattern of Semitic morphology . However, as compared to 

traditional Arabic morphology, it keeps the formal description of inflection se par ate from that of derivation and 

semantic s. As traditional Arabic dictionaries, the updatable dictionary is structured in lexical entries for 

lemma s, and the reference spelling is fully diacritized . In our model, m orphological analysis of Arabic text is 

performed directly with a dictionary of words and without morpho phono logical rules. 

Our taxonomy for noun inflection is simple, orderly and detailed. We simplify the taxonomy of singular patterns 

by specifying vowel quantity as v or vv , and ignoring vowel quality. Root alternations and orthographical 

variations are encoded independently from patterns and in a factual way, without deep roots or 

morphophonological or orthographical rules. Nouns with a triliteral BP are classified according to 22 patterns 

subdivided into 90 classes, and nouns with a quadri liter al BP according to 3 patterns subdivi ded into 70 classes .

These 160 classes become 300 inflectional classes when we take into account inflectional variations that affect 

only the singular .

We provide a straightforward encoding scheme that we appli ed to 3 200 entries of BP nouns .

1. Objective 

We present a model of description of the inflectional morphology of Arabic nouns . Our purpose is to generat e

comprehensive dictionaries for Arabic natural language processing (NLP) , and to equip them with easy 

procedures of manual, computer -aided updating. No such dictionary is currently available for Arabic NLP (cf. 

Section 2 .4 ). Noun inflection is a crucial part of the inflectional system of Arabic : it regards a large part of the 

lexicon and ‘nouns turn out to be far more complex than verbs’ (Altantawy et al ., 2010:851) .3

Our approach , inspired from Neme’s work on verbs (2011), is to generat e plural s from fully diacritized singular 

forms . The input of the system is a noun lemma with an inflectional code. The output is a list of inflected forms 

with their morpho -syntactic features.  We take fully d iacritiz ed spelling as reference , and  we deal with partially 

diacritiz ed or und iacritiz ed spelling through the concept of optional information. 

We focus on broken plural s (BP s), defined as those Arabic plurals formed by modify ing the stem , as in Euq odap 

‘knot’ vs. Euq ad ‘knots’. BPs contrast with suffixal plurals , which are formed by substituting suffixes, as in 

Halaq ap ‘ring’ vs. HalaqaAt ‘rings’ . A large proportion of nouns, e.g. most n ouns of concrete objects and 

animals and many technical terms , have only a BP . ‘For the lexicon as a whole, then, broken plural formation is 

by far the norm rather than the exception ’ (McCarthy, Prince, 1990:213) .

In this paper, examples displayed in the Latin alphabet are transliterated according to Buckwalter -Neme (BN) 

code , a variant (Neme, 2011, p. 6, note 4) of Tim Buckwalter’s transliteration that avoids the use of special 

characters .4 The diacritics for short vowels are noted  a, u, i . A position bet ween two basic letters without any                                                                      

> 1LIGM, Université Paris -Est -alexis.neme@gmail.com
> 2LIGM, Université Paris -Est ;DLL, Universidade Federal do Espírito Santo -eric.laporte@univ -paris -est.fr
> 3We thank Tim Buckwalter for helpful comments and discussions on an earlier version of this article.
> 4In this transliteration, upper -case and lower -case letters, e.g. Eand e, denote distinct, independent consonants :ء,c; آ, C; أ, O; ؤ, W; إ,
> I; ئ, e; ا, A; ب,b; ة,p; ت,t; ث,v; ج, j; ح, H; خ,x; د, d; ذ, J; ر, r; ز, z; س, s; ش, M; ص, S; ض, D; ط, T; ظ, Z; ع, E; غ, g; ف, f; ق, q; ك, k; ل,
> l; م, m; ن, n; ه, h; و, w; ى, Y; ي, y; ً, F; ً, N; ً, K; ً, a; ً, u; ً, i; ً,G; ً, o. The BN transliteration is implemented in the Unitex

# 2

vowel is noted o, as in Euqodap [ʕuqdap]. In other words, o does not note the [o] vowel, but is a silent diacritic: 

when it is noted, it rules out the hypothesis of a non -scripted short vowel. Th is transliteration system is entirely 

based on the digital encoding of text, as defined by the Unicode standard, and does not necessarily reflect its 

graphic display on the screen (e.g. ligatures) nor its pronunciation .

2. Previous work 

2.1. Root -and -pattern morphology 

Among the possible formal representations of Arabic morphology, root -and -pattern morphology is a natural 

representation , as well as for other Semitic languages . I t is so widely used that this model is also known as 

‘Semitic morphology’ . A (surface) root is a morphemic abstraction, a sequence of letters , which can only be 

consonants or long vowels ,5 like Eqd , where E notes the pharyngeal or epiglottal consonant [ʕ], or swr , where w

notes a long vowel in certain conditions. A pattern is a template of characters surrounding the slots for the root 

letter s. T he se slots are shown in the pattern by indices , like in 1u2a3 . Between and around the slots, patterns 

contain short vowels, and some times consonants or long vowels. Once affixes are stripped off the surface form 

of a word , the remaining stem is analysed as t he ‘interdigitation’ (Beesley, 1996) of a root with a pattern . For 

example, the stems Euq odap ‘knot ’ and the BP Euq ad ‘knot s’ are represented by the root Eqd and , respectively, 

by the singular pattern 1u2o3ap and BP pattern 1u2a3 :

Ste m Euq odap  Euq ad  عُقْدَة عُقَد 

Root  E q d E q d

Pattern 1u2o3ap 1u2a3 

A root is usually stable across all the forms in a lexical item; grammatical distinctions between these forms 

correspond to different patterns. Thus, lexical items are classified in bi literal , triliteral, quadriliteral, 

quinqueliteral depending on the number of letters in their root. The general principles of r oot -and -pattern 

morphology are ubiquitous in the Arabic -speaking world and are taught in school . This representation is well 

established in Arabic morphology and seems well founded .6

There is a parallel between this model and Arabic script. Arabic script distin guishes ‘basic letters’, which are 

obligatorily written, and diacritics, which are usually omitted. All basic letters are consonants or long vowels ,

just as all root letters also are ; r oots are written with basic letters only . T his is an additional reason why root -and -

pattern morphology is so intuitive for users of Arabic script . Between and around the slots, patterns comprise 

diacritics , and some times basic letters .

The slots for root letters in a pattern are traditionally noted by the consonants f, E, l, l , instead of the digits 1, 2, 

3, 4 . For instance, 1u2o3ap and 1u2a3 are noted fuEolap and fuEal  ( فُعْلَة، فُعَل  ). This makes  the 

representation of the pattern pronounceable, and thus easier to remember.  We adopted this convention and 

adjust ed it in  several  ways . We modified the consonant for the 4 th  slot, so as to have four different consonants  f, 

E, l, b . When we script patterns in Buckwalter transliteration, we type these consonants in upper case : F, E, L, B ,

so that the slots are visually salient:  FuEoLa p and  FuEaL . We note the long vowels  aa ii uu  instead of  aA iy uw ,

which  would be  the fully diacritized BN transliteration. With this convention, adopted by several authors, the 

slots for the root consonants are easier to identify visually. They appear in capitals, while most other letters in 

patterns appear in lower case. When  aA  is wr itten in BN transliteration, the upper case letter tends to confuse the 

recognition of the slots.                   

> system (Paumier, 2002) .
> 5As a simplification, we introduce here the surface root corresponding to a set of actually pronounced segments , and not the underlying
> root postulated by traditional Arabic grammar and by generative grammar.
> 6Prosodic morphology uses a close variant of this model (McCarthy, 1981) in which a pattern such as 1i2a3 is replaced by two
> abstractions: a ‘CV skeleton’ for the position of vowels, here 1v2v3 , and a ‘melody’ for their values, here ia . This variant is used in
> some implementations (Kiraz, 1994). We use the traditional form of patterns, which is simpler (Smrž, 2007:33) and more usual to
> Arabic speakers.

# 3

2.2. Traditional morphology 

A large part of traditional Arabic morphology (TM), including the description of BP s, dates back to Sibawayh , a 

grammarian of the VIII th century ( Sibawayh, ed. Haarun, 1977). Since then, his representation has been generally 

approved and transmitted by grammarians without major improvements. It is largely used at school in Arab 

countries. 

This traditional view describes how BPs are p roduced from singular nouns. The path from a singular form to a 

BP passes through a root. The essential steps in this operation are: 

- analysing the singular into a root and a n existing singular pattern, e.g. Euq odap ‘knot’ = [Eqd & FuEoLap ], 

- selecting a BP pattern, here FiEaL, 

- combining the root with the BP pattern. 

In t he first step , we shift from a surface for m to the root and pattern level; then , we shift back to surface. The 

steps listed above present four technical obstacl es. 

- The analysis of an Arabic word into a root and a pattern is not a deterministic operation and can a priori 

produce several results  (cf. Section 4.1) , even after discarding those results that violate any constraints about 

roots or patterns. 

- TM’s notion s of root and pattern are not exactly the surface root and pattern introduced above, but a ‘deep’ 

root , e.g., in the case of baA b ‘door’  باب  , bwb instead of  bAb, and a  ‘deep ’ pattern.  Rules  modify  these 

underlying  forms  to produce surface forms . Thus,  the path from a singular form to a BP, in fact, passes through  a

deep  root . To find the deep root, the rules have to be  ‘unapplied’, i.e.  applied regressively ;7 then, to generate the 

BP form, the same rules are applied  back  in the normal way. 

- The BP pattern is generally unpredictable from the singular pattern. 

- Onc e the root is combined with the BP pattern , rules apply and modify the deep forms. 

Reliable dictionaries (Abdel -Nour, 2006) and e xcellent inventories of classes and nouns (Tarabay 2003) can be 

found. Sure, numerous entries in Tarabay are disused in Modern Standard Arabic , and some classes are missing, 

for example the human nouns with the FaEaaLiBap pattern in the BP, as barobariyG ‘barbar’  بربري  or  malaAk 

‘angel’  مالك  . B ut the system is  essentially  unchanged  since  Sibawayh , and  has incorporated  loanwords 

harmoniously .

The TM model of BPs is precise enough to define taxonom ies : two nouns are assigned the same class if they 

produce their BP in the same way. However, TM does not explicitly enumerate classes. The notion of taxonomy 

is also naturally connected with that of codes: two nouns belong to the same class if they are assigned the same 

BP codes . TM produces BPs from singular nouns through two ‘codes ’: t he first is either the singular pattern 

(Fi EoLap in the example above) or the deep root (Eqd ), and the second is the BP pattern (FiEaL ).

Since Sibawayh , most lexicologists and linguists ha ve contributed in the form of comments, rather than 

revisions. The accumulated comments tend to make the model seem more complex , not to simplify it . Among 

modern linguists, those who have adopted the root -and -pattern model have rarely questioned historical author s

and practices either .

TM’s model of BP s is complex. Tarabay’s (2003) book about plural in Arabic, which is almost entirely 

dedicated to BPs, has 470 pages on 2 columns, plus 100 pages of glossaries representing more than 12 000 

entries (not exhaustive, common words are lacking) . BP s in themselves give an ‘initial impression of chaos’ 

(McCarthy, 1983:292) and are ‘highly allomorphic ’ (Soudi et al. , 2002) ; grammatical and lexical tradition s and 

practices along centuries do not give the impression of an effort towards a simple r and mo re orderly taxonomy, 

with few er classes. Arabic specialists disagree about the deep root of some nouns, e.g.  xanoziyr  ‘pig’  خنزير  is 

indexed under the root s xnzr  and  xzr in  Ibn Manzur (1290)  and under the root  xzr in  Al -Fairuzabadi ( c. 1400). 

Descriptions  of rules are  often  scattered in reference books, and their conditions of application are  not formalized  

> 7In case of doubt, lexicons provide the deep root directly.

# 4

and not always fu lly specified. In a typical example, Tarabay (2003:92, footnote 2) mentions a metathesis rule 

that substitutes o<cons>i<cons> by i<cons >o<cons> , as in the underlying form *Oax oMi Map ‘vermin ’ أخششة 

(the ‘*’ symbol signals  a reconstructed , not directly observed  form ) which takes the form  *Oax iMo Map  أخششة .,

which in turn is correctly spelt as  Oax iMG ap  أخشَّة  , where  the  G diacritic  notes the gemination of the preceding 

consonant . She words the conditions of application as follows:  ‘[The nouns] that pluralize only with the 

OaFoEiLap  pattern,  that  have the  FaEa AL pattern  in the singular  and  that  have identical 2 nd  and 3 rd  root letters ,

apply an  i shift which is substituted  by  o.’ In this footnote,  ‘pluralize only ’ means that th e noun does not have 

another BP:  if it has a suffixal plural, the rule  can  apply.  Thus, the conditions of applications of th is  rule are  and 

not fully specified .8 There are dozens of such rules. Their order of application matters  for their final output , but it 

is not systematically specified.  Good traditional dictionaries explicitly provide BPs in surface form, bypassing 

the  pattern and the  rules. 

The number of classes in a BP taxonomy measures the complexity of the BP system. Since TM does not count 

classes, let us compute estimat ions from numbers of patterns. Tarabay (2003) distinguishes 56 BP patterns. This 

number can be viewed as a measure of th e complexity of BP: ‘The defining characteristic of fixed -pattern 

morphology is that consistency in such system s is found not in a consistent proportion or relationship between 

two forms ( a base and a derivative, an input and an output) but in a consistent pattern (of syllable structure and 

vocalism) imposed on all derived forms of a particular class regardless of the form of the source word’ 

(Ratcliff e, 2001:153 ). However, the number of BP patterns underestimates the complexity of deducing a BP 

from a singular , because it overlooks the problem of finding the root. We should then take into account the 

number of singular patterns. The BP pattern is unpredictable from a given singular pattern, and vice versa, but 

not all singular pattern/BP pattern pairs are represented in the lexicon. Estimates of the number of singular 

pattern/BP pattern pairs vary from 105 (Murtonen 1964, survey based on the dictionary of Lane 1893) down to 

55 (Soudi et al ., 2002, citing Levy 1971, based on Wehr 1960) or 44 (El -Da hdah, 2002), but they are limited to 

the common types. Again, the number of pattern pairs does not take into account the additional complexity 

brought about by morphological variations. Such variations affect the consonants w, y and [ ʔ] (the glottal stop), 

and forms with reduplicat ed or geminated consonants. Tarabay (2003) dedicates 30 pages to the latter type of 

variations. We estimate that her inventory is equivalent to more than 2 000 classes. 

For TM, the description of BPs is required to be consistent with other constraints. For example, roots are also 

used for the practical purpose of indexing dictionarie s. ‘The lexical root provides a semantic field within which 

actual vocabulary items can be located’ (Ryding, 2005:677). Derived nouns such as miEowal ‘mattock’  معول  are 

listed in dictionaries under the root of their base, here  Ewl , a root that  also  occurs in  words  meaning  ‘howl’ ,

‘raise  (a famil y)’, ‘rely on’... T herefore , the consonants of derivational prefixes, here  m, are not  analysed as 

being  part of the root,  even when  they are common to the singular and BP of the derived noun , as is the case for 

this no un .

In a similar vein, the roots and patterns relevant for inflectional morphology are also ‘re used ’ for semantic 

description. ‘A root is a relatively invariable discontinuous bound morpheme, (…) which has a lexical meaning’ 

(Ryding, 2005:47). TM associates some patterns with semantic feature s, e.g. the miFoEaL pattern with the 

notion of instrument, as in miEowal ‘mattock’. However, such associations are never perfectly regular. The 

miFoEaL pattern could not be used as a semantic label for instrument noun s. S ome instrument nouns do not have 

it , e.g. qalam ‘pen’  قلم  . T he  broken  plural of  miEowal  ‘mattock ’ معول  itself , maEaAwil  ‘mattocks ’ معاول  , is  still 

an instrument noun , and has another pattern .

TM also integrates inflection with derivational morphology , which also involves roots and patterns. When a 

word is the output of a derivational process and the input of an inflectional process , as miEowal ‘mattock’ , it is 

traditionally implied that its root -and -pattern analysis is the same with respect with the two morphological 

processes.      

> 8Probably because it is relatively intuitive for Arabic speakers: o<cons>i<cons> sequences are rare in Arabic, and where they are
> expected, i<cons>o<cons> sequences are often observed .

# 5

Thus, notions relevant to production of BPs from singular nouns are reused for three other purposes: dictionary 

indexing, semantic description or derivational morphology. This integration makes sense in a context of Arabic 

teaching, in that it facilitates memorization . However, if we consider each of the se four objectives separately, the 

reuse may lead to conflicting constraints , if the best definition of roots and patterns for the different purposes do 

not coincide exactly , as in the examples above . In addition, this integration makes the assign ment of a word to a 

BP class depend on semantic and derivational information , and not only on inflectional morphology. 

Summing up, the TM ’s account of BPs produces the correct forms, it has been tested and validated over 

centuries, and it is familiar to the Arabic speakers that are likely to encode and update lexical resources. 

Dictionaries have a readable layout and provide reliable information. However, th ere might be room for 

simplification: 

- of the taxonomy, 

- of the morphophonological rules, 

- of the procedure of assignment of a noun to a class .

2. 3. BP in generative grammar 

Generative grammar gives several formal models of BP generation, some of them well documented, taking into 

account large portions of the Arabic lexicon, and based on interesting analyses. McCarthy & Prince (1990) 

propose a computation of BP stem from singular stem, a ‘rule for forming the broken plural’ (p. 263); Kihm 

(2006) formali zes other rules in a rival trend within generative grammar. 

As compared to traditional morphology, these models hypothe siz e underlying forms and rules for surface 

realis ation too, but they endeavour to lower the number of inflectional classes for BP. McCar thy & Prince 

(1990:210 and 217) view Wright’s (1971) account of BP, with 31 plural types, corresponding to 11 singular 

types, as a ‘poorly understood or perhaps even chaotic process’, and they try to ‘substantiate the informal notion 

that a single pattern unites all the classes grouped under the iambic rubric’. The price for reducing this ‘apparent 

complexity’ are more abstract underlying forms, i.e. more distance between underlying forms and surface forms, 

and therefore a more complex system of rules. The rules perform, for example, metathesis, after Levy (1971), 

and glide realis ation, after TM and Brame (1970). The complexity of the system s comes from relations between 

rules, such as order of application, and from the existence of exceptions to them. 

In co nformity with the generative paradigm , these authors assume that the underlying roots exist in native 

speakers’ minds and are activated during the production of BPs. We are not committed to this assumption , for 

lack of evidence ; in addition, when several u nderlying roots are a priori possible, as in qabow/Oaqobiyap (see 

Section 3.3) , we lack evidence about whether hypothetical underlying roots would be identical or different in 

respective speakers’ minds. Our approach focuse s on verifiable facts as much as possible .

The generativist models are not directly exploitable for computational purposes, for two reasons: 

- The rules are only partially specified. McCarthy and Prince’s (1990) rules rely on a metathesis (Levy , 1971) 

observed in OakotaAf for *kataAf ‘shoulders’  أكتاف  , but they leave undefined the conditions of application of the 

metathesis, not because they are easy to describe, but because they are ‘not wonderfully transparent’. Instead of 

this metathesis, Kihm (2006:83) uses an ‘augment of  obscure origin’, but does not specify the conditions of its 

insertion either. He also sketches rules according to which the 2 nd  root letter does not count as such when it is a 

glide, and another that integrates into the root some inflectional affixes of th e indefinite singular during the 

generation of the BP (p. 86), but he does not explain in which conditions. As for the lexical information required 

to generate BP s, he ‘leave[s] the precise formalization of this information to future work’ (p. 81). Similar ly, 

McCarthy & Prince do not enter into details to the point that they would tell how many inflectional classes for 

BP should be distinguished with their model. 

- Nouns showing exceptional behaviour are mentioned, but not dealt with in the model s. For example, McCarthy 

& Prince’s (1990:273 -274) rules with left -to -right association give the correct BP in many quinqueliteral nouns, 

but they do not propose any device for exceptions, since generative grammar is not committed to describing 6

lexical item s beyond those that ‘reflect a regular grammatical process of the language’ ( p. 267). Generative 

grammar aims to model a specifically linguistic mental process, and is traditionally not interested in general -

purpose mnemonic processes that are supposed to handle exceptions when they are not too numerous. This is an 

important difference with our objectives, since a comprehensive morpho -syntactic lexicon is required to deal 

with all cases. 

Anyway, the generative models of BP, even incompletely specified, seem already too complex to be the best 

choice for our practical objective of a system easy to update. Complex relations between rules, such as order of 

application, and the existence of exceptions to them, obfuscate the se system s.

In addition, this additional complexity of the rules (as compared to TM) does not always contribute to simplify 

the taxonomy of BPs. For example, McCarthy & Prince (1990) predict the quantity of last i in quadriliteral BP 

patterns when the first syllable of singular is bimoraic in th e generative sense. This allows for merging the 

FaEaaLiB and FaEaaLiiB patterns for some nouns. With reference to the goals of generative grammar, such a 

prediction makes sense, since it models a linguistic process by a rule which is assumed to comply with a

universal format. However, if we now take in mind our goal of simpli fying the encoding of lexical items, the 

prediction tends to complicate the generation of the BP, without lowering the number of patterns, since 

FaEaaLiB and FaEaaLiiB must still be dis tinguished for the BP nouns whose first syllable is not bimoraic. 

Kihm (2006:81) claims that his model simplifies dramatically the taxonomy of BPs: ‘such a wild variety of 

forms actually results from one process and from the interplay of a few well defined factors’, namely the timbre 

of an element inserted between the 2 nd and 3 rd root letters, which is chosen between i, a and u, and the category 

of the insertion: consonant or vowel. However, this claim overstates the simplicity of Kihm ’s taxonomy. In his 

model, t he variety of forms also depends , for example , on the value of the vowel inserted between the 1 st and 2 nd 

root letters of the BP (p. 82). 

2.4. Analysers and generators of Arabic inflected words 

Because of the rich morphology of Arabic , NLP for this language requires dictionaries : ‘we need to be able to 

relate irregular forms to their lexemes, and this can only be done with a lexicon’  (Altantawy  et al. , 2010:851). 

This need also applies to the statistic methods which are widely expoited  almost  without dictionaries  for  other 

inflectional languages : ‘the need for incorporating linguistic knowledge is a major challenge in Arabic  data -

driven MT. Recent attempts to build data -driven systems to translate from and to Arabic have demonstrated that 

the c omplexity of word and syntatic structure in this language prompts the need for integrating some linguistic 

knowledge’ (Zbib, Soudi, 2012:2). 

Still, no comprehensive dictionaries equip ped with easy procedures of updating are currently available for 

Arabic N LP. In the last 20 years, a number of comput er systems for the morphological analysis and generation 

of Arabic words have been implemented. They can be classified into two approaches. 

- The root/pattern/rule approach is based on traditional morphology . During analysis, a stem is an alysed into a 

deep root and a deep pattern which are look ed up among the roots and patterns stored in the system . The distance 

between deep level and surface level is covered with the aid of rules. This approach has a variant where patterns 

are closer to the surface, reducing the distance and simplifying the rules. 

- The multi -stem approach seeks to avoid heavy computation d uring analysis. A stem is look ed up among the 

stems stored in a dictionary . The term ‘multi -stem’ alludes to the fact that a lexical entry for a BP noun or a verb 

has at least two stems, e.g. miEowal ‘mattock’  معول  and  maEaAwil  ‘mattocks ’.  This approach has a variant in 

which the stems are generated from roots and patterns duri ng a dictionary compilation phase. 

2. 4.1. Beesley (1996, 2001 )

This system for Arabic infle ct ion formalizes the traditional version of the root -and -pattern model and classifies 

in the root/pattern/rule approach . Its r ules deal with root alternations, morphophonological alternations and 

spelling adjustments. They are encoded in the form of finite automata and compiled with the dictionary into a 7

finite transducer. For morphological analysis, these rules are applied regre ssively, i.e. they take surface form s as 

input and they output deep forms. 

The system has a medium lexical coverage : 4 930 roots produc ing 90 000 stems 9 (Beesley, 2001 :7) , and it 

includes BPs . The lexical data originate from work at ALPNET (Buckwalter, 1990) .

This system f ace s several challenges. One of them is that of analysis speed : ‘the finite -state transducers (FSTs) 

tend to become extremely large, causing a significant deterioration in response time ’ (Altantawy et al ., 

2011:116) . This was , by the way, the main motivation for devising the multi -stem approach. 

A second problem is the complexity of the rules that produce surface forms from underlying forms. The deep 

roots are borrowed from traditional morphology. For example, baAeiE ‘seller’  بائع  , with surface root  beE , and 

baAEap  ‘sellers’  باعة  (cf example 79 below ), with surface root  bAE , are analysed with deep root  byE , which 

requires that the rules change  y into  e in the singular and into  A in the plural.  Each difference between surface 

forms  and deep forms increases the complexity of the rule system.  This complexity does not bring about any 

identifiable benefit.  Once the roots are output by the analyser, they are to be essentially used as morpheme 

labels: the deep root borrowed from traditional morphology is not better for that than, say, the surface root of the 

singular.  This additional complexity is inherited f rom traditional morphology, where it is meant to contribute to 

the semantic indexing of dictionaries, and to the consistency between inflection and derivation (Section 2. 2

above). A morphological analyser of Arabic does not need to take into account these  constraints : s emantic 

indexing has no relation with morphological analysis; nobody finds it necessary to integrate inflection and 

derivation, for example, in English, in spite of obvious regularities between  derivational suffixes and  inflectional 

propertie s.  “Dictionary maintenance need not require a thorough knowledge of Arabic derivational morphology, 

which few native speakers learn” (Buckwalter, 2007 :37 ).  And the  useless  complexity induced by the deepness of 

the underlying level has a cost:  the rules are  encod ed and updated manually, ‘a tedious task that often influences 

the linguist to simplify the rules by postulating a rather  surfacy  lexical level’ (Beesley, 1996 :91 ). 

A third problem with this system is that the model lacks the notion of inflectional class. Two nouns belong to the 

same inflectional class if they inflect in the same way, and in particular if they pluralize in the same way. In 

lexicology for language processing, this notion allows for devising a common process shared by all the entries of 

a class, making the complexity depend on the number of class es (typically a few hundred) rather than on the 

number of lexical entries (in the dozens of thousands). Take for example root alternations : the surface root of 

baAeiE ‘seller’  بائع  is beE  in the singular and  bAE  in the BP , whereas for  HaAeir  ‘indecisive ’ حائر  ,10  it is  Her  in 

the singular and  Hyr  in the BP  (cf example 78 below ). Considering that there are no  inflectional classes amounts 

to  considering that  both entries  pluralize in the same way . This  imposes to de sign and implement  a single  set of 

rules that outputs the correct alternation for  both  — and for  all  entries of  all classes , in addition to the fact that 

for each entry, it should produce both the correct singu lar and the correct BP . In practice, this  is a real challenge: 

‘Not surprisingly, to anyone who has studied Arabic, the rules controlling the realization of  w, y and the hamza 

(the glottal stop) 11  are particularly complicated’ (Beesley, 2001 :5 ).  Checking, correcting and updating such a set 

of rules are also heavy tasks: a typical rule affects several kinds of lexical entries,  and  there is no index of the 

entries or  classes affected by each rule,  or of the rules affecting each entry or class; the o rder of application of 

the rules is significant and must be  decided and  encod ed.  A separate, simpler set of rules for each class is more 

convenient to handle, even if  at the cost of  some redundancy between classes. 

The solution adopted to specify BP patter ns is diametrically opposed to the one for root alternations: patterns are 

manually specified separately for each root (Beesley, 2001:7), without sharing information at the level of 

inflectional classes.           

> 9It is not measured as a number of entries because the formal model of the system does not include the notion of lexical entry .
> 10 The BP system is essentially the same for nouns and for adjectives, except that BP is stylistically preferred for nouns, and suffixal
> plural for adjectives. We will exe mplify some facts with adjectives.
> 11 The consonants w,yand [ ʔ] mentioned here are precisely those involved in root alternations.

# 8

The final shortcoming of this system is the format o f the outpu t of analysis , at the ‘abstract lexical ’ level . It 

identifies the POS, root and pattern of the analysed words and their inflectional features , but not their lexical 

entries. Lexical entries of words are used to store, for example, their syntactic and semantic features, or, in the 

case of multilingual systems, an index to a lexical entry in another language. For example, EawaAeil ‘families’ is 

analysed by the system as a noun with root Ewl and pattern FaEaAeiL , and maEaAwil ‘mattocks’ as a noun with 

the same root and pattern maFaAEiL , but this is insufficient to identify lexical entrie s for them : s ince both words 

share the same root Ewl , nothing specifies whether one of them is the plural of EaAeilap ‘family ’ or of miEowal 

‘mattock’ . This is a difference with traditional dictionaries , which have a level for lexical entries in addition to 

the level for roots .

2. 4.2. MAGEAD 

The MAGEAD system (Habash, Rambow, 2006; Altantawy et al ., 2010, 2011) is close to Beesley’s (2001) in its 

design: ‘We use “deep” morphemes throughout, i.e., our system includes both a model of roots, patterns, and 

morphophonemic/orthographic rules, and a complete functional account of morphology’ ( Altantawy  et  al ., 

2010:851) ; the  rules are also compiled with the lexicon into a finite transducer . The  lexicon  is  derived from 

Buckwalter ’s  (Habash, Rambow,  2006:686 ; Altantawy  et al. , 2010:853 ) through Smr ž’s (2007) . The project has 

an  on -going p ar t for nouns , including BPs  (Altantawy  et al .,  2010). 

MAGEAD improves upon Beesley (2001) in several ways.  The  notion of lexical  entry is represented . T he output 

of morphological analysis of a noun  comprises sufficient information to identify a lexical entry in the same way 

for the singular and the plural  (Altantawy  et al. , 201 0:8 53 ): for  mawaAziyn  ‘balances ’,  the lexical entry of the 

noun is identified by  the root  wzn  and the ‘ noun -I-M-mi12A3 -ma1A2iy3 ’ code s, w hich specify  the part -of -

speech , the non -human feature, the gender  and the compatibility with patterns.  This makes the results of 

morphological analysis more easily usable in other tools. The notion of inflectional class is adopted  for patterns ,

but not for root alternations (Habash, Rambow, 2006: 683 ): each lexical entry is assigned a code that identifies 

the patterns it admits , e.g. ‘ mi12A3 -ma1A2iy3 ’ (Altantawy  et al .,  2010:85 3). There are 41 classes for verbs 

(Habash, Rambow, 2006:684) . Thus, inflectional information is  shar ed  at class level,  reducing  redundancy 

between entries. This  facilitates  dictionary  checking , update  and extension,  reducing the  cost of  management  of 

the dictionary : when an error is detected in the patterns of a class, the correction of the error affects all the class; 

when a new class is found and encoded, it can be shared by all the  future members of the class through a simple 

code assignment .

However, MAGEAD still faces the other problems that we mentioned above about Beesley (2001). 

- The resources of MAGEAD -Express compile in 48 h, and the analysis of a verb takes 6.8 ms (Altantawy et al. ,

2011: 123 ). 

- The analysis opts for deep roots , complexifying the computation of the root from the surface form. 

- Root alternations are not taken into account in inflectional classes, but controlled by a single set of rules for all 

entries. Encoding such rules is a challenge: ‘we also exclude all analyses involving non -triliteral roots and non -

templatic word stems since we do not even attempt to han dle them in the current version of our rules’ 

(Altantawy et al. , 2010:856 ).

In addition, the lexical coverage is still limited . The lexical data are borrowed from Buckwalter (2002) : 8 960 

verbs (Altantawy et al. , 2011:122) and 32 000 nouns , including those with suffixal plural (Altantawy et al., 

2010:854) , but the rules are compa tible only with triliteral nouns : ‘we are not  evaluating our lexicon coverage 

(…)  Our evaluation aims at measuring performance on words which are in our lexicon, not the lexicon itself. 

Future work will address the crucial issue of creating and evaluating a comprehensive lexicon ’ (Altantawy  et al., 

2010:856 ).9

2. 4.3. Systems with root alternations encoded in patterns 

The Elixir system ( Smrž , 2007) has a medium lexical coverage and includes BP. The lexical data are adapt ed 

from Buckwalter (2002). It is slow, but could be quicker if implemented in another language than Haskell. The 

results include a representation of lexical entries , as in MAGEAD .

Elixir follows the root/pattern/rules approach, but, a s compared to the systems described above, patterns are 

closer to the surface level. In case of root alternation, surface forms of root letters are specified in patterns . For 

example, baAEap ‘sellers’ is analysed with root byE and pattern FaaLap , whereas traditional morphology taught 

at school analyses it with root byE and deep pattern FaEoLap , with A as the surface realisation of the seco nd 

deep root letter y. Traditional morphology represents patterns with a fixed number of slots, even in case of root 

alternations. Elixir’s option of encoding root alternations in patterns is shared by Ryding (2005:149): FaaLap, 

FuEaap …(

فالة ,

فعاة  ...)  This option  simplifies the rules and their application, but in troduces numerous new 

patterns,  which  look odd  to Arabic speakers  because  traditional  inflectional taxonomy is entirely based on deep 

patterns.  Th is difference  make s some of  the  Elixir  patterns difficult to read  and handle . In NLP companies ,

management  of  Arabic  language resources  tends to  involve  native  Arabic speakers , because of their wider 

knowledge of the language .

The open -source Alkhalil morphological analyser  12  (Boudlal  et al ., 2010 ) is used in various projects and  won 

the first prize at a competition by  the Arab League Educational, Cultural Scientific Organization (ALESCO) in 

2010.  We counted that Alkhalil’s lexical resources cover  97% of the verb occurrences of a sample text , which is 

comparable to the coverage of Buckwalter (2002).  The system includes  BP . The patterns are scripted in Arabic. 

As  in Beesley (2001), the output of the analyser does not identify lexical entries: nothing connects a noun in the 

BP to its singular.  Th e general approach is close to that of Elixir, patterns are used in the same way , and t he 

example of  baAEap  ‘sellers’  gets the same  analys is .

Another difference with traditional morphology is th at Alkhalil includes case and definiteness su ffixes in the 

patterns. For example, in the noun daAra  دار  ‘home ’,  Alkhalil assigns final  -a to the pattern  FaaLa  فال , whereas 

for traditional morphology, the stem is  daA r, with root  dwr and deep pattern  FaEaL  فعل  (with  A as the surface 

realisation of the second root letter  w),  and  -a is an inflectional suffix of the  accusative  case and the construct -

state definiteness . Traditional morphology has a systematic d elimita tion between stem and  such su ffixes ; these 

su ffixes  have very little variation  depending on  lexical entries;  most  analysers comply w ith this distinction and 

ex clude  the su ffixes  from  the pattern . The Alkhalil option in troduces numerous such new  patterns  which are 

alien to  familiar pattern taxonomy .

2. 4.4. The m ulti -stem approach 

Buckwalter’s (2002) open source morphological analyser of Arabic, BAMA, is a well -known example of the 

multi -stem approach. It is slow, but could be quicker if implemented in another language than Perl. It has a 

medium lexical coverage : approximately 32 000 nouns and 9 00 0 verbs . The lexical data originate probably from 

work at ALPNET , as can be seen by the common morpheme labels (Buckwalter, 1990 :3 -5). All stems are stored 

in the resources , including most spelling variants , bypassing almost all morphophonological rules . This option 

simplifies dramatically the lookup algorithm. ‘The BAMA uses a concatenative lexicon -driven approach where 

morphotactics and orthographic adjustment rules are partially applied into the l exicon itself instead of being 

specified in terms of general rules that interact to realize the output’ (Buckwalter, 2002). Thus, 9 stems are stored 

for the verb qara>a ‘read’  قرأ  (in Buckwalter transliteration) , due to the orthographic variants of the 3 rd  root 

letter, here [ʔ],  determined by  the  presence of an  inflectional suffix  or of  an agglutinated pronoun . The form 

qora>  appears in 3 items, with different compatibility codes:  

> 12 http://sourceforge.net/projects/alkhalil/

# 10 

Stem Compatibility code Stem Compatibility code 

qara> PV -> qora| IV -|

qara| PV -| qora& IV_wn 

qara& PV_w qora} IV_yn 

qora> IV qora> IV_Pass 

qora> IV_wn 

Th e information provide d in morpheme labels includes the part of speech , the voice and aspect of verbs, and 

other relevant information .

Independent work by Soudi et al . (2002) shares the same design: ‘Such an approach dispenses with 

truncating/deleting rules and other complex rules that are required to account for the highly allomorphic broken 

plural system’ (Soudi et al ., 2002). The main d ifference is that in case of purely orthographic variations, variants 

of stems are not stored in the lexicon , but the paper does not explain how they are recognised .

To date, the systems implementing the multi -stem approach have several common shortcomings . The multi -stem 

model lacks the notion of inflectional class: stem s are manually specified separately for each root . For example, 

if a verb conjugates like qara>a , its 9 stems are listed independently of those of qara>a , without sharing 

information at the level of inflectional classes .

In addition, for a BP noun without root alternations, such as EaAeilap ‘family’  عائلة , EawaAeil  ‘families ’ عوائل  ,

the stems stored in the lexicon include redundancy.  The same root appears in each stem. Duplicated manual 

encoding of the same piece of information  leads to  errors. This flaw is connected to the preceding: multi -stem 

systems do not encode regularities. 

Both have practical consequences. Human operations req uired to encode, check, correct and update the 

dictionaries are unnecessari ly repetitive and costly . Fallback procedures for words not found in the dictionary are 

difficult to devise. 

2. 4.5. Neme (2011) 

Neme (2011) describes a morphological analyser for Arabic verbs with a comprehensive lexical coverage: 

15 400 verbs. The dictionary compiles in 2 mn and the analysis of a verb takes 0. 5 ms on a 2009 Windows 

laptop ,13 outperforming MAGEAD -Express (cf. Section 2. 4.2) .

This system shows a concern with the comfort and efficiency of human encoding, checking and update of 

dictionaries. NLP companies need easy procedures for dictionary management, because most projects involve a 

specific domain with a particular vocabulary, and terminology evolves constantly; i n addition, dialects show 

lexical differences, which are relevant to speech processing if not for written text processing ; finally, the main 

advantage of dictionary -based analysers is that they provide a way of controlling the evolution of their accuracy 

by updating the dictionaries . None of the other authors surveyed above mentions the objective of facilitating 

manual dictionary management, and we reported the weak point s of their analysers in this regard. Neme (2011) 

identifies the problem as belong ing not only to computation and morpholog y, but also to NLP dictionary 

management , and considers language resources as the key point, as Huh & Laporte (2005) . His dictionar ies are 

constructed and managed with the dictionary tools of the open -source Unitex system (Paumier, 2002). 

All form s are stored in the resources, including spelling variants ; roots and patterns are handled at surface level .

The main difference with previous multi -stem system s is that the full -form dictionary is automatically 

pre compiled from another dictionary, which is specifically dedicated to manual construction, check and update. 

The dictionary is compil ed by finite transducers that combine roots, patterns and inflectional suffixes . Each of 

the 480 inflectional class es is assigned on e of the transducers, which ensures that the management of classes is 

mutually independent . The encoding of a new verb amounts to assigning it an inflectional code. Thus, the 

redundancy problems of the mainstream multi -stem approach are solved.     

> 13 Memory: 16 GB DDR3 1600 MHz; hard disks: 750 GB (7 200 rpm, Hybrid 4 GB Serial ATA) and 1TB (5 400 rpm, Serial ATA).

# 11 

Pattern taxonomy is kept simple and close to that taught in school to Arabic speakers, by maintain ing it separate 

from the encod ing of root alternations and of tense, person, gender and number suffixes. This keeps codes 

readable and facilitates the encoding, improving upon the pattern labels of Smrž (2007) and Boudlal et al .

(2010). 

Such technology reduces the computational skills required for the linguistic part of dictionary management :

these skills shift from software development to software use. Such a shift opens the perspective that Arabic 

language resources can be manag ed directly by native Arabic linguist s. In current practice, management of 

resources typically requires a high -wage specialist of computation and an Arabic informant : a configuration 

which is more costly and inserts an intermediary between the source of linguistic knowledge and the 

formalization. 

The results with verbs incit ed us to undertake the encoding of the BP system on the same bases . We called our 

project Pattern -and -Root Inflectional Morphology (PRIM), inverting the traditional ‘root -and -pattern’ phrase, 

because we capitalized on traditions about patterns, rather than about roots, to make our taxonomy intuitive to 

Arabic speakers. 

3. General organization of PRIM 

We decided to take advantage of the validation of traditional morphology over centuries, and we took it as a 

basis for our computerized model of BPs , formaliz ing and simplif ying it . We gave priority to this objective of 

simplification in order to make easier and more comfortable the manual part of the encoding of Arabic 

dictionarie s.  Consistency with semantic features or derivational analyses  wa s only a secondary objective.  The 

most s uccessful projects of morpho -syntactic codification are usually those that focus, in practice, on manual 

descriptors’ ease and comfort. They produce long -lasting morpho -syntactic  dictionarie s which are actually 

updated over time by linguists, as has been t he case of the Dela dictionaries since the 1980s (Courtois, 1990; 

Daille  et al ., 2002). 

3.1. Inflectional codes 

Arabic grammarians usually display the analys is of a singular stem/BP stem pair, e.g. Euq odap ‘knot’ /Euq ad 

‘knots’ , in the form of a compact formula: 

(a) Eqd Fu EoLap FuEaL 

where Eqd is the deep root, Fu EoLap the singular pattern and FuEaL the BP pattern. By combining Eqd with 

Fu EoLap and applying morpho -phonological and orthographical rules , one obtain s the singular stem. The same 

operation with Eqd and FuEaL yields the BP stem. 

Pattern pairs such as Fu EoLap /FuEaL make up a taxonomy of BP noun entries, by crossing the two taxonomies 

based , respectively, on singular patterns and BP patterns. A given singular pattern is compatible with several BP 

patterns, but not with all, and vice -versa. 

The PRIM format of a lexical entry is similar to (a) , with the lemma in Arabic script and the codes in the Latin 

alphabet :

(b)  Euqodap, $N3ap -f-FvEvL -FuEaL -123 

In this entry, Euq odap is the lemma of the noun, which is the singular of the noun, stripped off of its case and 

definiteness suffix, and written in fully d iacritiz ed script. The remain der is the inflectional code provided by the 

dictionary. In this code, FvEvL and FuEaL are the PRIM counterparts of the two patterns Fu EoLap and FuEaL 

in (a), and the root code 123 is comparable to the deep root Eqd in (a). Our encoding of nominal entries is also 

similar to that of verbal entries (Neme, 2011) , with two patterns and a root code :       

> Eu qodap ,$N3ap -f-FvEvL -FuEaL -123 / knot
> kaAotib, $N3 00 -g-FvvEvL -FuEEaaL -123 / author, employee
> kaAotib, $N3 00 -g-Fv vEvL -FaEaLap -123 / employee
> katiyobap,$N3 ap -f-FvEvvL -FaEaaLiB -12h3 / brigade of soldiers

# 12                         

> kitaAob, $N300 -m-FvEvvL -FuEuL -123 / book
> ktb, $V3 -FaEaLa -yaFoEuLu -123 / write
> Inktb, $V3 -IinoFaEaLa -yanoFaEiLu -123 / be written
> tkAtb, $V3 -taFaaEaLa -yataFaaEaL u-123 / write each other
> عِقْدَة ,$N 3ap -f-FvEvL -FiEaL -123 / knot
> كَاْتِب ,$N 300 -g-FvvEvL -FuEEaaL -123 / author, employee
> كَاْتِب ,$N 300 -g-FvvEvL -FaEaLap -123 / employee
> كَتِيْبَة ,$N 3ap -f-FvEvvL -FaEaaLiB -12 h3/ brigade of soldiers
> كِتَاْب ,$N 300 -m-FvEvvL -FuEuL -123 / book
> كتب ,$V 3-FaEaLa -yaFoEuLu -123 / write
> إنكتب ,$V 3-IinoFaEaLa -yanoFaEiLu -123 / be written
> تكاتب ,$V 3-taFaaEaLa -yataFaaEaLu -123 / write each other

In verbal entries, the two patterns are for the perfect and the imperfect. Verb lemma s are encoded without 

diacritics ; the d iacritics are specified in the perfect p attern. 

3.2. Special plurals 

As a simplification, our model does not take into account the traditional marking of a few BP forms as ‘plurals 

of paucity ’. Sibawayh (VIII th century) states that i n a n older stage of Arabic , plural of paucity had been restricted 

to collections of 3 to 10 entities, and other plural forms to collections of more than 10 ; however, at his time, both 

constraint s were commonly overlooked, and many nouns lacked a plural of paucity (F errando, 2002 :5 ). Native 

speakers accept a ‘non -paucity’ BP after cardinal numbers from 3 to 10 , even when the noun also has a plural of 

paucity :

عليه أن يختار ثال أماكن ) + أمكنة ( ثة        

> Ealayhi Ono yaxotaAr valaAvapu (Oamokinapin + OamaAkina)
> on him to choose three (places+pauc + places)

‘He must choose three places’ 

(أيادي + أيدي  )َ عليه أن يختار أربع         

> Ealayhi Ono yaxotaAr OarobaEa (Oayodin + OayaAdi )
> on him to choose four (hands+pauc + hands)

‘He must choose four hands’ 

In addition, the delimitation of plural of paucity is fuzzy . Four BP patterns are associated to plurals of paucity, 

but they also generate non -paucity BPs . Grammars give examples of plurals of paucity , but never exhaustive 

inventories .

We do not mark ‘plurals of plurals’ either. Plurals of plurals in TM , as OamaAkin ‘places’, are supposedly 

obtained by morphologically pluralizing a BP, here Oamokinap ‘places’, which is re -pluralized on the same 

model as zawobaEap ‘tornado ’/zawaAbiE ‘tornados ’. In our model, OamaAkin ‘places’ is directly related to the 

singular makaAn ‘place’. 

As a rule , the PRIM taxonomy gives only one plural of a given lexical entry : w hen several plurals are observed, 

they are assigned to distinct entries, no matter whether they are equivalent or not , as in examples (86), (97) and 

(119) . Neme (2011 :7 ) discusses the same problem for verbs. When several entries generate identical singular 

forms, the Unitex system removes duplicates. 

3.3. Interpretation of codes 

The main 3 codes in a PRIM entry for a BP noun, as FvEvL -FiEaL -123 in (b), correspond to 3 independent 

taxonomies which, crossed tog ether, are sufficient to identify the generation of a broken plural. 

The linguistic interpretation of these codes correspond to three conceptual steps in generat ing a BP from a 

lemma such as Euq odap ‘knot’: extract the surface root of the lemma, here Eqd ; find out the surface root for the 

BP, which is unchanged here; and combine it with the BP pattern, which gives Euq ad ‘knots’. 

The first step matches the singular -pattern code, here FvEvL , with Euqodap , to obtain Eqd :13 

Stem Euq odap ‘knot’  qabow  ‘cave ’َ ق ْ بو

Singular -pattern code FvEvL FvEvL 

Surface root  of singular  E q d q b w

The second step applies root alternations 14 encoded in the root code, if any , as is the case with 12y , the root code 

of qabow ‘cave’ :

Surface root of singular  Eqd  qb w

Root code 123 12 y

Surface root of BP  Eqd  qby 

The third step combines the surface root with the BP pattern :

Surface root of BP  E q d q b y

BP pattern FuEaL OaFoEiLap 

BP stem  Euq ad  ‘knots’  Oaqobiyap  ‘caves’  أقبية 

Lemmas with a geminated consonant are a little more complex. In Arabic script, the G diacritic notes the 

geminat ion of the preceding consonant. For example, MidGap ‘trouble’ is to be read as if it were spelt 

*Midodap . The silent diacritic o, which mark s the absence of vowel (cf. Section 2) , is not used when G is used. 

In this word, the singular -pattern code FvEvL implies that the geminated consonant corresponds to two slots in 

the root . The gemination is assigned to the root :                

> gloss sg .stem PRIM codes sg. root in Arabic
> 1trouble MidGap FvEvL -FaEaaLiB -12h2 Mdd شدّة شدائد
> 2luck HaZG FvEvL -FuEuuL -122 HZZ حظ ّ حظوظ

In sulGam ‘ladder’, the geminated consonant corresponds to a single slot in the root , which is represented by a 

repeated letter in FvEEvL . The gemination is assigned to the pattern:      

> 3ladder sulGam FvEEvL -FaEaaLiB -1223 slm سُلَّم سَاللِم

The choice between the two analyses is determined by observing other forms and specified in the singular -

pattern code .

In the Unitex implementation of PRIM, the three conceptual steps described above are performed simultaneously 

by inflectional transducers , as in Silberztein (1998). For example, in the transducer for inflectional class N3ow -

m-FvEvL -OaFoEiLap -12y , which is the class of  qabow  ‘cave’, they are performed by formula  Oa1o 2iy , where  1

and  2 refer to the positions of root letters in the lemma,  y is the value of the  other  root letter in the plural, and the 

remaining symbols  correspond to  the BP pattern ; t he  -ap  suffix in the pattern  is specified in another part of the 

transducer , because it undergoes spelling variations in the presence of a clitic pronoun. 

3.4. Encoding nouns 

Encoding a noun consists of writing the stem of its lemma in fully d iacritiz ed form, and assigning it a code as in 

(b) (with the lemma in Arabic script) , so as to generate t he correct forms of the plural :15 

(b)  Euqodap, $N3ap -f-FvEvL -FuEaL -123 

It is important that the stem is fully d iacritiz ed, since digits in inflectional transducers refer to the position of root 

letters. Each basic letter, except the last of the stem, is followed by a single diacritic, which is either a short 

vowel: a, u, i , or the void diacritic o. Thus, all root letters correspond to odd positions. The only exceptions are 

after a geminate consonant, which is transcribed as in example (3 ): the 3 rd root letter, m, is in position 6 .                     

> 14 We term as ‘root alternations ’ any changes in the surface value of root letters, as in qabow ‘cave’ وبْ قَ and Oaqobiyap ‘caves ’أقبية ,
> or in the number of root letters, as in TaAbiE ‘stamp’ طابع and TawaAbiE ‘stamps ’طوابع (cf. Section 5) .
> 15 Computer aiding could be devised to assist encoders, but might have perverse effects, e.g. inciting them to systematically accept
> suggestions, even if they are inconsistent with previously encoded entries .

# 14 

The choice of a code is not a deterministic process, because analysis in root and pattern is in general not 

deterministic (cf. (1)-(3) above, and Section 4.1 ). Traditional morphology provides rules for reducing 

indeterminacy. Our taxonomy complies with rules which are widely known by Arabic speakers : for example, 

triliteral roots take precedence over biliteral roots. However, we disregard rules that depend on scholarly or 

diachronic knowledge , when this reduces the number of classes or simplifies the task of assigning a class to a 

lexical item. 

4. Conflation of pa tterns 

In order to make the PRIM taxonomy of BPs simpler than the traditional one, we merged classes by conflating 

patterns without loss of information. W e illustrate this in the following examples. 

4.1. Singular patterns 

The PRIM models substitutes singular -pattern codes, e.g. FvEvL , to the traditionally used singular patterns, e.g. 

Fi EoLap . The PRIM singular -pattern codes are less numerous than singular patterns because they dispense with 

unnecessary information. Their on ly purpose is to be matched with lemmas, e.g. Euqodap , to obtain their surface 

root s, here Eqd :

Stem  Euq odap  ‘knot’ 

Singular -pattern code FvEvL 

Surface root of singular  E q d

The singular -pattern code cannot be dispensed of completely . Some nouns have more than three root consonants :

the singular -pattern code FvEvLvB , matched with diroham ‘dirham’  درهم  , extracts the  root  drhm . The difference 

between the two surface forms  Euq odap  and  diroham  would not be easy to tell without these codes. 

Similarly, some noun lemmas have a long vowel, which is assigned either to the root or to the pattern . In 

Miyomap ‘honour’  شيمة , the  iy  sequence  16  notes the long vowel [i:] ; t he  FvEvL  code implies that the root is 

Mym . T he root letter  y is  realis ed as a long  vowel . In contrast, in  sabiyol  ‘road’  سبيل  , the  FvEvvL  code points to 

the root  sbl . The long vowel  belongs to the pattern .

Thus, simplified singular pattern s such as FvEvL , FvEvLvB , FvEEvL or FvEvvL specif y the number of root 

letters, th e position of pattern -assigned long vowels , and the position of pattern -assigned geminations of root 

letters . They are sufficie nt to deduce the singular root. 

Representing o, the silent diacritic, by v, a symbol for a short vowel, might seem paradoxical, but it is natural to 

Arabic speakers. 

4.1.1. Omission of vowel quality 

The quality of the vowels is not specified because it is not necessary. This reduces the number of classes in the 

singular -pattern taxonomy, without loss of generative power. In the following examples, 6 singular patterns 

distinguished by TM are conflated into a single code in the PRIM model:                          

> 16 In Arabic script, th e letters yand wcode the semi vowels [j w] or the long vowels [i: u:], depending on context. When yis preceded
> by aor u, it codes [j]; when wis preceded by aor i, it codes [w]. The long vowels [i: u:] are coded iy and uw . This system codes
> alternations between [i: u:] and [j w] .The silent diacritic o, which notes the absence of vowel between two basic letters (cf. Section 2),
> is usually omitted after long vowels ( iy ,uw ,aA ), even when writers intend to fully diacritize their text. However, the PRIM model
> requires that it be present in lemmas, so that the convention given in Section 3.4 is respected, and roots with semivowels do not require
> separate classes. For the sake of consistency, from here on, this diacritic will be explicitly scripte d in our examples.

# 15 

gloss sing. plural TM p atterns PRIM codes Arabic 

4 spirit nafos nufuwos FaEoL -FuEuuL FvEvL -FuEuuL -123  نفس نفوس 

5 luck HaZG HuZuwoZ  Fa EoL-FuEuuL  Fv EvL-FuEuuL -122  حظ ّ حظوظ 

6 stem jiJoE juJuwoE FiEoL -FuEuuL FvEvL -FuEuuL -123  جَذع جذوع 

7 load Humol Humuwolap FuEoL -FuEuuLap FvEvL -FuEuuLap -123  حُمْل حمولة 

8 mountain jabal jibaAol FaEaL -FiEaaL FvEvL -FiEaaL -123  جَبل جبال 

9 shoulder katif OakotaAof FaEiL -OaFoEaaL FvEvL -OaFoEaaL -123  كتف أكتاف 

10 man rajul rijaAol FaEuL -FiEaaL FvEvL -FiEaaL -123  رجل رجال 

When triliteral nouns have a long vowel in the singular pattern , it may occur in any of the two positions between 

root letters: 

gloss sing. plural TM patterns PRIM codes Arabic 

11 friend SaAoHib OaSoHaAob FaaEiL -OaFoEaaL FvvEvL -OaFoEaaL -123  صاحب أصحاب 

12 film fiyolom OafolaAom N/A -OaFoEaaL FvvEvL -OaFoEaaL -123  أفالم فيلم 

13 book kitaAob kutub FiEaaL -FuEuL FvEvvL -FuEuL -123  كتاب كتب 

14 messenger rasuwol rusul FaEuuL -FuEuL FvEvvL -FuEuL -123  رسول رسل 

15 road sabiyol subul FaEiiL -FuEuL FvEvvL -FuEuL -123  سبيل سبل 

The Arabic word for ‘film’ (12 ) is a loan world, so the pattern of the singular is anomalous and not listed in TM. 

The 5 cases are conflated to 2 singular -pattern codes. 

In quadriliteral nouns, a long vowel may occur after the third root letter of the singular, or sometimes after the 

se cond: 

16 statue timovaAol tamaAoviyol FaEoLaaB -FaEa aLiiB FvEvLvvB -FaEaaLiiB -1234  تمثال تماثيل 

17 bird EaSofuwor EaSaAofiyor FaEoLuuB -FaEa aLiiB FvEvLvvB -FaEaaLiiB -1234  عصفور عصافير 

18 light qanodiyol qanaAodiyol FaEoLiiB -FaEa aLiiB FvEvLvvB -FaEaaLiiB -1234  قنديل قناديل 

19 bishop muToraAon mataAorinap FuEoL aa B-FaEaaLiBap FvEvLvvB -FaEaaLiBap -1234  مطران مطارنة 

20 sample namuwoJaj namaAoJij FaEuuLaB -FaEaaLiB FvEv vLvB -FaEaaLiB -1234  نموذج نماذج 

4.1.2. Omission of suffixes 

Some singular nouns have a suffix which disappears in the plural. Traditional morphology includes this singular 

suffix in the singular pattern: 

21 knot Euq od ap Euq ad Fu EoL ap -FuEaL FvEvL -FuEaL -123  عقدة عِقد 

22 bomb qunobul ap qanaAobil FuEoLuB ap -FaEaaLib FvEvLvB -FaEaaLiB -1234  قنبلة قنابل 

23 school madoras ap madaAoris maFoEaL ap -maFaaEiL FvEvLvB -FaEaaLiB -1234  مدرسة مدارس 

24 whore MaromuwoT ap MaraAomiyoT FaEoLuuB ap -FaEaaLiib FvEvLvvB -FaEaaLiB -1234  رموطة شراميط ش

Such information is unnecessary for producing the broken plural, since the suffix is absent from it. Our model 

does not specify the suffix in the singular -pattern code, which is generally conflated with a code for noun s

without suffix in the singular. Th is simplification of the BP taxonomy affects many lexical items. The suffix -ap 

is generally the singul ar suffix for feminine forms (2 1-24). 

The suffix -iyG and its feminine counterpart -iyGap are typical singular suffix es for human nouns (and 

adjectives) derived from nouns . Most of such nouns and adjectives pluralize with a sound plural suffix such as -

uwona or -aAoT , but others take a BP:                           

> 25 soldier junod iyG junuwod FuEoL iyy -FuEuuL FvEvL -FuEuuL -123 جندي َ جنود
> 26 copt quboT iyG OaqobaAoT FuEoL iyy -OaFoEaaL FvEvL -OaFoEaaL -123 قبطي َ أقباط
> 27 foreigner Oajonab iyG OajaAonib FaEoLaB iyy -FaEaaLiB FvEvLvB -FaEaaLiB -1234 أجنبي َ أجانب
> 28 barbar barobar iyG baraAobirap FaEoLaB iyy -FaEaaLiBap FvEvLvB -FaEaaLiBap -1234 بربري ّ برابرة
> 29 zionist Sahoyuwon iyG SahaAoyinap FaEoLuuB iyy -FaEaaLiBap FvEvLvvB -FaEaaLiBap -1234 صهيوني َ صهاينة

The following non -derived nouns illustrate the same situation:             

> 30 rifle bunoduq iyGap banaAodiq FuEoLuB iyyap -FaEaaLiB FvEvLvB -FaEaaLiB -1234 بُنْدُقِيَّة بَنادِق
> 31 turtle suloHaf aAop salaAoHif FuEoLaB aap -FaEaaLiB FvEvLvB -FaEaaLiB -1234 سُلَحْفاة سَالحِف

4.2. Broken -plural patterns 

Most BP patterns in the PRIM taxonomy are the same as in traditional morphology. However, a few differences 

come from our choice to handle patterns and roots at the surface level. 16 

The BP of miqaSG ‘scissors’ has two occurrences of the same consonant separated by i:             

> gloss sing. plural TM patterns PRIM codes Arabic
> 32 scissors miqaSG maqaAo SiSmiFaE oL-maFaaEi LFvEvLvB -FaEaa LiB-1233 مَقاصص ّمَقص

Some nouns behave in the same way, except that the two occurrences of the consonant are optionally (33 -34 ) or 

obligatorily ( 35 -36 ) replaced by a geminated consonant :                           

> 33 porcupine lutunGap lataAo ninFuEuLLap -FaEaa LiLFvEvL -FaEaa LiB-1233 لتانِن لتنَّة
> 34 porcupine lutunGap lataAo nG FuE uLLap -FaEaa LiLFvEvL -FaEaa LiB-123 Gّلتان لتنَّة
> 35 mission muhimGap mahaAo mG muF oEiL ap -maFaa EiLFvEvLvB -FaEaa LiB-123 Gّمهمَّة مَهام
> 36 substance maA od Gap ma waA odG FaaEiLap -Fawaa EiLFvvEvL -FaEaa LiB-1w22 ّمواد مادَّة

Traditional morphology views these form s as the result of the application of a rule that erases i between two 

occurrences of the same consonant : “The plural mawaadd is the form that the plural pattern fawaaEil takes in 

geminate nouns because of the phonological restriction on sequences that inc lude a vowel between identical 

consonants: *mawaadid –> mawaadd . It is diptote (CaCaaCiC pattern)” (Ryding, 2005:471). In fact, t he 

conditions of application of th e rule are also lexical: it does not apply in (e), wh ile it applies optionally in (33 -34 )

and obligatorily in ( 35 -36 ). Therefore, we account for this morphophonological variation through inflectional 

class es .

In the BP of (34 )-(35 ), t he surface pattern actually handled by the PRIM transducers , FaEaaLoB , differs from 

the traditional deep patterns which contain i. In this case, our option for surface patterns tends to increase the 

number of distin ct patterns, and to separate (33) -(35 ) from (32 ) in the pattern taxonomy. In order to avoid this 

effect , we inc luded t he deep pattern label FaEaaLiB in the PRIM inflectional codes . Thus, they sound more 

familiar to Arabic speakers , because they comply with the deep patterns of traditional morphology taugh t in 

school. The forbidden, optional or obligatory geminated consonant is encoded by the respective root codes 1233 ,

123 G and 1w22 .

When the BP surface patterns differ from traditional deep patterns, because of morphophonological constraint s

or variations , the deep pattern label is used in the inflectional code, and the surface pattern in the transducer 

associated to it . Thus, the pattern labels us ed in inflectional codes are relatively intuitive .

In the following case, we use the same method to conflate BP patterns labels. Some triliteral lemmas have the 

suffix -iy appended to the root in the BP :      

> 37 night layol ap layaAol iy FaEoLap -FaEaaLiy FvEvL -FaEaaLiB -123 yليلة ليالي

The following noun s are  similar, except  for  a free variation between  -iy  and  -aY , where  Y is an allograph of final 

A:                        

> 38 desert SaHor aAoc SaHaAor iyFaEoL aac -FaEaaLiB FvEvL -FaEaaLiB -123 yصحراء صحاري
> 39 desert SaHor aAoc SaHaAor aYFaEoL aac -FaEaaL aY FvEvL -FaEaaLiB -123 Yصحراء صحارى
> 40 complaint Makow aY MakaAow iy FaEoL aY -FaEaaLaY FvEvL -FaEaaLiB -123y يشكوى شكاو
> 41 complaint Makow aY MakaAow aY FaEoL aY -FaEaaLaY FvEvL -FaEaaLiB -123Y شكوى شكاوى

The noun EaJoraAoc ‘virgin’ has obligatorily -aY :      

> 42 virgin EaJor aAoc EaJaAor aY FaEoL aac -FaEaaLaY FvEvL -FaEaaLiB -123Y عذراء عذارى

The BP surface pattern actually handled  in the implementation details of  the PRIM transducers  for (39 ), (41 ) and 

(42 ) is  FaEaaLaB . However, it is natural to  Arabic speakers  to consider  it  as  a superficial  allomorph of 

FaE aa LiB , which  is  a regular  BP  pattern : the fact that t he sequence  iY  cannot occur in Arabic explains the 

surface forms in  aY . We adopted the pattern  label  FaE aa LiB  in  the inflectional code,  in  order to  reduce the 

number of pattern labels and to keep  the encoding of  these noun s intuitive.  The quality of the long vowel in the 

suffix is encoded in the root code  123Y .

The same situation occurs in the following examples, with the suffixes -aAon in the singular and -aY in the BP:              

> 43 drunk sakor aAon sakaAor aY FaEoL aan -FaEaaLaY FvEvL -FaEaaLiB -123Y سكارى سكران
> 44 Christian naSor aAoniyG naSaAor aY FaEoL aaniyy -FaEaaLaY FvEvL -FaEaaLiB -123Y نصارى ّنصراني

# 17 

and in the following BPs with the -aA ending :                        

> 45 corner zaAow iyap zawaAoyaA FaaEiLap -FaEaayaA FvvEvL -FaEaaLiB -12yA زاوية زوايا
> 46 mirror miroCp maraAoyaA miFoEaLap -maFaayaA FvEvL -FaEaaLiB -12yA مرآة مرايا
> 47 intention niyGap nawaAoyaA FiEoLap -FaEaayaA FvEvL -FaEaaLiB -1wyA نيّة نوايا
> 48 feature miyoz ap mazaAoyaA FiEoLap -FaEaayaA FvEvL -FaEaaLiB -13yA ميزة مزايا

The sequence iA cannot occur in Arabic, which explains the surface forms in aA . The quality of the long vowel 

in the suffix is encoded in the root codes . In example (46) , the character  C ( آ ) is an  obligatory substitute for the 

sequence  OaA o.

Example (37 ) pose s a segmentation problem. Recall that TM , most analysers and PRIM exclude from the pattern 

the case and definiteness suffixes. PRIM appends these suffixes to the root/pattern combination during the 

generation of inflected forms (cf. Section 8.2). In general, these suffixes have little variation depending on 

lexical entries , and little interaction with the end of the root and pattern. In the case of (37) layaAol iy ‘nights’ ,

the iy ending is removed in the indefinite n ominative and genitive layaAol K. We consider the iy ending as a part 

of the pattern ; this ending is removed when the case and definiteness suffixes are appended. Our segmentation is 

conforted by the fact that in other nouns, iy is actually part of the root, as in qaAoDiy ‘judge’ which declines as 

qaAoDK in the indefinite nominative. Our analysis deviat es slightly f ro m tradition and simplif ies it . Accord ing 

to TM, iy is present in underlying form s * layaAol iy N and *layaAol iy K, which are both rewritten as the surface 

form layaAol K, and the ‘citation form’ used to refer to the word is layaAol K, a form without iy .

4.3. Simultaneous conflation of singular and broken -plural patterns 

In the framework of traditional morphology, the analysis of broken plurals is systematically consistent with the 

roots traditionally used for the practical purpose of indexing dictionaries. For instance, t he BP of the derived 

noun miEowal ‘mattock’ is analysed with the root of its derivational base, here Ewl . An inflectional phenomenon 

is thus analysed with a derivational concept. By imposing one of the pieces of the j igsaw (the root) , this practice 

constrains all others, and happens to blur regularities in the system of inflectional patterns. 

For the PRIM model, the objective of consistency with derivational analyses is only secondary to th e simplicity 

of the taxonomy. By relaxing this constraint, we can capture more of the regularity of the inflectional system .

4.3.1. Nouns with m- prefixes 

Many nouns have a ma -, mu - or mi - prefix before a triliteral root. Traditional morphology ex cludes these 

prefixes from the root, and consequently includes them in the pattern, on the basis of the derivational history of 

these words:       

> 49 mattock mi Eowal ma EaAowil mi FoEaL -ma FaaEiL FvEvLvB -FaEaaLiB -1234 معول معاول

The prefix is common to the singular and BP of the derived noun. If we analyse the initial m- as a part of a 

quadriliteral root, most of these nouns enter in independently existing inflectional classes. ‘Initial m(i) -, although 

originally a prefix, is annexed to the root and treated as a C1 as far as BP formation is concerned ’ (Kihm, 

2006:83). For PRIM , the 9 prefixed nouns below inflect ex actly like (A) or (B ):                                                                   

> Adagger xanojar xanaAojir FaEoLaB -FaEaaLiB FvEvLvB -FaEaaLiB -1234 خناجر خنجر
> 50 theater ma soraH ma saAoriH ma FoE aL-ma FaaEiL FvEvLvB -FaEaaLiB -1234 مسرح مسارح
> 51 house ma nozil ma naAozil ma FoE iL-ma FaaEiL FvEvLvB -FaEaaLiB -1234 منزل منازل
> 52 museum mu toHaf ma taAoHif mu FoE aL-ma FaaEiL FvEvLvB -FaEaaLiB -1234 متحف متاحف
> 53 sieve mu noxul ma naAoxil mu FoE uL-ma FaaEiL FvEvLvB -FaEaaLiB -1234 منخل مناخل
> 54 pulpit mi nobar ma naAobir mi FoE aL-ma FaaEiL FvEvLvB -FaEaaLiB -1234 منبر منابر
> Bcluster Eunoquwod EanaAoqiyod FuEoLuuB -FaEaaLiiB FvEvLvvB -FaEaaLiiB -1234 عنقود عناقيد
> 55 letter ma kotuwob ma kaAotiyob ma FoEu uL-ma FaaEiiL FvEvLv vB-FaEaaLiiB -1234 مكتوب مكاتيب
> 56 gutter mi zoraAob ma zaAoriyob mi FoEaaL -ma FaaEiiL FvEvLv vB-FaEaaLiiB -1234 مزراب مزاريب
> 57 poor mi sokiyon ma saAokiyon mi FoEiiL -ma FaaEiiL FvEvLv vB-FaEaaLiiB -1234 مسكين مساكين
> 58 napkin mi nod iy ol ma naAodiyol mi FoEiiL -ma FaaEiiL FvEvLv vB-FaEaaLiiB -1234 منديل مناديل

# 18 

The only reasons to discriminate them are alien to inflectional morphology. In the traditional analysis, both the 

singular and BP patterns explicitly contain the prefix, which makes them specific to this set of nouns. Even if we 

strip the prefix off the patterns, we do not always obtain triliteral patterns observable in other BP nouns .

Th erefore, th e traditional analysis increase s the number of patterns. By implementing the alternative analysis, 

PRIM conflates simultaneously the singular pattern and the BP pattern with those of (A) or (B ), which simplifies 

the taxonomy .

Th e following examples are less regular, but also follow independently observed patterns :                                    

> 59 building mabonaY mabaAoniy maFoEaL -maFaaEiL FvEvLvB -FaEaaLiB -123y مبنى مباني
> 60 school madorasap madaAoris maFoEaLap -maFaaEiL FvEvLvB -FaEaaLiB -1234 مدرسة مدارسة
> 61 tragedy maOosaAop maCaAosiy maFoEaLap -maFaaEiL FvEvLvB -FaEaaLiB -1h3y مأساة مآسي
> 62 foreigner OajonabiyG OajaAonib FaEoLaBiyy -FaEaaLiB FvEvLvB -FaEaaLiB -1234 أجنبي أجانب
> 63 appointment mawoEid mawaAoEiyod maFoEiL -maFaaEiiL FvEvLvB -FaEaaLiiB -1234 مَوْعِد مَواعِيد
> 64 starling zurozur zaraAo ziyo rFuEoL uB-FaEaaLiiB FvE vLvB -FaEaaLiiB -1234 زرزور زرازير

In example (61), the character C ( آ ) is an obligatory substitute for the sequence  OaA o. The morphology of 

nouns with  ma -, mu - or  mi - prefix relates them with verb participles.  The ir  derivational patterns  are traditionally 

labelled  with semantic features of patient, e.g.  [ktb & maFoEuuL]= makotuwob 

مكتوب  ‘letter ’,  derived from the 

triliteral root  ktb  ‘write’, or of instrument, e.g.  [zrb & miFoEaaL] = mizoraAob 

مزراب  ‘gutter ’,  derived from 

zrb  ‘flow’. Some of these nouns denote places, e.g.  [nzl & maFoEiL] = manozil  ‘house’  منزل  , from  nzl  ‘go 

down’. 

4.3 .2. Other cases of diachronically motivated morphological segmentation 

In a similar way, some nouns with 4 consonants are traditionally analysed as triliteral, by assigning one of the 

consonants to the pattern, usually because of a diachronical relation of the noun with a triliteral root, or for some 

other etymological reason . These nouns can usually be traced back to roots through derivational patterns for 

participles, deverbal nouns, instrumental nouns… The consonants thus discarded from the root are often s, n, t, 

h, m, w, y  or the glottal stop [ ʔ], noted by the allographs  c, O, e, W  and  I (ء, أ, ئـ , ؤ , إ) depending on context .

Some of these consonants are  more likely to be discarded  if they occur in some position in relation to the  root .

We list below  8 examples of such nouns. If analysed as quadriliteral, all enter in the independently existing 

inflectional class of  TarobuwoM  ‘tarboosh’ (C ), just as if they were synchronically reanalysed as quadriliteral 

nouns for inflectional purposes:                                              

> gloss singular plural TM patterns PRIM codes Arabic
> Ctarboosh TarobuwoM TaraAobiyoM FaEoLuuB -FaEaaLiiB FvEvLvvB -FaEaaLiiB -1234 طربوش طرابيش
> 65 expression taEobiyor taEaAobiyor taFoEiiL -taFaaEiiL FvEvLvvB -FaEaaLiiB -1234 تعبير تعابير
> 66 week OusobuwoE OasaAobiyoE OuFoEuuL -OaFaaEiiL FvEvLvvB -FaEaaLiiB -1234 أسبوع أسابيع
> 67 pumpkin yaqoTiyon yakaAoTiyon yaFoEiiL -yaFaaEiiL FvEvLvvB -FaEaaLiiB -1234 يقطين يقاطين
> 68 nostril xayoMuwom xayaAoMiyom FayoEuuL -FayaaEiiL FvEvLvvB -FaEaaLiiB -1234 خيشوم خياشيم
> 69 pig xanoziyor xanaAoziyor FanoEiiL -FanaaEiiL FvEvLvvB -FaEaaLiiB -1234 خنزير خنازير
> 70 address EunowaAon EanaAowiyon FuEowaaL -FaEaawiiL FvEvLvvB -FaEaaLiiB -1234 عنوان عناوين
> 71 coffin taAobuwot tawaAobiyot FaEoLuut -FaEaaLiit FvEvLvvB -FaEaaLiiB -1234 تابوت توابيت
> 72 plant rayoHaAon rayaAoHiyon FaEoLaan -FaEaaLiin FvEvLvvB -FaEaaLiiB -1234 ريحان رياحين

(65 ) is a deverbal noun with the derivational pattern taFoEiiL related to the verbal pattern FaEEaLa .

(66 ) OusobuwoE  أسبوع  ‘week ’ is  related to  saboE  سبع  ‘seven ’. 

In ( 67 ) and ( 68 ), y is considered exterior to the root, probably for some etymological reason .

In (69 ) xa noziyor  خنزير  ‘pig ’,  there is no agreement in  traditional  dictionaries such  as  Ibn Manzur (1290)  and 

Al -Fairuzabadi (v. 1400):  dictionar ies  consider  the  n in this word as a roo t consonant  or not, because  an n after 

the 1 st  root letter may have a special value. 

In (70 ), w after the 2 nd root letter may have a special value, and EunawaAon ‘address’ may be related to the 

triliteral root EnY 

عنى  ‘signify ’.19 

(71 ) ends with -uwot , a suffix of Aramaic origin, so the final t is not considered a root consonant . However, 

Tarabay (2003) classif ies it in both FaEoL uut -FaEaaL iit and FaEoLuu B-FaEaaLii B.

In (72 ), -aAon is a suffix, so the final n is not considered a root consonant. 

The assignment of a consonant to the patterns by traditional morphology mak es the patterns of examples ( 68 -70 )

distant from typical inflectional patterns for nouns, in which phonetic consonants sometimes occu r before the 1 st 

root letter, as in OaFoEaaL (cf . (11 -12 ), Section 4.1.1) , or after the last, as in FaEoLap (cf. (3 6), Section 4.2) ,

but not between root letters , be it in the singular or in the BP . In the PRIM taxonomy, w e analyse (65) -(72 ) as 

quadriliteral as far as inflection is concerned. 

5. Root alternation s

The root letters of most BPs have the same surface form as those of the singular , as in Euq odap ‘knot’ vs. Euq ad 

‘knots’ . Other BPs show root alternations, i.e.  changes in the  surface  value of root letters, as in  qabow  ‘cave’  vs. 

Oaqobiyap  ‘caves’ , or in the number of root letters, as in  TaAobiE  ‘stamp’  طابع  vs.  TawaAobiE  ‘stamp s’ طوابع  .

In the PRIM model,  root alternations are  represent ed  by  a mapping between  surface  root s from  the singular to 

the BP . Th is mapping is  specified  in a straightforward way  by  root codes , a new  device .

5.1. Bypassing deep roots and rules 

In traditional morphology, most root alternations are obtained by applying rules to deep stems. This model has 

two major drawback s. First, rules are not very adequate for a phenomenon with such lexical dependency as BP ;

the few authors that formalized the rules of traditional morphology (Beesley, 1996; Habash, Rambow, 2006; 

Smrž, 2007) did not publish them in a readable , updatable way . Second , deep roots are not directly observable, 

which compl icat es decisions about what their e xact value should be . We abandoned this model for root codes, a 

new device that simplifies the encoding of lexical items, as the following examples show. 

5.1.1. Morphophonological alternation s of the 2 nd root letter 

Some nouns with BP are analysed with the ir 2nd root letter realis ed as A in the singular, and as w or y in the 

plural:                     

> gloss sing. plural root and patterns (TM) PRIM codes in Arabic
> 73 door ba Aob Oabo waAob bwb FaEoL -OaFoEaaL FvEvL -OaFoEaaL -1w3أبواب باب
> 74 tooth na Aob Oano yaAob nyb FaEoL -OaFoEaaL FvEvL -OaFoEaaL -1y3ناب أنياب

Traditional morphology describes this with the aid of a deep root, displayed in the examples above just before 

the TM patterns : bwb , nyb . In the deep root, the 2 nd root letter is the consonant observed in the plural and in 

derived words. Morphophonological rules change this letter to A in the singular , and leave it unchanged in the 

plural .

In the PRIM model, we specify the presence of w or y as the 2 nd letter of the surface form of the BP root , through 

the root codes displayed in the examples above at the end of the PRIM codes: 1w3 , 1y3 . The surrounding slots 

are represented in the root code, as usual, by a digit corresponding to their rank. W e sti ck to directly observable 

facts . The transducer associated to the inflectional code generates w or y at the position of the 2 nd letter root in 

the BP. The root code specifies the value of BP root letters when they differ from the corresponding singular root 

letters . As a simplification, the value of the 2 nd letter in the plural is encoded in the root code whenever it is y, w,

a glottal stop [ʔ], or A. This is not strictly necessary for the generation of the plural of suwor ‘wall ’, which is 

OasowaAor , since root code 123 would yield the same result as 1w3, but it simplifies the manual encoding of 

entries. 

The following example illustrates the converse situation. The 2 nd root letter y is replaced by A in the plural:               

> glos ssingular plural TM root and patterns PRIM codes in Arabic
> 75 politician si yaAos iyG sa Aosap sys FiEaaL iyy -FaAoLap FvEvvL -FaEolap -1A3 َ ساسة سياسي

# 20 

When the 2 nd root letter of a triliteral noun is realised in the singular as [ ʔ], the corresponding letter in the plural 

may be, unpredictably, [ ʔ], y, w or A:                              

> gloss singular plural TM root and patterns PRIM codes in Arabic
> 76 sad baAoeis baOasap bcs FaaEiL -FaEaLap FvvEvL -FaEaLap -1h 3بائس بأسة
> 77 betrayer xaAoe in xa wanap xwn FaaEiL -FaEaLap FvvEvL -FaEaLap -1w3خائن خونة
> 78 undecided Ha Aoeir Ha yarap Hyr FaaEiL -FaEaLap FvvEvL -FaEaLap -1y3حائر حيرة
> 79 seller ba AoeiE ba AoEap byE FaaEiL -FaEoLap FvvEvL -FaEoLap -1A3باعة بائع

The letters c and O note allographs of the glottal stop [ʔ]. Traditional morphol ogy postulates deep roots. In (79 ), 

the underlying y of the deep root occurs neither in the singular nor in the plural; rules change it to e in the 

singular and to A in the BP. 

We encode the 2 nd root letter of the plural in the root code: 1h3, 1w3, 1y3, 1A3 . In root codes, the symbol  h

stands for [ ʔ].  There are much less distinct root codes in the PRIM model than roots in TM: all the deep roots of 

triliteral nouns with alteration of the 2 nd  root letter conflate to the 4 code roots cited above. 

5.1.2. Morphophonological alternations of the 3 rd root letter 

The situation is the same for nouns which alter their 3 rd root letter. In the BP, this letter is realised as y or c, or as 

the long vowel [ a:], noted A or Y:                                                                                      

> gloss sing. plur al TM root and patterns PRIM codes in Arabic
> 80 organ EuD ow OaEoDaAo cED -FuEo w-OaFoEaaL FvEvL -OaFoEaaL -12h عُضْو أَعْضاء
> 81 cloth za yG OazoyaAo czy -FaE E-OaFoEaaL FvEvL -OaFoEaaL -12h ّ أَزْياء زِي
> 82 climate jawG OajowaAoc jw -FaEE -OaFoEaaL FvEvL -OaFoEaaL -12h جو ّ أجواء
> 83 enemy Ead uwG OaEodaAo cEd -FaEuuw -Oa FoEaaL FvEvvL -OaFoEaaL -12h عدو ّ أعداء
> 84 cave qab ow Oaqobi yap qb -FaEow -OaFoEiLap FvEvL -OaFoEiLap -12y قبو أقبية
> 85 pot wiEaAo cOawoEi yap wE -FiEaac -OaFoEiLap FvEvvL -OaFoEiLap -12y وعاء أوعية
> 86 boy fata Yfuto yaAon ft -FaEaY -FuEoLaan FvEvL -FuEoLaan -12y فتى فتيان
> 87 boy fata Yfito yap ft -Fa EaY -FiEoLap FvEvL -FiEoLap -12y فتى فتي ة
> 88 judge qaAo Diyqu DaAop qD -FaaEiy -FuEaap FvvEvL -FuEoLap -12A قـَاضِي قـُضَاة
> 89 jewel Hilo yap Hila YHl -FiEoyap -FaEaY FvEvL -FiEaL -12Y حلًى حلية
> 90 step xuTo wap xuTa YxT -FuEowa p-FuEaY FvEvL -FuEaL -12Y خطوة خطى

Since scholars may disagree on the value of the 3 rd letter of the traditional deep root, we omit it above. In the 

PRIM model, the surface value of the 3 rd root letter in the plural is encoded in the root code whenever it is y, [ ʔ], 

A or Y:              

> 91 valley waAod iy Oawodi yap wd -FaaEiL -OaF oEiLap FvvEvL -OaFoEiLap -12y وادي أودية
> 92 pastor raAoEi yruEo yaAon rE -FaaEiL -FuEoLaan FvvEvL -FuEoLaan -12y راع يرعيان

5.1. 3. Orthograph ic alternation s of  glottal stop  in  root s

Roots with the glottal stop  [ʔ] undergo purely orthographic  alternations. The glottal stop [ ʔ] has 6 allographs in 

the Arabic alphabet:  c, e, W, O, I and  C (ء, أ, ئـ , ؤ , إ, آ) . In general, the choice of the allograph depends on 

orthographic context, and  in particular on the preceding and following vowels. 17  For example, an initial [ ʔ] is 

written  O ( أ ) when it is followed by  a or  u, and  I ( إ ) when followed by i. The character C ( آ ) is an obligatory 

substitute for the sequence s OaA o and  OaOo . The allog raphs can be different between the singular and the 

plural, because they are inserted in different patterns :           

> 93 kettle Iiboriyoq OabaAoriyoq IiFoEiiL -OaFaaEiiL FvEvLvvB -FaEaaLiiB -h234 إبريق أباريق
> 94 African IiforiyoqiyG OafaAoriqap IiFoEiiLiyG -OaFaaEiLap FvEvLvvB -FaEaaLiBap -h234 إفريقي أفارقة

Because of these spelling changes, we systematically register in root codes the presence of [ ʔ]. In root codes, the 

symbol h stands for [ ʔ]. Then, the plural pattern is sufficient to determin e the allograph in the BP:  

> 17

In some configurations, no standard is actually applied to determine the allograph, and practice depends on regions and autho rs . I n

Arabic dialects, initial [ ʔ] admits phonetic variants, and some of them may have an influence on spelli ng in Modern Standard Arabic. 21                              

> 95 trouble ma Oozaq ma Cziq ma FoEaL -ma FaaEiL FvEvLvB -Fa EaaLiB -1h34 مأزق مآزق
> 96 twin ta woOam tawaAo eim Fa woEaL -Fa waaEi LFvEvLvB -FaEaa LiB -12 h4توءم توائم
> 97 congrat .tahonieap tahaAonie taFoEiLap -taFaaEiL FvEvLvB -FaEaaLiB -123h تهنئة تهانئ
> 98 principle ma boda OmabaAodi ema FoEaL -ma FaaEiL FvEvLvB -FaEaaLi B-123 hمبدأ مبادئ
> 99 pearl lu Wolu Wla Cli eFuEoFuE -FaEaaFiE FvEvLvB -Fa EaaLi B-1h3hلؤلؤ آللئ

The correct allograph of [ ʔ] is inserted by the transducer associated to the inflectional code. It is not necessary to 

specify it in the root code, since it depends on the context, which is encoded in the BP pattern. 18 

Even when the allograph is the same in the singular and in the plural, we encode the presence of the g lottal stop 

in the root code (1 00 , 101 ). This is not strictly necessary for the generation of the plural, since in such case root 

code 1234 would yield the same result as h234 , but it simplifie s the manual encoding of entries :            

> 100 warehouse OanobaAor OanaAobir Oa FoEaaL -OaFaaEiL FvEvLvvB -FaEaaLiB -h234 أَنْبار أَنابِر
> 101 teacher OusotaAoJ OasaAo tiJap Ou FoEaaL -OaFaaEiLap FvEvLvvB -FaEaaLiBap -h234 أستاذ أساتذة

The allography of [ ʔ] poses problems in stem -final position. The allograph may depend on graphically 

agglutinated pronouns:      

> ruWasaAo ci‘presidents’ رؤساء
> ruWasaAo eihaA ‘its presidents’ رؤسائها

In these examples, the final i is an inflectional suffix and -haA is a clitic pronoun in the genitive. This problem is 

dealt with in  Section  8. 

Nouns with initial [ ʔ] and BP pattern  OaFoEaaL  pose another problem of allography.  In the plural, the 

combination of the root with the pattern  produces an underlying form that begins with the sequence  OaOo . Due 

to morphophonological rules, this initial  sequence  is not pronounced [ ʔaʔ] but [ ʔa: ], and the surface form is not 

scripted  OaOo  or  OaAo , but  C آ :       

> 102 horizon Oufuq CfaAoq FuEuL -OaFoEaaL FvEvL -OaFoEaaL -h23 آفاق أفق

The PRIM transducers actually produce C, but we named the root code h23 and not A23 , to remind the 

underlying  [ʔ]: since  words in Arabic never begin with a long vowel,  it is not natural to Arabic speakers to 

consider that a root begins with  A.

5.1. 4. Biliteral nouns 

There are less than 20 b iliteral nouns in Arabic. When they admit a BP, it is always triliteral , often with the 

addition of a final consonant, generally c:                         

> gloss sing .plural TM root and patterns PRIM codes in Arabic
> 103 blood dam dimaAo cdmc FaE -FiEaaL FvE -FiEaaL -12h دم دماء
> 104 father Oab CbaAo cObw FaE -OaFoEaaL FvE -OaFoEaaL -h2h أب آباء
> 105 brother Oax Iixo wap Oxw FaE -FiEoLap FvE -FiEoLap -h2w أخ إخوة

Traditional morphology generally describes such nouns with a triliteral deep root in which the 3 rd root letter is 

not realised in the singular. Some scholars disagree on this notion of false biliteral, and analyse these roots as 

underlyingly biliteral. The PRIM taxonomy uses a biliteral singular -pattern code. 

A small series of nouns begin with Ii in the singular ,19 and have two ot her consonants ; this initial part is 

pronounced only if the word is preceded by a pause:             

> 106 son Iibon OabonaAoc bnc FoE -OaFoEaaL FvEvL -OaFoEaaL -23h إبن أبناء
> 107 name Iisom OasomaAoc smc FoE -OaFoEaaL FvEvL -OaFoEaaL -23h إسم أسماء

According to traditional morphology, this initial letter does not count as a root letter, so the se nouns are biliteral. 

We encode the m as triliteral.  

> 18

(97) admits an alternative plural,  tahaAoniy , which is assigned to another lexical entry (cf. Section 3.2).  

> 19

Recall that  I is an allograph of  [ʔ].22 

5.2. Shifting information from broken -plural patterns to root codes 

In some cases, traditional morphology accounts for consonant inser tions through special BP patterns such as 

FawaaEi L, FaEaaei L, FaEaayi L (فواعل, فعائل, فعايل ). By encoding  such insertions  in root codes, we reduce the 

number of BP pattern s.

5.2.1. Triliteral lemmas with insertion of y, w or [ ʔ]

The following n oun s ha ve 3 phonetic consonants in the singular , excluding suffixes , and 4 in the BP:                                                              

> gloss sing ular plural TM patterns PRIM codes in Arabic
> 108 stamp TaAobiE Ta waAobiE FaaEiL -Fa waaEiL FvvEvL -FaEaaLiB -1w23 طابع طوابع
> 109 order Oamor Oa waAomir FaEoL -Fa waaEiL FvEvL -FaEaaLiB -1w23 أمر أوامر
> 110 brothel maA oxuwor ma waAoxir FaaEuuL -Fa waaEiL FvvEvvL -FaEaaLiB -1w23 ماخُور مَواخِر
> 111 last Cxir OawaAoxir FaaEiL -FawaaEiL FvvEvL -FaEaaLiB -hw23 آخر أواخر
> 112 revenue EaAoeid EawaAoeid FaaEiL -Fawaa EiL FvvE vL-FaEaaLiB -1wh3 عائد عوائد
> 113 darling Habi yob HabaAo yib FaEiiL -FaEaa yiL FvEvvL -FaEaaLiB -12 y3حبيب حبايب
> 114 old Eajuwoz EajaAoeiz FaEuuL -FaEaaeiL FvEvvL -FaEaaLiB -12h3 عَجُوز عَجَائِز
> 115 first Oa wG al Oa waAo eil FaEEaL -FaEaa eiL FvEEvL -FaEaaLiB -12h3 أوّل أوائل
> 116 angel malaAok malaAoeikap FaEaaL -FaEaaeiLap FvEvvL -FaEaaLiBap -12h3 مالك مالئكة

Traditional morphology postulates that the deep root is the same for all the forms of a lexical entry . In 

consequence , the BP of these nouns ha s to be analyse d with tril iteral roots; the additional consonant can only be 

assigned to the pattern . This generates several additional BP patterns which specify the position and value of the 

additional consonant , as Fa waaEiL . The fact that the additional consonant occurs between the slots for root 

letters in these patterns makes them distant from other inflectional patterns for nouns , as FaEaaLiB . Recall that 

in typical inflectional patterns for nouns, be it in the singular or in the BP, phonetic consonants sometimes occu r

before the 1 st slot , as in OaFoEaaL, or after the last, as in FaEoLap, but not between slot s (Section 4.3.2 ). 

In contrast, if we analyse the nine BPs above (108 -116) with quadriliteral roots, all their pattern s conflate with 

FaEaaLiB and FaEaaLiBap , which are independently needed for other BPs . We adopted this solution for the 

PRIM taxonomy. We use the root code to specify the insertion of the additional consonant in the plural root. 

This analysis simplifies the BP pattern taxonomy by merging classes. It changes the BP patterns, but it remains 

straightforward t o Arabic speakers, since it reuses familiar BP pattern s.

In these nouns, t he position of the additional consonant of the BP is often occupied by a long vowel in the 

singular. For a couple of them, an alternative analysis is possible , in which the singular has a quadriliteral root ,

and one of the root letters codes the long vowel of the singular , as in (117a) :                   

> gloss singular plural TM root and patterns PRIM codes in Arabic
> 117 missile SaA oruw ox Sa waAoriyox Srx FaaEuuL -FawaaEiiL FvvEvvL -FaEaaLiiB -1w2 3صاروخ صواريخ
> 117a Swrx FaEoLuuB -FaEaaLiiB
> 118 wheel duw olaA ob da waAoliyo bdlb FuuEaaL -FawaaEiiL FvvEvvL -FaEaaLiiB -1w23 دوالب دواليب
> 118a dwlb FuEoLaaB -FaEaaLiiB

The two alternative analyses (117) and (117a) do not correspond to distinct interpretations of the form: they are 

two formal accounts for a single linguistic object. This situation requires a choice, so that the morphological 

analysis reports a single anal ysis. Th e soluti on of (117a) has the advantage of being closer to the encoding of 

lemma s with 2 phonetic consonants, such as baAob ‘door’ (Section  5.1.1 ). However,  we opted for the solution of 

(117) which is consistent with (108) -(116).  The availability of several solutions to describe the same 

phenomenon is a  flaw in  a descriptive model. In order to reduce  th is  indeterminacy  in  the encoding of entries,  we 

adopted  the following rule: 

For nouns with at least 3 phonetic consonants in the singular stem , long vowels occurring 

between the first 3 consonants are assigned to the pattern .

For example, as SaA or uw ox ‘missile’ has 3 phonetic consonants S, r and x, the long vowel aA is assigned to the 

pattern , which is specified by picking the singular -pattern code FvvEvvL . This rule leads to familiar patterns : for 

example, FaEaaLiiB , in (117 ) and ( 118 ), is independently needed for other nouns.  The rule does not apply to 23 

baAob ‘door’ since this noun has only 2 phonetic consonants. In this type of nouns , the long vowel between the 

two consonants is unanimously analysed as a root letter. 

Traditional morphology has still another analysi s for similar nouns, adopting the root of their derivational base:                                

> gloss singular plural TMroot patterns PRIM codes in Arabic
> 119 port miyonaAoc ma waAonie ?miFoEaaL -maFaaEiL FvvEvvL -FaEaaLiB -1w2h ميناء موانئ
> 120 scale miy ozaA on ma waAoziyon wzn miFoEaaL -maFaaEiiL FvvEvvL -FaEaaLiiB -1w2 3زان موازين مي
> 121 cave mag aAo rap magaAo wir gwr maFoEiLap -maFaaEiL FvEvvL -FaEaaLiB -12 w3مَغارة مَغاوِر
> 122 defect maE aAo bap maEaAo yib Eyb maFoEaLap -maFaaEiL FvEvvL -FaEaaLiB -12 y3مَعابة مَعايِب

We opted for the solution of (108 -116 ), for the same reasons as in  Section 4.3.1 . 20 

The noun EaAodap ‘habit’ shows, in addition to the insertion of w before the 2 nd root letter, the substitution of e

for A as 2 nd root letter :      

> 123 habit EaA odap Ea waAo eid FaEoL ap -FawaaeiL FvEvL -FaEaaLiB -1wh 3عادة عوائد

We have analysed a ll the nouns in this section with a triliteral root in the singular, and a quadriliteral root in the 

plural. In the following sections, we survey other examples of this configuration, where the additional root 

consonant is obtained by re duplicat ing one of th ose of the singular, or by inserting a prefix or a suffix. Then, we 

discuss the case of nouns with 5 consonants in the singular, and 4 in the BP, obtained by removing one of the 5 

consonants. 

Most quadriliteral BP s show no root alterati ons as c ompared to the singula r (cf. ( 16-20), Section 4.1.1).  They 

have one of the three following patterns:  FaE aa LiB , FaE aa LiBap  and  FaE aa LiiB .

5.2.2. Triliteral l emmas with geminated consonant and quadriliteral BP 

A number of lemmas with a geminated consonant have a quadri liter al BP. In general, the geminated consonant 

appears in the plural as two simple occurrences, with a long vowel between them :                                    

> 124 ladder su lGam sa laAo lim FuEEaL -FaEaaEiL FvEEvL -FaEaaLiB -12 23سُلَّم سَاللِم
> 125 pillow Ta rGaAoH ap Ta raA oriy oHFaEEaaLap -FaEaaE iiL FvEEvvL -FaEaaLiiB -12 23طَرّاحَة طراريح
> 126 mighty ja bG aA orja baA obirap FaEEa aL-FaEa aEiLap FvEEvvL -FaEa aLiBap -1223 جبّار جبابرة
> 127 dragon tinGiyon tanaA oniy onFiEEi iL-FaEa aEiiL FvEEv vL-FaEa aLiiB -122 3تنّين تنانين
> 128 ox fidGaAon fadaA odiy onFiEEa aL-FaEa aEiiL FvEEv vL-FaEa aLiiB -1223 فدّان فدادين
> 129 needle dabGuwos dabaA obiy osFaEEu uL-FaEa aEiiL FvEEv vL-FaEa aLiiB -122 3دبّوس دبابيس

The geminated consonant of the singular is analysed as a single letter of a triliteral root, and the gemination is 

assigned to the singular pattern (cf. Section 3.3 ). The  root code  1223  spec if ies the repetition of the 2 nd  root letter .

In  OawGal  ‘first’ , the geminated consonant of the singular is  realis ed as a  simple  consonant  in t he plural, but an 

additional  e (

ئ ) is inserted:       

> 130 first Oa wGal Oa waA oeil FaEEaL -FaEaa eiL FvEEvL -FaEaaLiB -12 h3لئأوّل أوا

In MidGap ‘trouble’ , the geminated consonant corresponds to two letters of a triliteral root, and an additional e is 

inserted between them:       

> 131 trouble Mi dGap Ma daAo eidFiEoLap -FaEaa eiL FvEvL -FaEaaLiB -12 h2 ئد شدّة شدا

Some triliteral nouns have a quadriliteral BP with a re duplication of the 2 nd root letter and a long vowel between 

the two occurrences:                

> 132 dinar diyo naAor da naAon iyor FiiEaaL -FaEaaEiiL FvvEvvL -FaEaaLiiB -1223 دينار دنانير
> 133 lighthouse fa naAor fa naAon iyor FaEaaL -FaEaaEiiL FvEvvL -FaEaaLiiB -1223 فَنار فَنانِير
> 134 mortar haAo wun ha waAow iyon FaaEuL -FaEaaEiiL FvvEvL -FaEaaLiiB -1223 هاوُن هَواوِين

These nouns seem to have atypical origins, since they are not related to attested verbal forms. 

5.2.3. Triliteral lemmas with BP in -iy or -aY 

Some tri liter al lemmas have a quadriliteral BP with -iy or -aY appended to the root (cf. (37) -(42 ), Section 4.2) : 

> 20

(11 9) admits an alternative plural,  mawaAoniy , which is assigned to  another lexical entry (cf. Section 3.2). 24                                

> 135 bottle qa nG iyon ap qanaA oniy Fa EE iiLap -FaEaaLiy FvEEvvL -FaEaaLiB -123 yقنّينة قناني
> 136 land Oaro DOaraAo Diy FaEoL -FaEaaLiy FvEvL -FaEaaLiB -h23 yأرض أرأضي
> 137 night layolap layaA oliy FaEoLap -FaEaaLiy FvEvL -FaEaaLiB -123y ليلة ليالي
> 138 snake OafoE aY OafaAoE iy FaEoL aY -OaFaaEiy FvEvL -FaEaaLiB -h23 yأفعى أفاعي
> 139 virgin EaJor aAoc EaJaAor aY FaEoL aac -FaEaaLaY FvEvL -FaEaaLiB -123Y عذارى عذراء

In most of these examples, the singular has a suffix such as -ap or -aY , which suggests that the ending -iy is also 

a suffix. However, by analysing these endings as part of the stem, we homogeniz e the nouns with other 

quadriliteral BPs with pattern FaEaaLiB .

In t he following examples, y is the 3 rd consonant of the singular root, and a w is inserted before the 2 nd 

consonant , as in ( 108 )-(112 ), Section 5.2.1 :             

> 140 suburb DaAoHiy ap Da waAoHiy FaaEiLap -FawaaEiL FvvEvL -FaEaaLiB -1w2yضواحي ضاحية
> 141 whore EaAoriy ap Ea waAoriy FaaEiLap -FawaaEiL FvvEvL -FaEaaLiB -1w2y عارية عواري

5.2.4. Triliteral lemmas with BP in Oa - or ma -

Some triliteral nouns have a BP with an initial Oa -, often in concur rence wit h another plural .21 We encode the 

BP in Oa - as quadriliteral if it matches one of the three independently known quadriliteral BP patterns (143 ), and 

as triliteral otherwise ( 142 ):                 

> gloss singular plural PRIM codes in Arabic
> 142 place makaAon Oa mokinap FvEvvL -OaFoEiLap -123 مَكان أمكنة
> 143 place makaA onOamaA okin FvEvvL -FaEaaLiB -h123 مَكان أَماكِن

In TM, the BP in (143) is marked as ‘ plural of plural’ and obtain ed by re -pluralizing the BP in (142) :             

> gloss singular plural pl. of pl. TM patterns in Arabic
> 144 place makaA onOamokinap OamaAokin FaEaaL -OaFoEiLap -OaFaaEi Lأَماكِن مَكان أمكنة

Recall that w e do not formalize the ‘plural of plural’ mark in our model (cf. Section 3 ). Here is a similar 

example, but  both BPs have quadriliteral patterns:                             

> gloss singular plural PRIM codes in Arabic
> 145 pregnant HabolaY HabaA olaY FvEvL -FaEaaLiB -123Y حبلَى حبالى
> 146 pregnant Habola YOaHaAobiyol FvEvL -FaEaaLi iB-h123 حبلَى أَحابِيل
> gloss sing. plural pl. of pl. TM patterns in Arabic
> 147 pregnant HabolaY HabaA olaY OaHaAobiyol FaEoLaY -FaEaaLaY -OaFaaEiiL أَحابِيل حبلَى حبالى

The noun Hadiyov ‘talk’ has only one BP in Oa -:             

> gloss sing ular plural TM patterns PRIM codes in Arabic
> 148 talk Hadiyov OaHaAdiyov FaEiiL -OaFaaEiiL FvEvvL -FaEaaLiiB -h123 أَحادِيث حَدِيث

Finally, s ome triliteral nouns have a quadriliteral BP with an initial ma -:                    

> 149 feeling MuEuwor ma MaAoEir FuEuuL -maFaaEiL FvEvvL -FaEaaLiB -m123 مشاعر شعور
> 150 danger xaTar ma xaAoTir FaEaL -maFaaEiL FvEvL -FaEaaLiB -m123 خطر مخاطر
> 151 drawback sayGicap ma saAowie FaEEiLap -maFaaEiL FvEEvL -FaEaaLiB -m1wh مَساوِئ سَيِّئَة

Dictionaries describe this type of plural , but grammarians have paid little a ttention to them . Tarabay (2003) does 

not mention them. These nouns usually denote abstract entities and are derived from verbs or adjectives. The 

ma - insertion can be compared with Oa - and with derivational prefixes in m- occurring in past participles and 

deverbal nouns. Diachronically , the singular and the plural of such pairs may have come from distinct lexical 

items. However, synchronically, the ir association with in a single item is confirmed by comparing sentences such 

as:  

> 21

As a rule, we generate at most one plural of a given lexical entry. When several plurals are observed, they are assigned to d istinct 

entries, no matter whe ther they are equivalent or not (cf. Section 3.2). 25 

جلس الشيخ في قاعة اإلجتماعات يراجع حساباته االنتخابية 

jalasa Al -Mayoxu  fiy qaAEapi Al -IijtimaAEaAti yuraAjiEu HisaAbaAti -hi Al -IntixaAbiyap 

sat the -sheikh in the -room -meeting review cal culation -his electoral 

“The s heikh sat in the meeting room reviewing his electoral cal culation” 

جلست المشايخ في قاعة اإلجتماعات تراجع حساباتها االنتخابية 

jalasa t Al -maMaAyixu  fiy qaAEapi  Al -Iijtima AEaAti turaAjiEu HisaAbaAti -hA Al -IntixaAbiyap 

sat the -sheikh s in the -room -meeting review cal culation -her electoral 

“The s heikh s sat in the meeting room reviewing their electoral calculations ”

The only semantic difference between these two senten ces is about the number of the subject. Such differential 

semantic evaluation (Gross, 1975) is a particularly reliable and reproducible type of introspective evidence about 

semantic facts. 

5.2. 5. Lemmas with 5 or 6 consonant s

From a 5-consonant singular, the formation of a quadriliteral BP requires the omission of one of the 5 

consonant s. The first consonant is never omitted. The consonants y, w or an n are often omitted:  

> 152

philosopher     

> fa yolasuwof falaA osifap Fa yoEaLuuB -FaEaaLiB ap FvEvLvBvvD -FaEaaLiB ap -1345 فيلسوف فالسفة
> 153

program      

> baro naAomaj baraA omij FaEo naa LaB -FaEaaLiB FvEvLvvBvD -FaEaaLiB -1245 برنامج برامج
> 154

elephant (female)      

> Eaqaro Tal EaqaAoril FaEaLoBaD -FaEaaLiD FvEvLvBvD -FaEaaLiB -1235 عقرطل عقارل
> 155

cylinder   

> OusoTu waAon ap OasaAoTiyon FuEoLu waaBap -FaEaaL ii B FvEvLvBvvD -FaEaaL ii B-h235 أسطوانة اساطين

Note that in the singular, for TM, the consonant omitted in the BP is a ssigned to the pattern in (152, 153, 154), 

but to the root in (155 ). 

The 5 th consonant is often omitted:  

> 156

quince      

> safaroja lsafaA orij FaEaLoBa D-FaEaaLiB FvEvLvBvD -FaEaaLiB -1234 سفرجل سفارج
> 157

octopus     

> OaxoTabuwo TOaxaA oTib FaEoLaB uuD -FaEaaLiB FvEvLvBvvD -FaEaaLiB -h234 أخطبوط أخاطب

Here is a similar example with 6 consonants :     

> 158 emperor Ii moba raAo Tuwor OabaAoTirap FvEvLvBv vDvvJ -FaEaaLiBap -h35 6طور أباطرة اإمبر

A few 5 -consonant nouns deviat e from the standard quadri liter al BP patterns in that all 5 root consonants are 

retained in the BP, with the 3 rd and 4 th ones jointly in the 3 rd slot of the BP pattern:                  

> 159 crab silo ToEaAon sa laAo ToE iyon FvEvLvB vvD -FaEaa LiiB -1234 5سلطعان سالطعين
> 160 pot miro TobaAon ma raAo Tob iyon FvEvLvBvvD -FaEaa LiiB -1234 5مراطبين مرطبان
> 161 thimble kiMo tobaAon ka MaAo tob iyon FvEvLvBv vD-FaEaa LiiB -123 45كشاتبين كشتبان

The surface pattern actually handled by the PRIM transducers of these BPs is FoEaaLoBiiD . However, we 

analyse this pattern as a variant of quadriliteral FaEaaLiiB , and we use the label of this pattern in the inflectional 

codes . These nouns deviate from general rules in several ways. First, all other BP roots have at most 4

consonants . Second, these BPs are pronounced in three syllables as Cv -CvvC -CvvC with unusual CvvC second 

syllable s: [sala: tˤʕi:n mara: tˤbi :n ka∫a:tbi:n ʔat ˤa:rmi: zˤ], as if the attraction to a quadriliteral BP pattern were 

stronger than phonotactic constraint s. We are not aware of any prior mention of these exceptional nouns in 

literature about Arabic. 

Unlike standa rd Arabic,  we report , in the Lebanese dialect,  the existence  of initial consonant clusters for 

examples  (15 9-16 1) as  solaAoToEiyon , pronounced in two syllables  as  CCvvC -CvvC [sla: tˤʕi:n mra: tˤbi:n 

k∫a:tbi:n] . (163) is a  similar example  with  an  initial consonant cluster , but in a triliteral BP pattern ; (162) is the 26 

BP of this word in standard Arabic. A probable template for ( 163 ) in standard modern Arabic is the inflectional 

class of (164 ), with a standard BP pattern FiEaL :

162 strip MariyoTap -MaraAoeiT FvEvvL -FaEaa LiB -12e4  شرائط  شريطة 

163 strip MoriyoTap -Mo riyaT F1F2vEvL -F1F2iEa L-1y3  شرِيَط  شريطة 

164 uprising fitonap -fitan FvEvL -FiEa L-123  فتن  فتنة 

Two other plurals of the same noun are observed in the Lebanese dialect: a suffixal plural MoriyoT -aAot 

شريطات  and a variant of ( 162 ),  MaraAoyiT .

6. Quantitative data about the taxonomy 

Our BP lexicon is composed of 3 198 noun entries, among which 1 662 admit a triliteral BP, and 1 536 a

quadriliteral BP. We have 9 85 BPs with the FaEaaLiB pattern. Table 1 shows how entrie s with this BP pattern 

are distributed according to the singular -pattern taxonomy .

Sing ular -Pattern  Code  Example 

Entries  In Arabic  script 

Gloss  Plural  Singular  

> FvEvLvB
> FvEvLvB

dirham  daraAhim  diroham  

> 55 6
> درهم دراهم
> FvEvLvB -ap

tornado  zawaABiE  zawobaEap  زَوْبَعَة زَواْبَع  

> FvEvLvB -iyy

foreigner  OajaAnib  OajonabiyG  أجنبي أجانب  

> FvEvLvB -iyyap

rifle  banaAdiq  bunduqiyGap  بُنْدُقِيَّة بَنادِق  

> FvEvLvB -p

turtle  salaAHif  suloHaFaAp  سُلَحْفاة سَالحِف  

> FvEvvLvB

sample  namaAzij  namuwozaj  1 نموذج نماذج  

> FvEvLvvB

bat  waTaAwiT  wuTowaAT  19 وَطْواط وَطاوِط  

> FvEvLLvB

buildings  majaAmiE  mujamGaE  4 مجمّع مجامع  

> FvvEvL

stamp  tawaAbiE  TaAobiE  16 5 طابع طوابع  

> FvE EvvL

bottle  qanaAniy  qanGiynap  1 قنّينة قناني  

> FvvEvvL

port  mawaAnie  miyonaAoc  6 ميناء موانئ  

> FvEvvL

cave  magaAwir  magaAorap  197  مَغارة مَغاوِر  

> FvEEvL

ladder  salaAlim  sulGam  5 سُلَّم سَاللِم  

> FvEvL

order  OawaAmir  Oamor  25  أمر أوامر  

> FvEvLvBvD

quince  safaArij  safarojal  4 سفرجل سفارج  

> FvEvLvvBvD

program  baraAmij  baronaAomaj  1 برنامج برامج  

> FvEvLvBvvD

octopus  OaxaATib  OaxoTabuwoT  1 أخطبوط أخاطب  

> TOTAL 985

Table 1. Distribution of lexical items with the FaEaaLiB BP pattern according to the 

singular -pattern taxonomy. 

The 3 19 8 entries with BP are inflected by means of finite -state transducers in number, definiteness and case 

(3 33) . An entry which does not inflect in gender produces 27 surface forms. An entr y which inflect s also in 

gender produces 2 332 forms for the singular and the dual, which inflec t in gender, and 1331 for the BP, 

which does not inflect in gender (cf. Section 7 ); thi s totals to 45 . The size of the full -form dictionary is 97 002 

surface forms. It occupies 4.9 Megabytes in Unicode little Endian in plain text. It is compressed and minimized 

into 4 30 Kilobytes, and loaded to memory for fast retrieval. The generation, compression and minimization of 

the full -form lexicon lasts a few seconds on a Windows laptop. 27 

The number of inflectional graphs is 300 : 25 BP patterns, 75 singular pattern/BP pattern pa irs, 160 singular 

pattern/BP patterns/root code triples, and 300 when we take into account the generation of gender and 

inflectional suffixes in the singular . In addition, the main graphs invoke approximately 20 sub -graphs. 

This number of inflectional gr aphs (300) is to be compared with the nearly 390 inflectional graphs for nouns for 

Brazilian Portuguese constructed also for Unitex (Muniz et al. , 2005) which deals with gender , number and 

degree (base, diminutive and augmentative ), as in casa(s) ‘house(s)’ , casinha(s) ‘small house(s)’ ,

casarão/casarões ‘large house(s)’ . Another 245 inflectional graphs for adje ctives deal with gender, number and 

degree: lindo(s)/linda(s) ‘beautiful’ (base), lindinho(s)/lindinha(s) (diminutive), lindão/lindões/lind ona(s) 

(augmentative) and lindíssimo(s)/lindíssima(s) (superlative) . With suffixal plurals, which will require at most 20 

additional graphs, the number of inflectional graph for Arabic nouns does not reach the number of graphs for the 

Unitex Portuguese (Br azil) dictionary. 

7. Rules of agreement with broken plural nouns 

The difference between BP and suffixal plural in Arabic is obviously a matter of inflectional morphology , but 

not only . Grammatical agreement of plural nouns with adjectives , participles or verbs is slightly different 

depend ing on whether the plural noun is a BP or a suffixal plural . The difference is observed both with human 

and non -human noun s, but agreement follows distinct rules .

7.1. Human nouns 

A human noun in the plural can agree with adjectives and participles in the broken or suffixal plural, or with 

both, if the adjective has both plurals . This rule applies independently of whether the plural noun is a BP , as 

EulamaAocu ‘scientists’, or a suffixal plural , as muraAoqibuwon a ‘observers’ . In the following examples, the :q 

code marks BPs, and :p marks suffixal plurals: 

...  والعلماء (العاملون + النشطاء) في حقل الكيمياء ....      

> wa -Al -EulamaAcu Al -(nuMaTaAc + EaAmiluwna) fiy Haqoli Al -kiymo yaAc
> and -the -scientists:q the -(active:q + working:p) in area the -chemistry

‘and the scientists (active + working) in the area of chemistry’ 

...  والمراقبون الدوليون (العاملون + النشطاء) في سوريا  ....       

> wa -Al -muraAqibuwna Al -duwGaliyGuna Al -(nuMaTaAc + EaAmiluwna) fiy suwriyGaA
> and -the -observers:p the -international the -(active:q + working:p) in Syria

‘and the international observers (active + working) in Syria’ 

However, if the human noun is in the BP, it can also agree with an adjective or participle in the feminine singular 

(:fs code below ), no matter the gender of the noun or the sex of its referent :22 

...  والعلماء العاملة في حقل الكيمياء ....       

> wa -Al -EulamaAcu Al -EaAmilapu fiy Haqli Al -ki ymoyaAc
> and -the -scientists: mqthe -working:fs in area the -chemistry

‘and the scientists working in the area of chemistry’ 

This additional possibility of agreement is not observed with suffixal plurals of human nouns (the ‘ *’ symbol 

signal s unacceptability here ):

*...  والمراقبون الدوليون العاملة في سوري ا ... *     

> *wa -Al -muraAqibuwna Al -duwGaliyGuna Al -EaAmilapu fiy suwriyGaA
> *and -the -observers:p the -international the -working:fs in Syria

‘and the international observers working in Syria’ 

Agreement of adjectives in the feminine singular with BP human nouns may surprise non -Arabic speakers . It is 

less frequent than agreement of adjectives in the plural , but handbooks definitely consider it as grammatical , and 

it occurs in literary works : 

> 22 The a djective or participle could be analysed and labeled as an alternative plural, with the same form as a feminine singular (Smr ž,
> 2007:27).

# 28 

...  الرجال شحيحة في مصر اآلن .      

> Al -rijaAlu MaHiHapun fiy misra AaloCn
> the -<N: mq> <A:fs> in Cairo presently

‘Men are rare in Cairo presently ’

(Rim Basyuwniy, Smell of The Sea , http://arabicorpus.byu.edu/ )

The rules of grammatical agreement between subject noun and verb, when the verb occurs after the subject, are 

similar to the rules above. A BP human noun subject can agree with the verb in the feminine singular, whereas a 

suffixal plural human noun subject cannot: 

القضاة (غا درت + غادروا + غادرن ) ظهرا      

> Al -quDaApu (gaAdarat + g aAdaruwA + gaAdarona) Zuh oraAF
> The -judges :q (left :fs + left :mp + left :fp )at -mid -day

‘The judges left at -mid -day ’

المراقبون (*غادرت + غادروا + *غادرن ) ظهرا       

> Al -muragibuwna (*gaAdarat + gaAdaruwA + *gaAdarona) Zuh oraAF
> The -observers:mp (*left:fs + left:mp + *left:fp) at -mid -day

‘The observers left at mid -day ’

7.2. Non -human nouns 

With non -human nouns, agreement rules are slightly different, but they still discriminat e between BPs and 

suffixal plurals. Both types of plural can agree with an adjective or participle in the feminine singular, but only 

suffixal plurals can agree with an adjective or participle in the plural ( :fp code below): 

(*المعاول + الحلقات )ال صالحات  إستعملت     

> IistaEomaltu Al -(* maEaAwilu + HalaqaAtu) SaAliHaAtun
> I used the -(*mattocks :q + rings:fp) good:fp

‘I used t he good (mattocks + rings) ’

A dozen non -human nouns with BP , often denoting female animals, are exceptions to this rule and can agree 

with an adjective or participle in the plural. 

7.3. Codification 

The formalization of agreement rules in parsers and generators requires discrimination between the BP and 

suffixal plural of Arabic nouns . We opted for the straightforward solution of distinguishing two values for 

number, q and p. Taking into account the singular and the dual , our morpho -syntactic model of Arabic totals 4

values for number of nouns and adjectives. The MAGEAD system (Altantawy et al ., 2011) has 3 values for 

number: singular, dual and plural. The Smrz (2007) parser has 3 values also. 

We lack bases to define the gender of a BP. Broken plural shows no morphological difference in gender, even 

when the singular does: qaAo Diy ‘male judge’ and qaAo Diyap ‘female judge’ have the same BP qu DaAop ‘male 

or female judges or both ’. Rules of a greement of a human BP with adjectives in the suffixal plural: <A:mp> ,

<A:fp> , or with verbs in the plural, depends on the sex of the referent. In the case of a non -human BP, an 

agree ing adjective is obligatorily in the feminine singular. Thus, our model represent BPs without any gender ,

tagging them as <N: q>. 

8. Clitic -related spelling variants 

In Arabic, a token can be analysed as a sequence of segments. Each segment in a token is a morpheme. A

nominal token may contain a single morpheme <N> , or the concatenation of up to 5 morphemes as in :

<CONJC> <PREP> <DET><N> <PRO+Gen> 

where <CONJC> is a coordinating conjunction, <PREP> a preposition, <DET> the determin er Al -, and 

<PRO+Gen> a pronoun in the genitive . The combination of morphemes obeys a number of constraints. A29 

<PREP> constrains the noun to be in the genitive case .23 The presence of a clitic , graphically agglutinated 

<PRO +Gen > constrains another inflectional feature of the noun, definiteness, to have the construct -state value, 

while two other values, definite and indefinite, are possible otherwise. By checking such co nstraints, wrong 

segmentations can be discarded. 

8.1. Segmentation 

With the Unitex system, we represent nouns with four inflectional features: gender ( masculine, feminine), 

number (singular, dual, suffixal plural, BP ), definiteness (definite, indefinite, construct -state ) and case 

(nominative , accusative , genitive). The segmentation into morphemes is perform ed with the aid of graph s. The 

output of this process is saved in the text automaton as in Fig . 1.   

> 4321

Fig. 1. Nouns tagg ed in t ext . Text automaton resulting from the application of graph s of 

morphological segmentation . Dashed lines connect segments inside the same token. 

The sequence displayed in Fig. 1 contains 4 nouns, among which 3 BPs :

No. Token Lexical item 

1 BP li_Euquwd -K Eaqod,FvEvL -FuEuuL -123 

2 BP ma SaAyid maSoyad,FvEvLvB -FaEaaLiB -1234 

3 sing. Al_mino Taqap -i mino Taqap,FvEvLvB -FaEaaLiB -1234 

(This singular noun is labelled by the analyser since it admits a BP) 

4 BP OasmaAk -i_haA samak,FvEvL -OaFoEaaL -123 

Dashed lines connect segments in side the same token. Abbreviations read as follow s: PREP (preposition), DET 

(determiner), PRO (pronoun), Gen (genitive). Gender s: masculine, feminine. Number s: singular, dual, suffixal 

plural, q for bro ken plural . Definiteness es: Definite, indefinite, and a for construct -state . Case s: Nominative ,

Accusative , Genitive .

8.2. Orthographic adjustments 

Most inflected noun forms are insensitive to graphically agglutinated pronoun s, but some forms undergo an 

orthographic adjustment , e.g. forms with the suffix -ap or ending with a glottal stop. The suffix -ap is realis ed as 

its allograph -at -. In t he full -form dictionary , th os e morphological variants that combine with the pronoun are 

marked as <N+pro> . Segmentation graphs select the <N+pro> variants from the dictionary . Fig. 2 shows the 

text automaton resulting from the morphological analysis of OanoMiTatihaA ‘its activities ’:

No. Token Lexical item 

1 BP OanoMiTa t-i-haA naMaAT,FvEvvL -OaFoEiLap -123   

> 23 <CONJC> combines freely with any inflected noun .

# 30 

The segmentation graph checks that the agglutinated variant is marked as <N+pro> in the dictionary. Dashed 

lines connect segments inside the same token. 

## ومعظم أَنْشِطَتِهَا الصناعيَّة والزراعيَّة 

Fig. 2. Text automaton resulting from morphological segmentation. 

The generation of the orthographically adjusted variants of an inflected noun is performed directly during the 

compil ation of the dictionary of word form s. This process applies rule s of orthographical va riation, but makes 

use of lexical information encoded in entries . During analysis, t he segmentation graph links each morphological 

variant to the correct context : again, this process implement s rule s, but takes advantage of formalized lexical 

information . The variants are generated during the compilation of the resources, not at analysis time as in rule -

based systems in which a rule should compute each morphological variant at run time, then link each variant to 

the correct context. Our method simplifies an d speeds up the process of annotation. 

The system generates the inflected forms with the aid of an inflectional transducer (Fig. 3), as in Silberztein 

(1998). Th is transducer invokes sub -graphs; one of them , displayed in Fig. 4, specifies the generation of the 

orthographically adjusted construct -state variants (with the form -at - of the suffix) of an inflected form . The 

generation is performed during the compilation of the dictionary .

Fig 3. Inflectional transducer N300 -m-FvEv vL -OaFoEiLap -12 3. Each path contains a

stem pattern and a call to a subgraph of suffixes for definiteness and case variations 

(3 3). 31 

Fig. 4. Subgraph ap -uaiNFK represents definiteness/c ase suffix variations for nouns 

ending with the suffix -ap .

9. Evaluation 

Since our BP lexicon is partial, we have chosen to measure its lexical coverage, and the feasibility of the 

extension of lexical coverage. 

9.1. Corpu s

We used a small sample of the NEMLAR Arabic Written Corpus (Attia et al. , 2005). This corpus was produced 

and annotated by RDI, Egypt, for the Nemlar Consortium .24 During the construction of our lexicon of BPs, we 

did not use any part of the corpus: our sources of information were handbooks, reference dictionaries and native 

speaker competence. Thus, t he evaluation tool is independent from the evaluated resource. 

We selected three documents totalling 3 550 tokens (about 10 pages) and contain ing scientific popularization 

about three topics: pollution and fishing in Egypt, earthquakes in the world, and quality of water. We used t he 

documents in the fully d iacritiz ed version .25 

9. 2. Coverage 

We have extracted manually 3 88 occurrences of plural nouns and adjectives : 2 67 BP s and 1 21 suffixal plurals ,

among which 8 in the masculine and 113 in the feminine . Our lexicon (3 198 entries with BP) cover ed 19 5

occurrences out of the 26 7, i.e. 73% of occurrences . The sample did not contain any adjective in the BP. 

The 19 5 covered oc currences of BP s are forms of 84 different lemmas of nouns , while the 72 remaining 

occurrences are forms of 25 lemma s of nouns : the lexicon cover ed 77 % of the lemmas in the sample .

The 267 occurrences of BPs belong to 33 different inflectional classes , which had all been encoded in the system 

before evaluation . During the evaluation experiments , 5 descriptions of classes were found to contain errors 

affecting the recognition or tagging of forms. Therefore, the system covered 100% of the inflectional clas ses 

relevant for the sample , and 85% of them with out errors .

Sample  Covered  Coverage 

Occurrences  267  195  73% 

Lemmas  109  84  77% 

Inflectional classes  33  33  100%     

> 24 It consists of about 500 thousand words of Arabic text from 13 di fferent genres. Each text is provided in 4 different versions: raw
> text, fully d iacritiz ed text, text with Arabic lexical analysis, and text with Arabic POS -tags.
> 25 The annotated corpus (10 pages) will be freely available in a file named Fishing -Earthquake s-Water.txt in the Unitex/Arabic/Corpus
> folder.

# 32 

BP occurrences make up 7. 5% of all tokens of the sample, but 69% of all occurrences of plural noun s and 

adjectives , a surprisingly high proportion . In order to check this point, we made a nother study with another 

document from the Nemlar corpus, belonging to another genre: a 2 510 -token biographical text (4 pages) by 

Tawfiq Hakim, an Egyptian playwright . We counted 158 BP occurrences , which make up 6.3% of all tokens, 

and 73% of the 216 plural nouns and adjective s.

Thus, i n spite of the fact that BPs are irregular, the ir presence in Arabic text is predominant over suffixal plurals. 

To our knowledge, this quantitative predominance had not been discovered before .

Among the 26 7 BP occurrences, 1 70 occurrences (6 4%) are graphically aggluti nated with other segments and 9 7

are not. This means that graphical agglutination affects nouns in a massive way .

9. 3. Feasibility of the extension of lexical coverage 

The 72 occurrences of BP missing in the lexicon were analysed as forms of 25 distinct lemmas, for which 25 

new entries were insert ed. All new entries were assigned to already encoded inflectional classes . The new entries 

were tested by compiling the lexicon and tagging the evaluation corpus. The description of one of the classes had 

to be corrected because of a filename error . The analysis, encoding, testing and correction required 4 hours’ 

work. 

This experiment validates the feasibility of a comprehensive BP lexicon on the basis of the PRIM model. 

The following list is a part of a concordance of the 26 7 occurrences of BPs in the evaluation corpus . It has been 

produced after lexicon update, by submitting the <N:q> lexical mask to Unitex: 

In order to investigate the feasibility of the extension of lexical coverage beyond BPs and verbs (Neme, 2011), 

we inserted in the lexicon 750 items for all the words occurring in the evaluation corpus and not found in the 

lexicon. We encoded 52 inflectional classes for suffixal plural nouns, suffixal plural adjectives, grammatical 

words and for 2 classes of verbs missing in Neme (2011). The encoding and the te sting/correction loop required 

60 hours’ work. After this extension, the eva luation corpus was entirely covered. 

This experiment validated our intuition that , besides verb conjugation and BPs , Arabic morpho -syntactic tagging 

doe s not pose any serious challenge s to resource -based language processing .ِاَلنَّيِتْرُوجِينِيَّة ِ وَالْفِسْفُورِيَّة ِوَالْمَوَاد الْعُضْوِيَّة ِ ا ْلُْخْرَي الَّتِي ُعُضْوِيَّة ِ ا ْلُْخْرَي الَّتِي تُعْتَبَر غِذَاء ِل ِْلَْسْمَاك ِوَالَّتِي تَفِد ُ إِلَي الْبَحْر ِالْبَحْر ِ وَالْبُحَيْرَات ِ مَع َ مِيَاه ِ النِيل ِوَالْمَصَارِف ِوَالْقَنَوَات ِ الزِرَاعِيَّة َاآلْدَمِيَّة ِ الَّتِي تَذْهَب ُ لِلْبَحْر ِ أَمَام ِسَوَاحِل الدَّلْتَا ْ وَمَصَايِدِهَا مُنْذ ُ بِدَاي ْتَذْهَب ُ لِلْبَحْر ِ أَمَام َ سَوَاحِل ِ الدَّلْتَا وَمَصَايِدِهَا مُنْذ ُ بِدَايَة ِ الثَّمَانِينِيَّات ِذ ُ بِدَايَة ِ الثَّمَانِينِيَّات .ِوَهٰذِه ُا ْلَْسْبَاب َهِي :أَوَل :زِيَادَة ُ التِع ِحُوظ ُ فِي حَجْم ِ وَمِسَاحَة ِ شَبَكَات ِ الْمِيَاه وَالْمَجَارِي ِوَمَحَطَّات ِ الصَّرْف ِ اآلْدَمِي 

> وَمَحَطَّات ِ الصَّرْف ِ اآلْدَمِي ِ بِخَاصَّة ٍ فِي

ِمُدُن ََِلَل الْقَاهِرَة ِ وَا ْلِْسْكَنْدَرِيَّة ِ خ 

> حَقِيقَة ٌ أَم ْ وَهْمٌ؟ !ُلَم ْ يَتَّفِق ْ بَعْض

ِالْعُلَمَاء ُمَع َ رَأْي ِ نِكْسُون ْ وَمِنْهُم ُلْمِصْرِي ُّ الدُّكْتُور ِيُوسُف ُ حَلِيم ٍ بِقِسْم ِعُلُوم الْبِحَار ِ بِجَامِعَة ِ ا ْلِْسْكَنْدَرِيَّة ِي ُّ الدُّكْتُور ُ يُوسُف ُ حَلِيم ٍ بِقِسْم ِ عُلُوم ِالْبِحَار بِجَامِعَة ِ ا ْلِْسْكَنْدَرِيَّةِ، حَيْث ِفِي الْمَقَام ِ ا ْلَْوَّل ِ إِلَى زِيَادَة ِ عَدَد ِسُفُن ِوَمَرَاكِب  ِ الصَّيْد ِ وَتَحَسُّن ِ كَفَاءَة َمَقَام ِ ا ْلَْوَّل ِ إِلَى زِيَادَة ِ عَدَد ِ سُفُن ِ و  ِ مَرَاكِب الصَّيْد ِ وَتَحَسُّن ِ كَفَاءَة ِ الْمُعَد ِالصَّيْد ِ وَتَحَسُّن ِ كَفَاءَة ِ الْمُعَدَّات ِوَا ْلَْجْهِزَة ِالْمُسْتَخْدَمَة ِ فِي عَمَلِيَّات ْزِيَادَة ِ نِسْبَة ِ ال  ِ هَائِمَات ِ النَّبَاتِيَّة ِوَالْمَوَاد ِالْعُضْوِيَّة .ُكَمَا يُؤْخَذ َمْلَة ِ الْمُلَوِثَات ِ الَّتِي ذَكَرَتْهَا بَيْن ِالْمَوَاد ْلْ الْعُضْوِيَّة ِ الْمَوْجُودَة ِ فِي ا 

> الْمَوَاد ِ الْعُضْوِيَّة ِ الْمَوْجُودَة ِ فِي

ِا ْلَْسْمِدَة ْوَالْمُخَلَّفَات ِ اَآل دَمِيَّة ِ وَب 33 

Conclusion 

By keeping inflection apart from derivational morphology and dealing with morphophonological alternations in 

a factual way, the PRIM model simplifies the encoding of BP. Its strong points can be summed up as follows: 

1. It complies with the conventions in traditional morphology that we found useful to noun inflection , in 

particular with most of the traditional patterns in the sense of Semitic morphology. Thus, the PRIM language 

resources can be easily updated by Arabic -speaking linguists in order to extend lexical coverage and control the 

evolution of the accuracy of system s that use them. We have dropped conventions related to semantic 

description. 

2.  The updatable  lexicon is structured in lexical entries, as traditional dictionaries, and not in stem entrie s, as in 

the  multi -stem approach. 

3. Inflected forms are generated from their observable surface lemma , and not from a deep root. 

4.  The  pattern of a singular noun is abstracted from  the  stem  without  gender  or number  suffixes, and without 

definiteness and case markers.  The pattern of a  BP is  abstracted  from the  stem without definiteness or case 

markers. 

5. The taxonomy of singular patterns specifies vowel quantity , noted as v or vv , but ignores vowel quality and 

deriva tional history .

6. Patterns are not used to represent morpho -syntactic features in lexical tags. Lexical tags are accurate and 

informative and consist of a lemma and a set of feature -value pairs , generally gender, number, definiteness and 

case. 

7. Root alternations are encoded independently from patterns . They are explicitly represent ed as separate pieces 

of lexical information, instead of being obtained through the interac tion of a deep level with general rules. They 

are encoded as mapping s from the su rface root of the singular to the surface root of the plural. Orthographical 

variations of the glottal stop are encoded in the same way. 

8. Root letter substitutions and insertions are restricted to w, y, A, to allographs of the glottal stop, and to copies 

of root letters available in the lemma .

9. The PRIM taxonomy for noun inflection is simple, orderly and detailed. The number of classes, including 

suffixal plural and BP, is smaller than for Brazilian Portuguese. 

10. A transducer corresponds to each inflectional class of nouns , and generates all the inflect ed forms of any 

lemma in the class . Transducers are edited in graphical form with the Unitex system , and handle roots in Semitic 

languages straightforward ly. They can be quickly corrected when an e rror is detected. 

11. Morphological analysis of Arabic text is performed directly with a dictionary of words and without 

morphological rules, which simplifies and speeds up the process. 

12. Agglutinated clitics are analysed without generation of artificial ambiguity. Clitic a gglutination is described 

independently from inflection , in separate graphs .

13. The PRIM model is compatible with solution s to the other challenges to Arabic processing: verb 

conjugations, including alternations of w, y, A and the glottal stop (Neme, 2011); recognition of partially 

diacritized text with fully diacritized resource s, excluding incompatible analyses .

Ou r distinctive approach consists in considering language resources as the key point of the problem. We 

integra te all complex operations among resource management operations. 

Bibliography       

> Abdel -Nour, Jabbour (2006). Dictionnaire Abdel -Nour al -Mufassal Arabe -Franç ais .Dar El -Ilm Lil -Malayin. 10th edition.
> 2034 pages ,3columns .

# 34 

Altantawy, Mohamed ; Habash, Nizar ; Rambow, Owen (2011 ). Fast Yet Rich Morphological Analysis . In Proceedings of 

the 9th International Workshop on Finite State Methods and Natural Language Processing (FSMNLP), p ages 116 -124 .

Altantawy, Mohamed ; Habash, Nizar ; Rambow, Owen ; Saleh , Ibrahim  (2 010) . Morphological Analysis and Generation of 

Arabic Nouns: A Morphemic Functional Approach. In  Proceedings of the Language Resource and Evaluation 

Conference  (LREC), Malta , pages 851 -858 .

Attia., M., Yaseen., M., Choukri., K. (2005). Specifications of the Arabic Written Corpus produced within the NEMLAR 

project , www.NEMLAR.org. 

Beesley, Kenneth R. (1996). Arabic finite state morphological analysis and generation. In Proceedings of the International 

Conference on Computational Linguistics (COLING ), Copen hagen, Center for Sprogteknologi , volume 1 , pages 89 -94 .

Beesley , Kenneth R. (2001 ). Finite -State Morphological Analysis and Generation of Arabic at Xerox Research: Status and 

Plans in 2001. In Proceedings of the ACL/EACL Workshop ‘Arabic Language Processing: Status and Prospects’ , pages 

1-8.

Boudlal, Abderrahim ; Lakhouaja, Abdelhak ; Mazroui , Azzeddine ; Meziane , Abdelouafi (2010) . Alkhalil Morpho SYS1: 

A Morphosyntactic Analysis System for Arabic Texts . International Arab Conference on Information Technology 

(ACIT ). 

Brame, M. (1970). Arabic Phonology: Implications for Phonological Theory and Historical Semitic , unpublished Ph.D. 

dissertation, MIT. 

Buckwalter, Timothy  (1990) . Lexicographic notation of Arabic noun pattern morphemes and their inflectional features. In 

Proceedings of the Second Cambridge Conference on Biling ual Computing of Arabic and English . 7 pages. 

Buckwalter , Tim othy . Arabic Morphological Analyzer Version 1. 0. (2002). LDC Catalog No.: LDC2002349. 

Buckwalter, Timothy  (2007 ). Issues in Arabic Morphological Analysis . In Antal va n den Bosch and Abdelhadi Soudi 

(eds.),  Arabic Computational Morphology . Knowledge -based and Empirical Methods . Text, Speech and  Language 

Technology, volume 38, Berlin: Springer, pages 23 -41. 

Courtois, Blandine (1990). Un système de dictionnaires électroniques pour les mots simples du français, Langue Française 

87, Paris: Larousse, p.11 -22. 

El -Dah dah Antoine (1992), A dictionary of universal Arabic Grammar.  Librairie du Liban Publishers. Bilingual , 250  p.  in 

Arabic/250  p. in English. 

Daille, Béatrice; Fabre, Cécile; Sébillot, Pascale (2002).  Applications  of Computational Morphology. In  Boucher, Paul 

(ed.),  Many Morphologies , Somerville: Cascadilla Press, p. 210 -234. 

Al -Fai ruzabadi ( v. 1400 ), Al-Qamus al -Muhit (Comprehensive Dictionary ).  Ed. 2007,  Beirut:  Dar Al Kotob Al Ilmiyah ,

1440 pages. 

Ferrando, Ignacio (2006). The plural of paucity in Arabic and its actual scope. On two claims by Siibawayhi and al -Farraa ’. 

In: Boudelaa, Sami (ed.), Perspectives on Arabic Linguistics , XVI, Current Issues in Linguistic Theory, 266, 

Amsterdam/Philadelphia: Benjamins, p. 39 -61. 

Al -Ghalāyini, Mustafa (2007). Jāmi3 al -durūs al -’arabiyah (A university gr ammar textbook ). 1st edition 1912. Dar El Fikr 

Printers -Publishers , Beirut . 570 pages . In Arabic. 

Gross, Maurice (1975). Méthodes en syntaxe. Régime des constructions complétives . Paris: Hermann. 

Haaruun, S.M. ( ed.) (1977 ). 2ª. Sibawayh (around 800 CE), Kitaabu Siibawayhi ‘Abii Bišrin ‘Amri bni ‘Utmaana bni 

Qunb ur, Cairo, 5 vols. 

Habash, Nizar; Rambow, O wen (2006). MAGEAD: A Morphological Analyzer and Generator for the Arabic Dialects. In 

Proceedings of the International Conference o n Computational Linguistics and Annual Meeting of the Association for 

Computational Linguistics (COLING -ACL) , Sydney, Australia, pages 681 –688 .

Al -Hadithy, Khadija (2003). Morphological forms in the Sibawayh’s Kitāb. A dictionary and a study . Republication of the 

dissertation in the Master of Arts , Faculty of Literature in Cairo , first published in 1961. 370 pages . In Arabic. 35 

Huh, Hyun -Gue; Laporte, Éric (2005). A resource -based Korean morphological annotation system. In Proc eedings of the 

Int ernational Joint Conf erence on Natural Language Processing (IJCNLP) , Jeju, Korea .

Ibn Manzur (1290). Lisān al -ʿArab (The Arabic Language).  Ed.  1955 -1956, Beirut : Dar Sadir , 15 volumes. 

Kihm, Alain (2006). Nonsegmental concatenation : a study of Classical Arabic broken plurals and verbal nouns, 

Morphology 16, 69 -105. 

Kiraz , George Anton (1994 ). Multi -tape Two -level Morphology: A Case study in Semitic Non -Linear Morphology. In 

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computational Linguistics (COLING ), Kyoto, Japan, pages 180 –186. 

Kiraz, George Anton (2001).  Computational Nonlinear Morphology, with Emphasis on Semitic Languages  Cambridge, 

U.K.: Cam bridge University Press.  Studies  in  Natural  Language  Processing , 171 pages. 

Lane , Edward William (1893) . Arabic -English Lexicon . Williams and Norgate, London .

Levy, M. M. (1971). The plural of the nouns in Modern Standard Arabi c, PhD dissertation, University of Michigan. 

McCarthy, J. J. (1981 ). A prosodic theory of nonconcatenative morphology. Linguistic Inquiry 12, 373 -418. 

McCarthy, J.J. (1983 ). A prosodic account of Arabic broken plurals . Linguistics Department Faculty Publication Series, 

Paper 25, University of Massachusett s – Amherst, pp. 289 –320. 

McCarthy, J. J. & Prince, A. S. (1990). Foot and word in prosodic morphology: the Arabic broken plural.  Natural 

Language and Linguistic Theory  8(2), 209 –283. 

Muniz , Marcelo C.M. ; Maria das Graças V. Nunes ; Éric Laporte (2005).  UNITEX -PB, a set of flexible language resources 

for Brazilian Portuguese. In  Proceedings of the  TIL  Workshop . pages  2059 –2068. 

Murtonen , Aim o (1964 ). Broken Plurals: Origin and Development of the System . E.J, Brill, Leiden .

Neme, Alexis (2011) A lexicon of Arabic verbs constructed on the basis of Semitic taxonomy and using finite -state 

transducers. In  Proceedings of the  International Workshop on Lexical  Resources  (WoLeR) at ESSLLI. 

Paumier, Sébastien. (2011). Unitex - manuel d'utilisation 2.1 , Universit é Paris -Est Marne -la -Vallée .

Ra tcliffe, Robert R. (1998), The ‘broken ’ plural problem in Arabic and comparative Semitic: allomorphy and analogy in 

non -concatenative morphology , John Benjamins,  Foreign Language Study , 261 pages .

Ra tcliffe, Robert R. ( 2001 ), Analogy in Semitic morphology: where do new roots and new patterns come from? In 

Zaborsky, Andrzej (ed.), New Data and New Methods in Afroasiatic Linguistics. Robert Hetzron in memoriam ,

Wiesbaden, Harrassowitz , p. 153 -162. 

Ryding C. Karin (2005), A Reference Grammar Of Modern Standard Arabic , Cambridge University Press, 708 pages .

Silberztein, Max (1998). INTEX: An integrated FST toolbox . In Derick Wood , Sheng Yu (eds.), Automata 

Implementation , p. 185 -197, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 1436. Second Intern ational Workshop on 

Implementing Automata, Berlin/Heidelberg: Springer. 

Smrž, Otakar (2007) . Functional Arabic Morphology. Formal System and Implementation . Ph.D. thesis, Charles University 

in Prague, Czech Republic. 

Soudi , Abdelhadi ; Cavalli -Sforza , Violetta ; Jamari , Abderrahim (2002), The Arabic Noun System Generation .

Tarabay, Adma (2003). A diction ary of Arabic plurals.  Librairie du Liban Publishers.  590 pages . In Arabic. 

Wehr , Hans (1960) . Dictionary of Modern Written Arabic . Spoken Language Services, Ithaca, N.Y .

Wright, William (1971 ). A Grammar of the Arabic Language . Cambridge University Press. 

Zbib, Rabih; Soudi, Abdelhadi (2012). Introduction. In Soudi, Abdelhadi; Farghaly, Ali; Neumann, Günter; Zbib, Rabih 

(eds.), Challenges for Arabic Machine Translation , Natural Language Processing, 9, Amsterdam: Ben jamins, p. 1 -13.