Title: Generative Data-engine Foundation Model for Universal Few-shot 2D Vascular Image Segmentation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.10737v1

Published Time: Tue, 14 Apr 2026 01:42:31 GMT

Number of Pages: 25

Markdown Content:
> arXiv:2604.10737v1 [eess.IV] 12 Apr 2026

Medical Image Analysis (2026) 

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 

# Medical Image Analysis 

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/media 

# Generative Data-engine Foundation Model for Universal Few-shot 2D Vascular Image Segmentation 

Rongjun Ge a,1 , Xin Li b,1 , Yuxing Liu b, Chengliang Liu c, Pinzheng Zhang b, Jiong Zhang d, Jian Yang e, Jean-Louis Dillenseger f,Chunfeng Yang b, ∗, Yuting He g, ∗, Yang Chen b

> a

School of Instrument Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing, China 

> b

Key Laboratory of New Generation Artificial Intelligence Technology and Its Interdisciplinary Applications (Southeast University), Ministry of Education, Nanjing, China 

> c

Department of Computer and Information Science, University of Macau, Macau, China 

> d

Laboratory of Advanced Theranostic Materials and Technology, Ningbo Institute of Materials Technology and Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Ningbo, China 

> e

Beijing Engineering Research Center of Mixed Reality and Advanced Display, School of Optics and Photonics, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China 

> f

National Institute of Health and Medical Research, 35000 Rennes, France 

> g

Department of Biomedical Engineering, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, USA 

A R T I C L E I N F O 

Article history :Received 1 May 2013 Received in final form 10 May 2013 Accepted 13 May 2013 Available online 15 May 2013 Communicated by S. Sarkar 

2000 MSC: 41A05, 41A10, 65D05, 65D17 

Keywords: Vascular segmentation, Gen-erative data-engine, Few-shot learning, Foundation models 

A B S T R A C T The segmentation of 2D vascular structures via deep learning holds significant clinical value but is hindered by the scarcity of annotated data, severely limiting its widespread application. Developing a universal few-shot vascular segmentation model is highly de-sirable, yet remains challenging due to the need for extensive training and the inherent complexities of vascular imaging. In this work, we propose UniVG (Generative Data-engine Foundation Model for Universal Few-shot 2D Vascular Image Segmentation), a novel approach that learns the compositionality of vascular images and construct-ing a generative foundation model for robust vascular segmentation. UniVG enables the synthesis and learning of diverse and realistic vascular images through two key in-novations: 1) Compositional learning for flexible and diverse vascular synthesis: It decomposes and recombines vascular structures with varying morphological features and diverse foreground-background configurations to generate richly diverse synthetic image-label pairs. 2) Few-shot generative adaptation for transferable segmentation: It fine-tunes pre-trained models with minimal annotated data to bridge the gap between synthetic and real vascular domains, synthesizing authentic and diverse vessel images for downstream few-shot vascular segmentation learning. To support our approach, we develop UniVG-58K, a large dataset comprising 58,689 vascular images across five imaging modalities, facilitating robust large-scale generative pre-training. Extensive ex-periments on 11 vessel segmentation tasks cross 5 modalties (only with 5 labeled images on each task) demonstrate that UniVG achieves performance comparable to fully super-vised models, significantly reducing data collection and annotation costs. All code and datasets will be made publicly available at https://github.com/XinAloha/UniVG .

© 2026 Elsevier B. V. All rights reserved. 2 Given-name Surname et al. / Medical Image Analysis (2026) 

1. Introduction 

The segmentation of 2D blood vascular holds significant clin-ical value in disease diagnosis, screening, and surgical plan-ning and navigation (Moccia et al., 2018). However, its ap-plication has been significantly impeded due to the inability to construct large amounts of 2D datasets for training, as two fac-tors contribute to this limitation: 1) Scarcity of vascular images stem from high collection costs, privacy protection policies, and the complex processes of data sharing among hospitals (Du-Mont Sch¨ utte et al., 2021). These factors make it particularly di ffi cult to collect su ffi ciently large and diverse datasets from clinical settings, thereby limiting the generalization and per-formance improvement of models. 2) Shortage of high-quality vascular annotations results from the requirement for special-ized doctors to dedicate extensive time to performing pixel-level annotations on images (Khan et al., 2019). The elon-gated nature of vascular structures makes the annotation process even more time-consuming (Yagis et al., 2024), thereby limit-ing the construction of large amounts of labeled datasets. Un-like conventional organ segmentation where anatomical struc-tures maintain relatively consistent morphologies, vascular net-works exhibit rich structural diversity with complex branching patterns and highly variable topological structures, which sig-nificantly increases the complexity of feature representation and annotation requirements (Zhang et al., 2025a). A promising so-lution involves training deep learning models to achieve precise segmentation with few samples, thereby significantly reducing data acquisition costs while streamlining the model develop-ment pipeline (Song et al., 2023). Some studies (Kozi´ nski et al., 2020; Dang et al., 2022; Wu et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2021; Ouali et al., 2020) attempt to use Weakly supervised learning (WSL) to reduce the cost of 2D vascular annotation by leveraging a small number of labeled 2D images and a large amount of unlabeled data (Zhou, 2018). However, this approach is limited by the volume of available data and the quality of weak supervision information (Lin et al., 2023). As shown in Fig. 1 (a), WSL reduces the reliance on extensive labeled data by leveraging a small number of anno-tated images and unlabeled data with consistent scene types for model training, its application faces several challenges. On one hand, models trained using such methods are typically task-specific and struggle to generalize to other vascular scenarios (Shu et al., 2022). On the other hand, the quality of weak su-pervision information directly impacts model performance (Lin et al., 2016), as inaccurate or incomplete labels lead to degraded outcomes, particularly when handling complex structures such as vascular (Tang et al., 2018; Kervadec et al., 2019). In recent years, Pre-trained Foundation Models (PFM) have garnered significant attention across various domains (He et al., 2024; Bommasani et al., 2021). As illustrated in Fig. 1 (b), these models establish e ff ective prior knowledge by learning 

> ∗

Corresponding author 

e-mail: chunfeng.yang@seu.edu.cn (Chunfeng Yang), 

yuting.he4@case.edu (Yuting He) 

> 1

Equal contribution (c) Generated data engine foundation model      

> L
> (a) Weakly supervised learning
> L
> (b) Pre-trained foundation model
> Downstream task adaptaion
> Learning
> target
> Learning
> target
> Learning
> target
> Lack of generalization
> Rigid network architecture
> Flexible network architecture
> Large-scale generative
> pretraining
> Generation for down stream
> task learning
> Current predictions Step1: Step2:
> Step2: Large-scale pretraining Step1:
> Stronger
> generalization
> Current predictions
> Current predictions
> Large generator
> Limited supervised
> information
> Few labeled images
> Unlabeled images with
> consistent scene type
> Generated large
> labeled images
> L
> Large amounts
> of vascular
> images
> Few labeled
> images
> Large amounts
> of vascular
> structures
> Small model
> Large model Large model
> Large amounts of
> vascular images
> Small model

Fig. 1: The advantages of our generative data-engine foundation models are as follows, (a) Weakly supervised learning: It utilizes a small number of sample images and unlabeled but consistent scene types. This model exhibits limited generalization capability. (b) Foundation models developed via large amounts of images pretraining adopt fixed architectural structures. When adapted to downstream tasks with few annotated images, these models encounter dual con-straints: insu ffi cient supervisory signals and inflexible network architectures. (c) In our generative data-engine foundation model, the first phase conducts pretraining of the generative model by integrating both collected large amount images and structured data synthesized through rule-based vascular generation algorithms. During the second phase of downstream adaptation, the model not only generates images at scale but also dynamically selects optimal architec-tures tailored to task-specific requirements. 

generic feature representations through large-scale pretraining , and demonstrate robust transfer learning capabilities during downstream task adaptation using few labeled images. This ap-proach substantially reduces reliance on annotated target do-main data and enhances model convergence e ffi ciency. How-ever, in the field of 2D vascular image analysis, the performance of such models faces several critical challenges, primarily in-cluding domain discrepancy, limited supervised information, and rigid network architecture. Specifically, 1) Domain discrep-ancy: Vascular images exhibit significant di ff erences from nat-ural images in terms of morphological characteristics, contrast distribution, and topological structures (Raghu et al., 2019b; Hu et al., 2024). This results in a significant mismatch between the pre-trained feature space and the feature space required for the vessel segmentation task, thereby leading to a degrada-tion in model performance. 2) Limited supervised information: When fine-tuning with few labeled image datasets, the model is prone to overfitting, particularly in high-dimensional parameter Given-name Surname et al. / Medical Image Analysis (2026) 3

spaces with insu ffi cient supervisory signals (Tajbakhsh et al., 2020). This limitation further constrains the model’s general-ization capability. 3) Rigid network architecture: Existing pre-trained models employ fixed network architectures, hindering task-specific optimization due to their inherent structural con-straints (Ma et al., 2022; Isensee et al., 2021) . This architectural rigidity limits the model’s capacity to capture intricate vascular features e ff ectively. This constraint particularly a ff ects vascular segmentation, as specialized networks designed for elongated structures with multi-scale feature extraction capabilities can-not be utilized within pre-training transfer paradigms (Yang and Zhang, 2024). Existing research indicates that the learning mechanisms of neural networks possess the capability to extract concepts from a limited number of samples (Sorscher et al., 2022), a capabil-ity partly attributed to their ability to decompose and recom-pose entities, known as compositionality (Mishra et al., 2022). Compositionality refers to the process of decomposing and re-combining entities to generate new samples, thereby enabling the model to adaptively understand the underlying logic of the entities. As illustrated in Fig. 2 (a), the branch structures of plants can be decomposed and recombined to generate plant morphologies with distinct branching characteristics, further combining plants with pots can create entirely new plant-pot composite samples. This process of generating new samples through composition not only enhances data diversity but also allows the learning mechanism to gain a deeper understanding of the inherent patterns and relationships underlying the enti-ties. Based on this, we propose a hypothesis: by decomposing and recombining vascular images, integrating compositionality into the learning process can enable the development of a uni-versal few-shot vascular segmentation model. This approach aims to leverage compositionality to generate diverse vascular image samples, thereby enhancing the model’s generalization capability and segmentation accuracy few annotated data. In this study, we integrate compositional modeling into few-shot vascular segmentation learning, constructing a generative-based universal framework for vascular segmentation. As illus-trated in Fig. 2 (b), the core concept involves decomposing and recombining vascular structures, analogous to compositional process observed in plants, and combining these structures with diverse backgrounds to generate novel vascular images. Build-ing on this innovative approach, we develop the compositional learning for flexible and diverse vascular synthesis. As depicted in Fig. 1 (c), this method uses rich vascular structures and vas-cular images for conducting large-scale generative pretraining. To mitigate the domain discrepancy between generated data and target segmentation images, we proposed a few-shot genera-tive adaptation for transferable vascular image segmentation. Subsequently, the trained synthesizer generates a rich set of la-beled images to train the segmentation model. The generated data is highly diverse and rich, which substantially enhances the model’s generalization capabilities. Furthermore, the down-stream segmentation network can be flexibly replaced with al-ternative architectures, improving the framework’s universality and adaptability. Building upon the aforementioned method-ological innovations, we ultimately establish the Generative (a) The description of compositionality  (b) Compositionality in our vascular generation           

> plant pot new pot-plant foreground background synthetic image
> branch branch new branch vessel structure synthetic vessel vessel structure
> Fig. 2: The motivation in our generative data-engine foundation model is that compositionality can enhance the diversity of images. a) The description of compositionality in plants, two branches combined into a new branch and a plant and a pot combined into a new pot-plan.b) Compositionality in our vas-cular generation is reflected in the synthesis of new vascular structures by com-bining di ff erent vascular structures, as well as the combination of background and foreground to create new vascular images.

Data-engine Foundation Model for Universal Few-shot Vascu-lar Image Segmentation (UniVG). By embedding composition-ality into the vascular learning process, our method achieves performance comparable to or exceeding fully supervised mod-els using five annotated images in arbitrary scenarios, o ff ering an e ffi cient solution for few-shot vascular segmentation learn-ing. Overall, our proposed UniVG framework encompasses two innovations: 1) Compositional learning for flexible and diverse vascular syn-thesis : Through compositional learning, the model can learn the structural features of vascular structures at various levels and the distribution characteristics of vascular images, thereby en-hancing the diversity of synthesized images. Specifically, this mainly includes the following two aspects: a) Enhancing the diversity of 2D vascular structures: Our approach applies rule-based vascular generation algorithms to flexibly produce pseudo-vascular structures with various mor-phological features. This method allows for customization of the complexity and layout of vascular structures by adjust-ing parameters and configurations during the generation pro-cess, thereby naturally generating a diversified range of vascular structures. Subsequently, a di ff usion model is utilized for pre-training to learn representations of these structures at di ff erent types and levels, integrating multi-level knowledge to generate an even broader array of vascular structure combinations. This not only supports the creation of a richly diverse set of vascular structures but is also particularly suitable for vascular segmen-tation tasks with few samples. b) Increasing the diversity of 2D vascular image styles: To further enrich the styles of vascular structures, we constructed a dataset named UniVG-58K, comprising 57,075 unlabeled vas-cular images. This dataset was used to pre-train the di ff usion model, enabling it to capture the rich characteristics of the dis-tribution of vascular images. Ultimately, by integrating vascu-lar structures with background information and diverse vascular masks, our method generates stylistically varied vascular im-ages, improving dataset diversity and practicality. 2) Few-shot generative adaptation for transferable vascular im-age segmentation : In the process of adaptation via fine-tuning, 4 Given-name Surname et al. / Medical Image Analysis (2026) 

embedding few-shot real data enables generative models to pro-duce high-quality synthetic data. Such data are leveraged by downstream networks to learn e ff ective domain-specific infor-mation, ultimately achieving performance that approaches or even surpasses fully supervised models trained on real datasets. a) Few-shot transfer of 2D vascular structure knowledge: By fine-tuning a generative model that has learned from a rich combination of vascular structures with a small amount of real vascular masks, we aim to transfer foundational knowledge of vascular structures into corresponding real-world vascular con-texts. Consequently, this approach facilitates the generation of vascular structures that are both diverse and realistic, signifi-cantly advancing further research in vascular generation. b) Few-shot transfer of 2D vascular image knowledge: Through the use of a few annotated vascular images for transfer learning on a conditional generative model that has been pre-trained on a large ensemble of vascular image combinations, we conditionally generate corresponding vascular images based on the vascular structures produced as described in a). This adapted model generates vascular images with diverse struc-tures and styles, emulating the complexity of real vascular dis-tributions. Ultimately, the integration of a large volume of synthetic images alongside a few real data trains downstream segmentation networks to extract domain-invariant features, en-abling robust generalization in unseen vascular domains. In summary, the contributions of this paper are as follows: 

• To the best of our knowledge, we propose a novel gener-ative data-engine foundation model for universal few-shot vascular image segmentation for the first time. This in-novative approach enables the generation of su ffi ciently diverse vascular images even under few-shot conditions, thereby providing essential data support for downstream vascular segmentation tasks. Remarkably, it achieves per-formance comparable to fully supervised models trained on real datasets using as few as five annotated vascular im-ages in any 2D vascular segmentation scenario. 

• We propose compositional learning for flexible and di-verse vascular synthesis, where di ff erent branches of vas-cular structures are recombined and integrated with diverse foreground-background environments, achieving flexible and highly diversified labeled vascular image generation. 

• We propose a few-shot generative adaptation for transfer-able vascular image segmentation, specializing knowledge from pre-trained generation models for the real vascular domain, enabling the generation of high-quality synthetic data from a few annotated data. This supports e ff ective training and generalization of downstream segmentation models. 

• We develop a large-scale vascular image dataset, UniVG-58K, containing 57,075 vascular images, and used vas-cular generation algorithms to create numerous pseudo-vascular structures. Based on this dataset, large-scale pre-training was conducted, significantly enhancing the struc-tural and stylistic diversity of vascular images. 

• We conducted extensive experiments on 11 vascular seg-mentation tasks cross 5 modalities to verify the e ff ec-tiveness of our proposed UniVG framework. The results demonstrate that our method can generate diverse vascular images and e ff ectively enhance the performance of seg-mentation models in 5-shot scenarios. This confirms the robustness and versatility of our framework across various applications. Overall, our UniVG framework has three key advantages: 1) Diversity : Our UniVG framework can generate morpho-logically diverse vascular images using only a small amount of annotated data, e ff ectively augmenting the data for few-shot vascular segmentation tasks. This significantly reduces the la-beling costs in vascular image segmentation tasks. 2) Trans-ferability : Our UniVG framework demonstrates excellent ver-satility, requiring only 5 images and corresponding masks to be applied to di ff erent datasets and segmentation tasks. 3) 

Accuracy : Compared to other segmentation methods, the au-thentic images generated by our framework significantly im-prove the performance of the segmentation model. Our UniVG framework achieves state-of-the-art results in multiple vascu-lar segmentation tasks. We implement our proposed method using the PyTorch framework and share our code at https: //github.com/XinAloha/UniVG .

2. Related Works 

2.1. Pre-trained foundation model 

Pre-training is a critical phase of foundation models, signif-icantly enhancing model performance through large-scale data learning. Compared to models trained from scratch, pre-trained models exhibit higher robustness and better generalization ca-pabilities across multiple tasks (Yang et al., 2024). In the med-ical domain, the application of foundation models has been shown to significantly improve diagnostic accuracy, acceler-ate disease screening, assist clinical decision-making, reduce healthcare costs, and advance medical research, thereby com-prehensively enhancing the quality and e ffi ciency of medical services (Zhang and Metaxas, 2023). Foundation models have demonstrated significant advantages in the field of medical image segmentation. For instance, BiomedParse (Zhao et al., 2025) was proposed as a biomed-ical foundation model capable of jointly executing segmenta-tion, detection, and recognition tasks across up to nine imaging modalities. This joint task learning not only improves the accu-racy of individual tasks but also opens new applications such as segmenting relevant objects in images through textual descrip-tions. Additionally, Zhang et al. (2025b) explored a foundation model for brain MRI lesion segmentation, utilizing a mixture of modality experts framework to automatically segment dif-ferent types of brain lesions, exhibiting excellent generalization capability across multiple input modalities. Berger et al. (2025) introduced cross-domain transfer learning for image-to-graph transformers, enabling 2D road network data to pretrain 3D ves-sel graph extraction models through regularized edge sampling and supervised domain adaptation frameworks. Wittmann et al. Given-name Surname et al. / Medical Image Analysis (2026) 5

(2025) proposed vesselFM for universal 3D blood vessel seg-mentation, trained on three heterogeneous data sources, achiev-ing zero-shot generalization across diverse imaging modalities such as MRA, CTA, vEM, and microscopy images. The pre-training strategies for foundation models can be pri-marily categorized into two types: supervised pre-training and self-supervised pre-training. Supervised pre-training leverages labeled data to train the model, enabling it to learn the mapping relationship between input data and labels, which improves the model’s accuracy and generalization capabilities. For instance, SAM and MedSAM (Ma et al., 2024) have demonstrated out-standing performance in natural image and medical image seg-mentation tasks DeepVesselNet (Tetteh et al., 2020) alleviates the problem of insu ffi cient annotated data by generating syn-thetic 3D vascular datasets and applying transfer learning. Self-supervised pre-training, on the other hand, utilizes unlabeled data to learn the intrinsic structures and patterns within the data, mapping the input data to a low-dimensional represen-tation to better capture the essential features. Self-supervised pre-training methods, such as MoCo (He et al., 2020) , MAE (He et al., 2022), SimCLR (Liu et al., 2022), iBOT (Zhou et al., 2021), and SimSiam (Chen and He, 2021) , have achieved sig-nificant results in various tasks. These methods enhance the model’s representation capabilities by minimizing reconstruc-tion objectives or maximizing similarity measures. 

2.2. Vascular image synthesis 

Generative models, encompassing GAN (Goodfellow et al., 2014), VAE (Kingma, 2013), and di ff usion models (Ho et al., 2020), have made rapid advancements in the field of synthesiz-ing highly realistic images. Particularly, di ff usion models have garnered significant attention due to their exceptional perfor-mance in image generation quality (Rombach et al., 2022). Kim et al. (2022) proposed a Di ff usion Adversarial Repre-sentation Learning (DARL) method for self-supervised vascu-lar segmentation aimed at diagnosing vascular diseases. DARL comprises a di ff usion module specifically designed to learn the distribution of background images and a generative mod-ule for vascular segmentation. Kreitner et al. (2024) intro-duced a retinal vascular network simulation technique inte-grated with space colonization algorithms and three contrast adaptation pipelines. This method aims to enhance the accu-racy of vascular segmentation by generating more realistic Op-tical Coherence Tomography Angiography (OCTA) synthetic images. Lin et al. (2023) proposed the YoloCurvSeg frame-work, which includes background generation, a vascular gener-ator based on space colonization algorithms, and a multi-layer patch-wise contrastive learning synthesizer. This framework re-quires only a single noisy skeleton annotation to generate high-quality synthetic vascular datasets, significantly improving the accuracy of vascular segmentation. Galati et al. (2023) de-veloped A2V for angiography-to-venography translation using StyleGAN2 architecture in brain vessel segmentation. Feldman et al. (2025) introduced VesselGPT, an autoregressive approach combining VQ-VAE and GPT-2 to generate vessel sequences with B-spline-based cross-sectional representation. Physics-based vascular synthesis methods (Jessen et al., 2025, 2023; Ebrahem et al., 2024) typically employ nonlinear optimization frameworks, incorporating biophysical principles such as Murray’s law and porous elasticity theory to generate vascular tree structures, requiring configuration of specific pa-rameters including organ geometry, blood viscosity, and pres-sure drop constraints. For example, Jessen et al. (2025) es-tablished an optimization framework based on Murray’s law to generate multiple non-intersecting vascular trees in non-convex organs. 

2.3. Few-shot semantic segmentation 

Unlike ordinary natural images, vascular images are costly to acquire, and require expert knowledge for annotation, and their slender and complex structures often lead to high anno-tation costs, resulting in limited data availability (Cheng et al., 2024). To tackle annotation scarcity, one approach focuses on improving annotation e ffi ciency through collaborative frame-works, while another leverages few-shot learning to train mod-els with minimal labeled data. For annotation e ffi ciency, Falcetta et al. (2025) introduced VesselVerse, a large-scale brain vessel annotation dataset with 950 images from three public datasets across multiple neurovas-cular imaging modalities, featuring multi-expert annotations and version control with STAPLE-based consensus generation to facilitate collaborative refinement and quality assurance. Few-shot Semantic Segmentation (FSS) methods o ff er an al-ternative solution by learning from limited annotations. FSS issues are commonly tackled by i) augmenting training data, ii) limiting the hypothesis space, or iii) adjusting the search strategy within the hypothesis space guided by prior knowledge extracted by a meta-learner (Song et al., 2023). Additionally, existing domain adaptation methods (Gu et al., 2022; Galati et al., 2024; Lin et al., 2024; Peng et al., 2022; Hu et al., 2024) typically handle cross-modality segmentation by developing domain-specific components or alignment strategies that mini-mize distributional di ff erences between imaging modalities, uti-lizing techniques such as style transfer, contrastive learning, or multi-center collaborative training. For example, Hu et al. (2024) propose a Vector Field Transformer (VFT) that converts vessel images to vector fields using Hessian matrix eigenvec-tors and employs vessel enhancement networks to generate syn-thetic domains for cross-modality generalization between fun-dus photography and OCT angiography. SSL leverages unlabeled data to enrich the training dataset, thereby assisting the learning of segmentation models. Chen et al. (2019, 2021) introduced SSL methods named MASSL and CPS, which concurrently optimize both supervised segmenta-tion and unsupervised reconstruction objectives. However, the limited availability of unlabeled data in semi-supervised learn-ing, caused by the di ffi culty in obtaining medical data, collec-tively leads to a bottleneck in performance improvement for the vascular segmentation task. Meta-learning represents another approach to tackling FSS, featuring optimization-based, model-based, and metric-based methodologies (Raghu et al., 2019a; Wang et al., 2021; Snell et al., 2017). Among these, metric learning has emerged as a leading paradigm for addressing few-shot segmentation chal-lenges, as demonstrated by methods such as CANet, PANet, 6 Given-name Surname et al. / Medical Image Analysis (2026) 

and PFENet (Zhang et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2019; Tian et al., 2020). These approaches generally start by mapping support and query images into embedding features, followed by per-forming segmentation on the unseen query image through fea-ture matching in the embedding space. 

3. Methodology 

The pseudo-vascular structure generation using the Spatial Colonization Algorithm (SCA) will be detailed in Sec.3.1. The formulation of a generative data-engine foundation model will be introduced in Sec. 3.2. The compositional learning for flexi-ble and diverse vascular synthesis will be presented in Sec. 3.3. The few-shot generative adaptation method for transferable vas-cular image segmentation will be discussed in Sec. 3.4. The collected UniVG-58K dataset will be introduced in Sec. 3.5. 

3.1. Implementation details of the spatial colonization algo-rithm 

For the vascular synthesis algorithm, we adopt the SCA pro-posed by (Runions et al., 2005, 2007) is a procedural modeling algorithm used to simulate the growth of branching networks or tree-like structures, widely applied in the generation of vascu-lar systems, leaf venations, root systems, and more. In UniVG, the algorithm flow is shown in Figure.3, which simulates the iterative growth of curvilinear structures through attractors and nodes. Nodes represent discrete points along vessel structures that progressively extend to form complete vascular networks, while attractors are spatial points that guide vessel growth direction by exerting influence on nearby nodes within a defined attraction distance (Da). We have employed a real-conditioned grid-based jittering approach for attractor placement, where the spatial dis-tribution has been conditioned on real vascular masks from cor-responding modalities with attractors placed using regular grids perturbed by random o ff sets to balance anatomical plausibility with structural diversity, and root nodes have been initialized at anatomically appropriate locations: optic disc centers for fun-dus imaging, multiple root nodes distributed across the foveal avascular zone boundary for OCT and OCTA, coronary ostia for coronary artery DSA, and major vessel origins for brain DSA. The core steps include: 1) Placing attractors and associating nodes: Attractors are placed randomly or according to a predefined pattern within the growth domain, where a j represents the posi-tion of attractor A j and pi represents the position of node 

Ni. These form the attractor set A and node set N, respec-tively. 2) Calculating the average direction of nodes: For each node, we determine the growth direction by averaging vec-tors pointing toward all attractors within the attraction dis-tance Da. The direction vector from node Ni to each at-tractor A j within range is given by: 

vi j = a j − pi, |vi j | ≤ Da (1) Eliminated  

> attraction points
> Segment length
> Kill zone
> New node
> Attraction
> points
> Choose shortest
> distance impact
> Leaf node
> Inter -node
> Kill radius
> Attraction
> distance
> Average attraction vector
> Next elimination of
> attraction points
> 1
> 2
> 3
> 4
> 5
> Fig. 3: The process of node growth in the space colonization algorithm. Figure details the direction of node growth, determined by the mean attraction vector. It also shows the next eliminated attraction points, the lethal radius, and the kill zone.

where vi j is the direction vector from node Ni to attractor 

A j. The average direction vector is then computed as: 

vi =

X 

> aj∈A

vi j (2) where vi represents the average direction vector for node 

Ni.3) Calculating the position of new nodes: New nodes are generated by extending existing nodes along their com-puted growth directions. The average direction vector vi

is first normalized to obtain a unit vector: ˆvi = vi

∥vi∥ (3) where ˆ vi is the unit direction vector for node pi.The position of the new node pi+1 is then calculated by advancing from the current node position by the segment length Ls:

pi+1 = pi + Ls · ˆvi (4) where pi+1 is the position of the newly generated node. 4) Checking the position of nodes: After placing new nodes at their calculated positions, we evaluate whether any at-tractors fall within the kill zone of the newly generated nodes. For each new node pi+1 and each attractor A j, we compute the distance: 

d(i+1) j = ∥pi+1 − a j∥ (5) where d(i+1) j is the distance between the new node Ni+1 and attractor A j.5) Pruning attractors: Attractors within the kill distance of any newly added node are removed from the system. The updated attractor set is: 

A = {a j ∈ A| d(i+1) j > Dk} (6) Given-name Surname et al. / Medical Image Analysis (2026) 7

where A is the updated attractor set, d(i+1) j is the distance between the new node Ni+1 and attractor A j, and Dk is the kill distance threshold. 6) Iteration and termination: The algorithm iteratively re-peats steps 1)–5) until one of the termination conditions is satisfied. The algorithm terminates when: 

|N| ≥ Nmax or t ≥ Tmax (7) where Nmax is the maximum allowed number of nodes, 

Tmax is the maximum number of iterations, and t is the current iteration count. As shown in the spatial colonization algorithm in Fig.3, the process involves several key steps to generate diverse vascular structures. By observing the starting point, boundary, and cur-vature of vascular structures in images, parameters such as the root node coordinates Cr (e.g., the starting point of retinal vas-cular located in the optic disc region) as well as boundaries and obstacles can be set. Commonly used parameters such as attrac-tion distance Da, kill distance Dk, and segment length Ls are set to 20, 10, and 15, respectively, but can be adjusted as needed. The number of attractors is controlled through a grid placement strategy, and jitter is introduced to increase randomness. Addi-tionally, by recursively calculating the radius from the branch tips to the tree base, the thickness variation of branches is sim-ulated. Finally, by setting random attractors and root nodes, a library of curves with varied shapes but the same type is gener-ated for pre-training the mask generation model. 

3.1.1. Spatial colonization algorithm initialization 

Spatial colonization algorithm initialization incorporates 

real vessel topology, denoted as R-SCA, to enhance structural authenticity. This algorithm comprises two sequential steps: 1) Real image initialization: The algorithm employs a real-conditioned hybrid placement approach combining dense vessel coverage with randomized grid-based distribution. The spatial distribution is conditioned on real vascular masks from corresponding modalities, where attractors are first densely placed at true vessel locations to ensure anatomical fidelity. In the remaining non-vessel regions, a regular grid is established and attractors are randomly placed within grid cells to introduce spatial variation and placement diversity. This hybrid strategy ensures both ad-herence to anatomical vascular territories and su ffi cient structural variation for diverse pseudo-vascular generation. 2) Spatial colonization-based structure generation: The spatial colonization algorithm is employed to generate ves-sel masks by iteratively growing branches from initialized root nodes toward attractors. 

3.2. Formulation of vascular data-engine foundation model 

A foundational generative data-engine model for universal few-shot vascular image segmentation generates a large quan-tity of high-quality and diverse vascular images from limited annotated data, thereby driving vascular image segmentation al-gorithms. Specifically, the framework comprises three compo-nents: the vascular mask data-engine (detailed in Sec. 3.2.1), the vascular image data-engine (introduced in Sec. 3.2.2) and the vascular data-engine (explained in Sec. 3.2.2). 

3.2.1. Vascular mask data-engine 

R-SCA (referred to as S ) generates a large quantity of syn-thetic vascular labels (denoted by the set MF , where each ele-ment is mi). The formulation is as follows, 

MF = {mi|mi = S (I, P), ∀i ∈ N}, (8) where N represents the set of natural numbers, indicating that the index i runs over all instances of synthetic vascular labels. 

S (·) processes the input image I to generate each synthetic vas-cular label mi, P represents the set of parameters used for gen-erating synthetic vascular labels. The vascular mask data-engine is trained using a large num-ber of pseudo-vascular labels MF . This learning process is for-malized as, 

θ1 = GM (MF |θ), (9) where θ represents the parameters of a mask data-engine pre-trained on natural images, and θ1 denotes the parameters of the vascular mask data-engine after pretraining on a large-scale dataset of vascular structures. 

3.2.2. Vascular image data-engine 

To generate synthetic vascular images that align with the cor-responding vascular masks for downstream segmentation tasks, we use the vascular image data-engine ( GI ), which is trained on large unannotated vascular image dataset I = {Ii|i ∈ N} to learn the background distribution within the vascular images. 

θ2 = GI (I| θ), (10) where θ represents the parameters of the vascular image data-engine, θ2 represents the parameters of the model after pre-training. 

3.2.3. Vascular data-engine 

Building upon the vascular mask data-engine and the vas-cular image data-engine, we obtain the specialized vascular mask data-engine ( GM ) and the specialized vascular image data-engine (CondG) after adaptation to specialized vascular domains (Sec. 3.4.1). Combining these two engines results in the final data-engine. Using the synthetic vascular masks S mask 

generated by the specialized vascular mask data-engine as de-scribed by: 

S mask = {S imask |S imask = GM (θ3, ϵ i), i ∈ Z}, (11) where ϵi is the randomly sampled noise and θ3 is defined in Sec. 3.4.1. The CondG is utilized to generate vascular images S img that align with the vascular masks and feature diverse backgrounds. The formal description is given by: 

S img = {S iimg |S iimg = CondG (S imask |θ4, ϵ i), i ∈ Z}, (12) where ϵi is the randomly sampled noise and θ4 is defined in Sec. 3.4.1. 8 Given-name Surname et al. / Medical Image Analysis (2026) Synthetic vascular mask dataset 

> Few real vascular masks
> Vascular image dataset
> Large -scale generation of
> vascular images
> Few real vascular images
> Large -scale generation of
> vascular masks
> Few real
> vascular masks
> Ldiff Ldiff

(a) Compositional learning for flexible 

and diverse vascular synthesis 

(b) Few -shot generative adaption for 

transferable vascluar image 

segmentation     

> Image generator Image generator
> Control Control Control Control
> Decoder Decoder Decoder
> Decoder Decoder Decoder
> Encoder Encoder Encoder Encoder Encoder Encoder
> Encoder Encoder Encoder
> Latent diffusion based
> mask generator
> Latent diffusion based
> mask generator
> i.Vascular mask data engine learning ii.Vascular image data engine learning
> ZTZ

εθ(z t, t) ZT Z 

> ZTZ

εθ(z t,c, t)  

> Noise

ε

> Mask generator Mask generator
> ZTZ
> Mask generator
> ZTZ

Segmentor Segmentor  

> Predict
> Ldiff Ldiff
> Ldiff Ldiff
> Lcontrol Lcontrol
> Training
> Inference
> Loss
> Initialize
> Noise

ε 

> Noise

ε Noise ε

εθ(z t, t) 

εθ(z t, t)   

> Real -synthetic joint
> vascular masks
> Real -synthetic joint
> vascular masks
> Lseg Lseg
> Fusioin Frozen
> Trainable Plus
> Encoder Encoder Encoder
> Latent diffusion based
> image generator

Fig. 4: UniVG framework architecture overview. The framework consists of two stages: (a) Compositional learning for flexible and diverse vascular synthesis, including i) vascular mask data-engine learning using spatial colonization algorithms and latent di ff usion models to learn morphological knowledge, and ii) vascular image data-engine learning from the UniVG-58K dataset for background distribution modeling. (b) Few-shot generative adaptation using 5-shot real samples to fine-tune both generators, bridging the synthetic-real domain gap for downstream segmentation tasks. 

3.3. Compositional learning for flexible and diverse vascular synthesis 3.3.1. Learning the vascular mask data-engine from large-scale synthetic vascular data 

The vascular mask data-engine learns diverse vascular mor-phological structures from a large number of pseudo-labels, en-abling the model to synthesize a variety of vascular structures. Our approach consists of two components (Fig. 4 i): 1) A reg-ularization algorithm for vascular structure synthesis: We pro-pose a novel vascular structure synthesis algorithm that uses spatial colonization algorithms (SCA) (Runions et al., 2005, 2007) to randomly place a large number of attractors condi-tioned on real vessels. This approach guides the growth of vas-cular structures following the SCA growth pattern, enabling the synthesis of a wide range of vascular structures across di ff erent anatomical sites. The final output is a synthetic vascular mask dataset ( MF ). 2) Learning the vascular mask data-engine: To enable e ffi cient learning of the vascular mask data-engine, we fine-tune the pre-trained Stable Di ff usion model using Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) (Hu et al., 2021). This technique allows the model to transfer knowledge from natural images to vascular structures, enhancing its ability to synthesize high-quality vascular masks. Firstly, the synthetic vascular mask mi

is transformed into a latent variable Z through an encoder E(·). Then, at each time step t, noise ϵ is added to the latent variable 

Z to generate the noisy latent variable Zt:

Zt = p1 − βtZ + pβtϵ, (13) where Z = E(mi) is the latent variable obtained by encoding the synthetic vascular mask mi. βt is the variance scheduling parameter used to control the amount of noise added at each step. ϵ ∼ N (0 , I) is the noise sampled from a standard normal distribution. Next, the vascular mask data-engine ϵθ(·) predicts the noise 

ϵθ(Zt, t) in the noisy latent variable Zt, and the di ff erence be-tween the predicted noise and the actual noise is calculated as the loss function: 

Ldi ff = Ez,t,ϵ 

h∥ϵ − ϵθ(Zt, t)∥22

i , (14) where ϵ ∼ N (0 , I) is the noise sampled from a standard normal distribution. The time step t is sampled from a uniform distri-bution U(1 , T ). 

3.3.2. Learning the vascular image data-engine from large-scale vascular images 

The vascular image data-engine (Fig. 4 ii) achieves an ef-ficient representation of vascular images by learning exten-sively from a wide range of 2D vascular images I (Sec. 3.5) spanning multiple modalities and categories. This extensive learning enables the engine to perform compositional gener-ation of both vascular structures and vascular backgrounds. Firstly, the vascular image Ii is transformed into a latent vari-able Z through an encoder E(·), obtaining a noisy latent variable Given-name Surname et al. / Medical Image Analysis (2026) 9

Zt = E(Ii) (Equ. 13 ). Then, the noise ϵθ(Zt, t) is predicted by the vascular image data-engine and the loss is calculated using 

Ldi ff = Ez,t,ϵ 

h∥ϵ − ϵθ(Zt, t)∥22

i (Equ. 14). 

3.3.3. Hierarchical compositional mechanism 

Our compositional learning has operated through a hierar-chical decomposition and recombination process that has been embedded throughout the UniVG architecture. The mechanism has functioned at three distinct levels: 

a) Structural decomposition : Structural decomposition has been achieved via the iterative denoising process, where the di ff usion model e ff ectively resolves vascular masks into fun-damental elements (e.g., vessel segments, bifurcation points). These decomposed elements have been encoded as hierarchical latent features within the di ff usion model’s learned representa-tions, where lower-level features capture local geometric prim-itives such as vessel curvature and thickness, while higher-level features represent global topological patterns including branch-ing connectivity and overall network architecture. This hierar-chical feature encoding has enabled the model to capture essen-tial morphological characteristics across di ff erent vessel types and anatomical contexts. 

b) Feature recombination : The di ff usion-based vascular mask data-engine has learned to recombine these decomposed structural elements in novel configurations, utilizing struc-tural features decomposed from fine-tuned real masks as an-chor points. The model has balanced synthetic diversity with anatomical realism by composing new vascular structures from learned primitives. 

c) Cross-modal composition: The vascular image data-engine has composed the corresponding modality-specific ves-sel appearances by combining structural masks with diverse background contexts. This compositional process has enabled the generation of morphologically diverse vascular images that have maintained anatomical plausibility across di ff erent imag-ing modalities. 

Summary of advantages: 1) Flexibility: The vascular mask data-engine possesses the capability to customize the complex-ity and layout of vascular structures by fine-tuning the vascu-lature in the corresponding domain. This engine supports the generation of multiple types of vascular structures and can flex-ibly integrate background information with a diverse array of vascular masks, thereby creating images that are stylistically unique and content-rich. 2) Diversity: By acquiring multi-level knowledge from large-scale collections and generated vascu-lar images, this approach enables a broader and more complex combination of vascular structures. Consequently, it facilitates the generation of morphologically diverse vascular images us-ing only a minimal amount of labeled data. 

3.4. Few-shot generative adaptation for transferable vascular image segmentation 3.4.1. E ffi cient adaptation for specialized vascular images 

Effi cient adaptation for specific vascular images enables the specialization of pre-trained knowledge to specific vascular dis-tributions, thereby generating diverse vascular structures from limited annotated data. Including two parts of downstream adaptation: 

1) Specialized vascular mask data-engine specific to down-stream task: We fine-tune the vascular mask data-engine us-ing Low-Rank Hadamard Product (LOHA) (Hyeon-Woo et al., 2021) techniques with a small dataset of real vascular masks corresponding to specific anatomical locations. The weight ma-trix ( W′) after LoRA adjustment becomes: 

W′ = W + λ1∆W, (15) where λ1 is used to control the influence strength of the adjust-ment term ∆W on the original weight matrix W. Using five real and domain-specific vascular labels Rmask = {Rimask | i ∈ Z, 1 ≤

i ≤ 5} as the training set, the vascular image mi is transformed into a latent variable Z through an encoder E(·), obtaining a noisy latent variable Zt (Equ. 13). Then, the noise ϵθ(Zt, t)is predicted by the vascular image data-engine and the loss is calculated using Ldi ff (Equ. 14). After training, we obtain the specialized mask data-engine ( GM ): 

θ3 = GM (Rmask | θ1), (16) where θ3 denotes the parameters of the generative model after fine-tuning. 

2) Specialized vascular image data-engine specific to down-stream task: Based on the vascular image data-engine, we use five labeled vascular images Rimg = {Riimg | i ∈ Z, 1 ≤ i ≤ 5} and their corresponding masks Rmask as the training set. The vascu-lar image Riimg is transformed into a latent variable Z through an encoder E(·). The vascular mask Rimask is downsampled to the same size as Z using a conditional network to obtain c f . A noisy latent variable Zt is obtained through Equ. 13. The noise is then predicted using a noise prediction model ϵθ(Zt, t, c f ), and the loss is calculated using Lcontrol :

Lcontrol = EZt ,t,c f ,ϵ ∼N (0 ,1) 

h∥ϵ − ϵθ(Zt, t, c f )) ∥22

i , (17) After the training process is completed, we obtain the special-ized vascular image data-engine (denoted as CondG). This pro-cess can be described as follows: 

θ4 = CondG (Rimg , Rmask |θ2), (18) where θ4 represents the parameters of the model after fine-tuning. 

3.4.2. Downstream vascular image segmentation 

The vascular data-engine (Sec. 3.2.3) was utilized to gen-erate a large-scale dataset comprising vascular masks S mask 

alongside their corresponding vascular images S img . In addi-tion to the generated dataset, a dataset containing 5 real vascu-lar images and masks was also prepared. These two datasets are jointly used for training downstream segmentation tasks. Specifically, during the training phase, to ensure authenticity during the learning process and avoid interference from devi-ations introduced by synthetic data in segmentation, we ran-domly select a synthetic vessel image ( S iimg ) and its correspond-ing mask ( S imask ) from the synthetic training image set, and 10 Given-name Surname et al. / Medical Image Analysis (2026) HRF HRF 

58K vascular 

images with 

5 vascular 

modalities  

> Fig. 5: We curated a large-scale 2D vascular dataset, UniVG-58K, for pre-training and utilized it as the downstream dataset.

a real vessel image ( Riimg ) and its corresponding mask ( Rimask )from the real fine-tuning vessel dataset. These synthetic and real vessel images are then placed into a batch as input to the downstream segmentation network, with the synthetic and real masks serving as training targets. Here, pred (·) denotes the segmentation mask predicted by the model based on the input image (whether synthetic or real). The loss function uses binary cross-entropy loss (BCE), defined as: 

Lseg =BCE (S imask , pred (S iimg )) 

+ BCE (Rimask , pred (Riimg )) . (19) By leveraging the aforementioned training strategy, the net-work can learn rich and diverse features from large-scale syn-thetic data while using a small amount of real data to ensure generalization to real-world scenarios. This approach enables the model to achieve highly accurate vessel image segmenta-tion even when only a limited number of annotated real images are available. 

Summary of advantages: 1) Transferability: Effi cient adaptation for specialized vascular images exhibits remarkable versatility, requiring only 5 images and corresponding masks to be applied across various segmentation tasks. This advantage is attributed to its few-shot generation adaptation capability, en-abling rapid deployment in di ff erent vascular domains. 2) Ac-curacy: By generating diverse and realistic images, the accu-racy and reliability of segmentation outcomes are significantly enhanced, providing high-quality data support for downstream tasks. 

3.5. UniVG-58K dataset 

We have curated a large dataset named UniVG-58K (Fig. 5), which encompasses 58,689 vascular images across five distinct imaging modalities: Optical Coherence Tomography (OCT), OCTA, Fundus imaging, Brain Digital Subtraction Angiog-raphy (DSA), and Coronary Artery DSA. This dataset inte-grates content from twenty publicly available datasets and one private dataset, ensuring a diverse representation of vascular structures. Specifically, the fundus imaging dataset (Kauppi et al., 2007; Decenciere et al., 2013; Porwal et al., 2018; Decenci` ere et al., 2014; Orlando et al., 2020; Karthik and Dane, 2019; Gulshan et al., 2016) includes 42,259 images from seven authoritative sources, while the coronary artery DSA dataset (Danilov et al., 2021; Maxim Popov et al., 2023; Ma et al., 2021) comprises 12,946 images from three dif-ferent collections. Additionally, the cerebral DSA dataset (Liu et al., 2024)utilizes the DIAS dataset with 441 images. The OCT and OCTA datasets (Li et al., 2024; Ning et al., 2024) contribute an additional 600 and 829 high-resolution images, respectively. The dataset is publicly available at https: // huggingface.co /datasets /xinaloha /UniVG. Detailed de-scriptions of these datasets are provided in the Appendix Afor further reference. The UniVG-58K dataset is meticulously designed to en-hance the performance of foundational models in few-shot med-ical image segmentation tasks. By covering multiple imaging modalities, it provides rich training materials that help improve the model’s understanding and recognition capabilities for var-ious vascular structures. The diversity and scale of the dataset enable foundational models to learn more representative fea-tures, thereby exhibiting stronger adaptability when handling complex and diverse vascular images. 

4. EXPERIMENTS CONFIGURATIONS 

4.1. Experiments tasks settings 

The UniVG-58K dataset is split into one part for foundation model pretraining and another for few-shot vascular segmenta-tion in downstream tasks. 1) For foundation model pretraining: The pre-training dataset contains a total of 57,075 images covering five modalities: Fun-dus (42,259 images), Coronary artery DSA (12,946 images), Brain DSA (441 images), OCTA (829 images), and OCT (600 images). 2) For few-shot vascular segmentation in downstream tasks: a) Few-shot fundus vascular segmentation (FVS): This task fo-cuses on vascular segmentation within fundus images, incorpo-rating datasets such as DRIVE (40 images) (Asad et al., 2014), CHASEDB1 (28 images) (Henry et al., 2020), HRF (45 im-ages) (Li et al.), ORVS (49 images) (Sarhan et al., 2021), and ARIA (142 images) (Bankhead et al., 2012). b) Few-shot coro-nary artery DSA segmentation (FCS): This task targets coro-nary artery segmentation using digital subtraction angiography (DSA) images, including datasets like XACD (126 images) (Ma et al., 2021) and SBCD (300 images). c) Few-shot brain DSA segmentation (FBS): The brain DSA image segmenta-tion task includes datasets DIAS (60 images) (Liu et al., 2024) Given-name Surname et al. / Medical Image Analysis (2026) 11 

and DSCA (224 images) (Xie et al., 2024b,a). d) Few-shot OCTA vascular segmentation (FOS): Optical coherence tomog-raphy angiography (OCTA) vascular segmentation utilizes the OCTA500 dataset (300 images) (Li et al., 2024). e) Few-shot OCT vascular segmentation (FTS): The final task involves opti-cal coherence tomography (OCT) vascular segmentation using another OCT dataset (300 images) (Li et al., 2024). Similar to OCTA, this dataset is used for studying detailed structures of the eye, particularly the retina. The aforementioned five tasks follow this protocol: The num-bers in parentheses indicate the number of labeled images in each dataset. For training purposes, five randomly selected la-beled images are used as the training set, while the remaining images serve as the test set. Specifically, the training and testing set splits for each dataset are presented in Table .10. 

4.2. Comparison settings 

To demonstrate the superiority of our proposed UniVG framework, we compare it with 21 widely-used frameworks in the few-shot scenario. 1) Direct Learning Segmentation: The UNet (Ronneberger et al., 2015) and nnUNet (Isensee et al., 2021) are utilized to evaluate the performance of supervised medical image segmentation models in the 5-shot scenario. Both models are trained using the same 5-shot images and cor-responding masks to ensure fair comparison under data-limited conditions. The UNet serves as a basic baseline to assess fun-damental supervised learning performance, while nnUNet pro-vides a more advanced baseline with automated architecture optimization and preprocessing strategies. Both methods em-ploy five-fold cross-validation on the complete datasets to as-sess the upper limit of segmentation performance under fully supervised scenarios. Additionally, we compared two special-ized vessel segmentation methods on DRIVE and CHASEDB datasets, including Retina-Unet (Jaeger et al., 2020) and FSG-Net (Bacchin et al., 2023), trained using the same 5-shot im-ages and corresponding masks, following their original pre-processing and postprocessing protocols. 2) Weak Supervision Learning: We compare MASSL (Chen et al., 2019), CPS (Chen et al., 2021), CCT (Ouali et al., 2020), AGMM (Wu et al., 2023), DBDM (Luo et al., 2022), PVA (Zhang et al., 2023b) and Vessel-captcha(Dang et al., 2022) to illustrate the limita-tions posed by the lack of domain knowledge in the few-shot scenario and the noise-induced weak supervision challenges during training. 3) Pre-trained Foundation Model: A series of pre-trained foundation models (MAE (He et al., 2022), Sim-CLR (Liu et al., 2022), MOCO (He et al., 2020), iBOT (Zhou et al., 2021), SimSiam (Chen and He, 2021), SAM (Kirillov et al., 2023), MedSAM (Ma et al., 2024)) are compared to highlight the limitations encountered when transferring pre-trained knowledge to medical images due to domain gaps. 4) Pre-trained Foundation Models on Vascular Images (PFM-V): Models such as iBOT (Zhou et al., 2021) and SimSiam (Chen and He, 2021) are compared to showcase the challenges asso-ciated with transferring contrastive learning-based pre-training paradigms to vascular images.To ensure fair comparison, we have adapted the original pre-trained models from both methods to our vascular imaging domain while preserving their respec-tive backbone architectures. For iBOT, we utilized their Vision Transformer-Small /16 (ViT-S /16) architecture following their self-distillation approach with masked image modeling frame-work. For SimSiam, we employed their ResNet-50 backbone with the characteristic stop-gradient operation and Siamese net-work design. Both methods were pre-trained on our large-scale vascular dataset using publicly available ImageNet pre-trained checkpoints, adhering to their original training protocols and hyperparameter configurations. 5) Data Engine Paradigm (DE): We compare YoloCurvSeg (Lin et al., 2023) to evaluate the performance of skeleton-based synthetic data generation approaches in cross-modal vascular segmentation scenarios. To ensure fair comparison, we pro-vided YoloCurvSeg with 20 images containing skeleton noise annotations for each vascular modality and followed their orig-inal training protocols with all network hyperparameters main-tained according to the paper’s configuration. We also com-pared with the SOCT (Kreitner et al., 2024) method, generating 500 OCTA vascular images by fully following the SOCT (Kre-itner et al., 2024) configurations, using the same UNet network and training parameters for testing on the OCTA500 dataset. 

4.3. Implementation details 

All training processes were executed on NVIDIA GeForce RTX V100 GPUs with 32GB memory. 1) For the vascular mask data-engine learning: Pseudo vascular structures total-ing 10,000 (2,000 per modality across fundus imaging, OCTA, OCT, brain DSA, and coronary artery DSA) were generated us-ing SCA and used for training on an initialized Stable Di ff u-sion v1.5 model 2. The learning rate was set at 1 × 10 −4 with a total of 6 × 10 5 iterations. 2) Specialized vascular mask data-engine specific to downstream task: Fine-tuning was performed on the vascular mask data-engine using the LOHA method, maintaining the same learning rate of 1 × 10 −4. A cosine learn-ing rate scheduler was employed, with convolutional dimension and convolutional alpha both set to 4. The batch size was set to 1, with fine-tuning iterations limited to 1,500. Both pre-training and fine-tuning stages utilized the Adam optimizer, with net-work dimensions and network alpha set to 32. The hyperpa-rameter α1 for generating vascular masks was set to 0.7. 3) For the vascular image data-engine learning: An initialized Stable Di ff usion v1.5 was pretrained on the UniVG-58K dataset with a learning rate of 1 × 10 −4, using the Adam optimizer, and a batch size of 8 for 1 .4 × 10 5 iterations. 4) Specialized vascu-lar image data-engine specific to downstream task: The vascu-lar image data-engine served as the foundation for ControlNet training, which was further trained using 5 annotated vascular images. The learning rate for this stage was reduced to 1 ×10 −5,with a batch size of 2 and 6 × 10 3 iterations. 5) For down-stream vascular image segmentation: For downstream vascular segmentation tasks, a standard UNet architecture was selected. The loss function was defined as cross-entropy loss, optimized with the Adam optimizer, starting with an initial learning rate of 3 × 10 −4. The training process was capped at a maximum of 300 epochs. Notably, all generated images were used directly     

> 2https://huggingface.co/stable-diffusion-v1-5/ 12 Given-name Surname et al. /Medical Image Analysis (2026)

without any filtering or quality selection process, and no post-processing steps were applied after segmentation. 

5. RESULTS AND ANALYSIS 

5.1. Quantitative evaluation to show metric superiority 

Data-engine-based methods demonstrate significant advan-tages in few-shot medical image segmentation tasks. Five inter-esting observations can be made from Tab. 1: 1) Direct learn-ing segmentation methods demonstrate significant performance degradation under few-shot constraints. From the average re-sults, nnU-Net achieves 77.88% DSC score under the FIVE setting, substantially outperforming specialized vessel segmen-tation methods Retina-Unet (67.01%) and FSG-Net (72.56%). The performance gap is particularly pronounced in few-shot scenarios, with Retina-Unet and FSG-Net performing 10.87% and 5.32% lower than nnU-Net, respectively. Although all methods show improvements under the FULL setting, with nnU-Net reaching 83.83% and UNet achieving 78.86%, these results confirm that the dependence of direct learning segmen-tation methods on large-scale annotations fundamentally lim-its their e ff ectiveness in few-shot learning. 2) WSL methods are not always superior to supervised learning methods: For example, across all 11 datasets, the average DSC of MASSL, CPS, and CCT is higher than that of UNet, with CPS improv-ing DSC by 6.01% compared to UNet. This is because unla-beled data contains rich latent information, and semi-supervised learning can leverage this information to enhance the model’s generalization and performance. However, on the FBS-DIAS dataset, CCT’s DSC is 12.09% lower than that of UNet due to the extremely limited labels providing minimal supervision, making the supervision information in semi-supervised settings highly unreliable. 3) PFM methods show general improvements over WSL and supervised learning methods: Due to the pow-erful representation capabilities of deep learning, these mod-els achieve comprehensive improvements over WSL and super-vised methods. The average DSC of these methods exceeds 70% across all 11 datasets. 4) PFM-P methods show signif-icant improvement compared to those pre-trained on natural images: Because they learn the feature distribution of vascu-lar images, PFM-P shows notable improvements compared to models pre-trained on natural images. For instance, after be-ing pre-trained on vascular images, iBOT achieves an average DSC improvement of 1.66% when transferred to downstream vascular segmentation tasks compared to models pre-trained on natural images. Similarly, SimSiam pre-trained on the FCS-XACD dataset using vascular images shows a 2.42% higher DSC when transferred to downstream tasks compared to the original foundation model pre-trained on natural images. 5) DE methods demonstrate competitive performance but with lim-ited cross-modal adaptability: YoloCurvSeg achieves an aver-age DSC of 76.98% across all 11 datasets, showing reason-able performance in skeleton-based synthetic data generation. However, our UniVG framework outperforms YoloCurvSeg with an average DSC of 79.34%, representing a 2.36% im-provement. The performance gap is particularly evident on datasets requiring complex morphological variations, such as FVS-CHASEDB1 where our method achieves 85.39% DSC compared to YoloCurvSeg’s 80.89%. These results indicate that while algorithmic-based generation methods can provide eff ective data augmentation, learning-based compositional ap-proaches o ff er superior adaptability to diverse vascular mor-phologies and cross-modal scenarios without requiring special-ized parameter tuning for each imaging modality. Our UniVG method achieved improvements of 0.92% Dice and 0.87% clDice compared to the specialized OCTA generation method SOCT (Kreitner et al., 2024) in OCTA vascular segmentation tasks, while the SOCT method cannot be applied to vascular images of other modalities. Compared to other methods, the DE paradigm demonstrates significant superiority in few-shot medical image segmentation tasks due to its ability to leverage rich latent information from unlabeled data and generate diverse images for training. Our UniVG exhibits outstanding segmentation capabilities across all 11 datasets. In the 5-shot scenario, due to the diversity and authenticity of the generated images, UniVG achieves the highest average DSC (79.34%) and clDice (81.07%) across all 11 tasks. MedSAM performs similarly to our framework in terms of average metrics but underperforms on the FBS-DSCA dataset (with a 2.7% lower DSC than ours). This is because MedSAM lacks representations related to brain DSA and strug-gles to transfer to unseen medical images, thereby reducing seg-mentation performance. 

5.2. Qualitative evaluation to show visual superiority 

We present the segmentation results of the proposed UniVG method and 22 comparative methods on five vascular modal-ities in Fig. 6. Our UniVG method demonstrates exceptional segmentation accuracy and robust noise resistance in small vas-cular segmentation tasks, with its robustness being particularly outstanding. Specifically, in the example shown in the first row, UniVG successfully segmented the fine coronary artery vascular, whereas MedSAM and CPS failed to fully segment some of the tiny vascular structures. Although SimCLR was able to segment part of the vascular, its results exhibited no-ticeable omissions. The SAM method, while providing reason-able segmentation of small vascular, simultaneously introduced false segmentations of non-vascular background regions, result-ing in significantly lower segmentation accuracy compared to the UniVG method. Similarly, in other instances, the UniVG method consistently demonstrated higher accuracy and fewer errors in small vascular segmentation tasks. For example, in the results shown in the third row, UniVG successfully segmented the complete fine vascular structure on the left side, while the other comparative methods achieved only partial segmentation. These results fully validate the robustness and generalization capability of the proposed UniVG method in handling complex vascular structures. 

5.3. Ablation studies show improvements of innovations 5.3.1. Model ablation study 

To evaluate the e ff ectiveness of our proposed combined learning and few-shot fine-tuning strategies in fundus vascu-lar segmentation and coronary artery segmentation tasks, the Given-name Surname et al. / Medical Image Analysis (2026) 13 Table 1: Quantitative evaluation demonstrates the superiority of our UniVG framework in few-shot medical segmentation tasks. Compared to 22 methods, our UniVG framework achieves the best average performance across 11 tasks and 5 vascular modalities. N /A entries marked with ”—”. 

Model Type FVS-DRIVE FVS-CHASEDB1 FVS-HRF FVS-ORVS DSC ↑ clDice ↑ DSC ↑ clDice ↑ DSC ↑ clDice ↑ DSC ↑ clDice ↑

UNet (Ronneberger et al., 2015) FIVE 64 .39 ±6.00 64 .22 ±6.05 72 .62 ±3.04 73 .53 ±3.75 63 .18 ±6.30 59 .03 ±7.20 47 .80 ±11 .54 42 .32 ±11 .50 

nnU-Net (Isensee et al., 2021) FIVE 79 .12 ±3.06 81 .02 ±4.01 84 .26 ±1.47 87 .05 ±2.43 81 .21 ±4.33 84 .52 ±4.47 75 .04 ±5.32 78 .37 ±5.21 

Retina-Unet (Jaeger et al., 2020) FIVE 68 .61 ±3.49 69 .49 ±4.48 70 .92 ±3.11 73 .47 ±3.21 74 .77 ±5.69 75 .55 ±6.60 65 .15 ±7.41 66 .84 ±7.43 

FSG-Net (Bacchin et al., 2023) FIVE 77 .90 ±3.23 80 .35 ±4.10 77 .03 ±1.98 78 .51 ±2.32 77 .31 ±4.64 78 .92 ±4.83 70 .08 ±6.03 71 .11 ±6.22 

UNet (Ronneberger et al., 2015) FULL 79 .24 ±4.03 81 .40 ±4.96 80 .55 ±2.12 84 .52 ±2.62 74 .14 ±6.09 73 .05 ±7.82 74 .66 ±4.61 77 .80 ±4.75 

nnU-Net (Isensee et al., 2021) FULL 80 .90 ±1.55 82 .37 ±3.76 86 .01 ±1.63 89 .08 ±2.42 82 .91 ±2.01 85 .29 ±2.89 79 .40 ±2.31 82 .64 ±1.78 

MASSL (Chen et al., 2019) WSL 72 .54 ±4.24 73 .13 ±4.83 73 .82 ±3.78 75 .25 ±4.77 60 .91 ±11 .28 59 .24 ±13 .86 49 .79 ±12 .14 46 .26 ±12 .68 

CPS (Chen et al., 2021) WSL 71 .38 ±6.51 72 .70 ±6.14 80 .42 ±1.71 83 .93 ±2.14 70 .60 ±5.20 67 .38 ±6.44 63 .57 ±8.39 62 .82 ±8.29 

CCT (Ouali et al., 2020) WSL 74 .03 ±2.57 75 .91 ±3.65 77 .38 ±1.98 79 .49 ±3.23 67 .89 ±4.51 70 .25 ±5.43 64 .80 ±3.65 66 .39 ±4.14 

AGMM (Wu et al., 2023) WSL 57 .35 ±4.11 70 .25 ±4.50 70 .90 ±3.18 83 .82 ±3.23 60 .54 ±3.71 79 .22 ±4.53 66 .76 ±3.88 72 .87 ±4.14 

DBDM (Luo et al., 2022) WSL 51 .02 ±7.60 60 .45 ±6.21 67 .18 ±3.48 79 .92 ±4.79 60 .75 ±5.30 74 .02 ±5.22 59 .71 ±4.23 77 .15 ±4.80 

PVA (Zhang et al., 2023b) WSL 61 .59 ±7.06 64 .88 ±7.46 57 .91 ±5.76 60 .28 ±5.47 61 .12 ±10 .93 58 .41 ±11 .07 62 .46 ±4.46 66 .74 ±4.45 

Vessel-captcha (Dang et al., 2022) WSL 76 .88 ±4.29 77 .21 ±5.71 79 .98 ±3.30 81 .88 ±4.05 69 .63 ±9.22 68 .85 ±10 .73 73 .08 ±4.21 74 .75 ±4.24 

MAE (He et al., 2022) PFM 74 .68 ±3.31 74 .83 ±4.41 72 .64 ±3.37 71 .23 ±4.60 68 .81 ±3.61 64 .78 ±4.38 65 .86 ±4.65 63 .94 ±4.67 

SimCLR (Liu et al., 2022) PFM 77 .75 ±3.13 81 .21 ±3.79 80 .20 ±1.33 83 .74 ±2.02 66 .91 ±6.19 70 .67 ±8.31 76 .02 ±3.40 79 .51 ±3.09 

MOCO (He et al., 2020) PFM 78 .81 ±4.73 81 .24 ±4.29 83 .96 ±1.81 87 .50 ±2.54 72 .54 ±5.95 74 .42 ±8.44 76 .01 ±4.37 79 .99 ±4.21 

iBOT (Zhou et al., 2021) PFM 75 .47 ±3.37 75 .90 ±3.99 78 .81 ±2.12 80 .53 ±3.00 74 .14 ±4.46 72 .10 ±5.84 67 .59 ±4.56 67 .85 ±4.99 

SimSiam (Chen and He, 2021) PFM 77 .88 ±3.48 80 .14 ±3.96 83 .25 ±1.95 86 .03 ±2.35 80 .22 ±4.11 82 .59 ±5.06 76 .29 ±4.35 80 .00 ±4.12 

SAM (Kirillov et al., 2023) PFM 75 .56 ±2.67 79 .89 ±3.23 83 .54 ±1.43 86 .92 ±2.14 76 .02 ±3.78 78 .33 ±4.47 76.49 ±3.24 80.13 ±2.59 

MedSAM (Ma et al., 2024) PFM 79 .46 ±3.32 81 .59 ±4.39 84 .40 ±1.41 87 .76 ±2.10 80 .08 ±3.80 82 .66 ±4.20 76 .03 ±3.28 79 .49 ±3.04 

iBOT (Zhou et al., 2021) PFM-V 77 .29 ±4.86 77 .83 ±5.46 81 .30 ±1.64 82 .73 ±2.39 77 .22 ±3.92 76 .70 ±5.65 72 .21 ±4.02 74 .75 ±4.04 

SimSiam (Chen and He, 2021) PFM-V 78 .56 ±7.03 82 .31 ±4.60 83 .77 ±1.57 87 .30 ±2.02 80 .47 ±4.98 83 .12 ±6.07 75 .11 ±4.85 79 .77 ±4.25 

SOCT (Kreitner et al., 2024) DE - - - - - - - -YoloCurvSeg(Lin et al., 2023) DE 78 .79 ±3.12 81 .13 ±4.28 80 .89 ±2.41 83 .45 ±2.73 78 .67 ±3.36 81 .47 ±4.21 75 .04 ±5.32 78 .37 ±5.21 

Ours(UniVG) DE 80.32 ±2.89 82.73 ±3.89 85.39 ±1.37 88.85 ±1.97 82.23 ±3.89 85.74 ±4.05 76 .16 ±4.02 79 .46 ±4.19 

Model Type FOS-OCTA500 FTS-OCT FBS-DIAS FBS-DSCA DSC ↑ clDice ↑ DSC ↑ clDice ↑ DSC ↑ clDice ↑ DSC ↑ clDice ↑

UNet (Ronneberger et al., 2015) FIVE 77 .70 ±5.45 84 .99 ±5.38 69 .10 ±12 .09 73 .78 ±12 .41 64 .43 ±7.38 56 .83 ±8.35 72 .04 ±10 .17 63 .97 ±11 .35 

nnU-Net (Isensee et al., 2021) FIVE 80 .88 ±4.99 86 .93 ±4.71 76 .49 ±7.97 80 .23 ±9.26 73 .00 ±7.82 71 .85 ±7.49 81 .07 ±7.16 79 .54 ±8.21 

Retina-Unet (Jaeger et al., 2020) FIVE 72 .61 ±6.99 79 .72 ±6.91 65 .65 ±11 .89 68 .45 ±12 .51 66 .15 ±11 .65 61 .92 ±12 .89 75 .71 ±9.32 72 .04 ±11 .45 

FSG-Net (Bacchin et al., 2023) FIVE 76 .62 ±5.61 83 .51 ±5.31 72 .11 ±9.67 74 .97 ±10 .47 70 .31 ±9.49 66 .67 ±10 .16 76 .16 ±8.66 72 .38 ±10 .25 

UNet (Ronneberger et al., 2015) FULL 83 .01 ±4.21 88 .90 ±4.26 79 .24 ±6.89 83 .60 ±7.50 74 .55 ±6.88 69 .24 ±7.41 82 .22 ±6.41 78 .93 ±7.32 

nnU-Net (Isensee et al., 2021) FULL 85 .77 ±2.89 90 .43 ±2.81 80 .17 ±5.91 83 .87 ±7.15 78 .17 ±4.27 74 .92 ±4.69 89 .15 ±4.08 88 .87 ±4.79 

MASSL (Chen et al., 2019) WSL 79 .28 ±5.59 85 .87 ±5.59 74 .65 ±9.12 77 .90 ±10 .23 69 .31 ±8.42 64 .11 ±8.90 72 .28 ±10 .24 68 .13 ±10 .81 

CPS (Chen et al., 2021) WSL 79 .99 ±5.08 86 .69 ±5.07 72 .39 ±12 .17 77 .52 ±12 .09 68 .81 ±9.85 63 .03 ±10 .86 74 .66 ±9.40 66 .55 ±10 .82 

CCT (Ouali et al., 2020) WSL 73 .26 ±6.01 80 .99 ±6.80 66 .48 ±9.86 67 .75 ±11 .28 52 .34 ±8.60 40 .97 ±6.63 57 .81 ±10 .17 42 .68 ±10 .44 

AGMM (Wu et al., 2023) WSL 57 .85 ±5.27 73 .64 ±6.88 57 .49 ±6.86 71 .57 ±10 .31 58 .30 ±6.01 58 .30 ±7.07 65 .33 ±7.87 58 .75 ±8.96 

DBDM (Luo et al., 2022) WSL 57 .09 ±5.30 67 .65 ±6.31 47 .28 ±5.85 61 .47 ±10 .55 53 .46 ±6.92 51 .05 ±9.16 66 .51 ±15 .10 61 .24 ±15 .72 

PVA (Zhang et al., 2023b) WSL 69 .45 ±6.65 77 .04 ±6.76 62 .75 ±9.70 66 .36 ±11 .51 59 .37 ±7.98 52 .84 ±9.82 63 .52 ±9.30 55 .34 ±10 .18 

Vessel-captcha (Dang et al., 2022) WSL 76 .88 ±4.39 82 .84 ±4.66 72 .16 ±7.23 76 .81 ±8.45 69 .79 ±8.87 65 .72 ±9.25 77 .32 ±6.55 76 .34 ±8.14 

MAE (He et al., 2022) PFM 77 .33 ±5.26 83 .40 ±5.65 70 .70 ±9.21 72 .73 ±10 .93 67 .76 ±9.62 57 .27 ±10 .19 76 .50 ±8.71 71 .35 ±10 .51 

SimCLR (Liu et al., 2022) PFM 76 .96 ±5.81 84 .61 ±5.79 74 .09 ±9.75 76 .64 ±11 .25 66 .96 ±7.91 62 .52 ±10 .03 76 .38 ±11 .32 74 .05 ±13 .16 

MOCO (He et al., 2020) PFM 77 .82 ±6.14 84 .57 ±6.33 72 .67 ±11 .58 75 .91 ±12 .83 64 .43 ±13 .21 60 .39 ±12 .78 69 .06 ±12 .97 65 .03 ±16 .14 

iBOT (Zhou et al., 2021) PFM 75 .97 ±6.34 83 .57 ±5.90 69 .74 ±9.. 58 72 .24 ±10 .69 69 .92 ±6.22 60 .12 ±6.99 70 .45 ±14 .18 61 .83 ±16 .34 

SimSiam (Chen and He, 2021) PFM 79 .06 ±4.93 84 .79 ±5.02 73 .69 ±9.77 77 .68 ±10 .66 68 .18 ±8.50 63 .49 ±8.06 75 .88 ±7.80 75 .48 ±8.94 

SAM (Kirillov et al., 2023) PFM 80 .28 ±4.78 86 .78 ±4.95 76 .16 ±7.79 79 .91 ±8.80 71 .86 ±6.78 68 .42 ±7.44 78 .32 ±5.67 75 .72 ±8.00 

MedSAM (Ma et al., 2024) PFM 80 .68 ±4.85 86 .91 ±4.98 76.67 ±7.28 80 .23 ±8.40 75 .02 ±4.82 70 .32 ±4.69 78 .41 ±5.45 76 .26 ±5.88 

iBOT (Zhou et al., 2021) PFM-V 74 .71 ±7.16 82 .19 ±6.81 71 .11 ±10 .05 72 .26 ±11 .22 70 .53 ±7.26 63 .13 ±8.77 71 .96 ±10 .35 64 .33 ±12 .73 

SimSiam (Chen and He, 2021) PFM-V 78 .21 ±5.32 86 .14 ±5.62 74 .47 ±8.56 78 .95 ±9.79 67 .41 ±9.07 60 .41 ±8.72 79 .91 ±7.01 77 .94 ±8.56 

SOCT (Kreitner et al., 2024) DE 80 .79 ±4.64 86 .92 ±5.07 - - - - - -YoloCurvSeg (Lin et al., 2023) DE 80 .05 ±4.93 86 .07 ±5.02 74 .59 ±8.79 78 .43 ±9.86 71 .54 ±7.93 68 .75 ±8.45 80 .06 ±7.56 78 .83 ±7.71 

Ours(UniVG) DE 81.71 ±4.53 87.79 ±4.68 76 .57 ±7.37 81.02 ±8.30 75.99 ±6.95 73.17 ±7.49 81.11 ±7.05 79.86 ±8.09 

Model Type FCS-XACD FCS-SBCD FVS-ARIA Average 

DSC ↑ clDice ↑ DSC ↑ clDice ↑ DSC ↑ clDice ↑ DSC ↑ clDice ↑

UNet (Ronneberger et al., 2015) FIVE 66 .74 ±7.63 69 .50 ±7.91 72 .26 ±6.47 58 .81 ±8.13 62 .22 ±10 .32 66 .66 ±10 .67 66 .59 ±7.52 64 .88 ±10 .57 

nnU-Net (Isensee et al., 2021) FIVE 72 .92 ±7.26 75 .71 ±7.92 80 .68 ±4.90 71 .57 ±6.78 72 .12 ±6.68 77 .58 ±6.86 77 .88 ±3.95 79 .48 ±5.05 

Retina-Unet (Jaeger et al., 2020) FIVE 57 .95 ±8.15 58 .57 ±8.21 57 .31 ±7.95 51 .17 ±7.31 62 .31 ±10 .57 66 .23 ±10 .88 67 .01 ±5.95 67 .58 ±7.71 

FSG-Net (Bacchin et al., 2023) FIVE 62 .14 ±9.13 61 .44 ±10 .67 74 .30 ±4.63 64 .47 ±5.73 64 .25 ±9.48 68 .98 ±9.77 72 .56 ±5.16 72 .85 ±6.74 

UNet (Ronneberger et al., 2015) FULL 80 .12 ±4.77 84 .56 ±5.54 85 .35 ±4.49 83 .91 ±7.81 74 .43 ±4.42 80 .18 ±4.53 78 .86 ±3.74 80 .55 ±5.37 

nnU-Net (Isensee et al., 2021) FULL 84 .39 ±3.53 89 .54 ±3.64 86 .25 ±3.70 78 .51 ±6.66 89 .10 ±10 .36 92 .61 ±9.45 83 .83 ±3.63 85 .28 ±5.19 

MASSL (Chen et al., 2019) WSL 70 .34 ±7.07 73 .09 ±8.38 78 .86 ±5.05 68 .82 ±7.29 56 .01 ±12 .38 59 .00 ±13 .62 68 .89 ±8.98 68 .25 ±10 .30 

CPS (Chen et al., 2021) WSL 70 .83 ±7.50 73 .03 ±8.05 79 .30 ±5.18 67 .15 ±6.90 66 .67 ±9.71 72 .06 ±6.69 72 .60 ±5.26 72 .08 ±7.56 

CCT (Ouali et al., 2020) WSL 72 .33 ±7.29 76 .33 ±8.42 75 .43 ±5.01 62 .51 ±6.68 67 .26 ±6.93 72 .58 ±7.26 68 .09 ±7.31 66 .90 ±12 .97 

AGMM(Wu et al., 2023) WSL 64 .24 ±7.70 62 .39 ±10 .92 65 .41 ±5.89 59 .26 ±7.74 64 .37 ±6.87 72 .32 ±7.70 62 .59 ±4.33 69 .31 ±8.18 

DBDM (Luo et al., 2022) WSL 63 .31 ±8.31 65 .04 ±10 .57 57 .69 ±8.22 54 .60 ±9.60 58 .13 ±5.88 69 .92 ±7.59 58 .38 ±5.87 65 .68 ±8.67 

PVA(Zhang et al., 2023b) WSL 59 .78 ±8.30 60 .29 ±9.87 66 .23 ±5.56 58 .42 ±6.57 57 .70 ±11 .40 62 .25 ±11 .99 61 .99 ±3.36 62 .08 ±6.29 

Vessel-captcha (Dang et al., 2022) WSL 71 .05 ±8.18 72 .56 ±9.70 68 .26 ±10 .27 58 .88 ±8.14 66 .51 ±9.98 72 .58 ±11 .08 72 .87 ±4.13 73 .49 ±6.67 

(a) Pre-lay 14 Given-name Surname et al. / Medical Image Analysis (2026)                                                                                                             

> (b) Post-lay
> MAE (He et al., 2022) PFM 69 .03 ±6.64 70 .59 ±7.71 75 .52 ±4.66 65 .44 ±6.38 67 .95 ±6.35 71 .91 ±7.55 71 .53 ±3.80 69 .77 ±6.49
> SimCLR (Liu et al., 2022) PFM 74 .40 ±6.30 77 .80 ±7.11 79 .52 ±6.70 70 .24 ±7.70 68 .33 ±8.29 74 .83 ±8.38 74 .32 ±4.60 75 .98 ±6.22
> MOCO (He et al., 2020) PFM 71 .73 ±8.99 74 .84 ±10 .30 80 .12 ±4.94 70 .39 ±6.89 70 .12 ±7.47 76 .17 ±7.45 74 .30 ±5.37 75 .50 ±7.66
> iBOT (Zhou et al., 2021) PFM 70 .91 ±8.56 70 .73 ±8.77 75 .68 ±4.94 58 .64 ±6.87 67 .80 ±6.07 70 .11 ±6.09 72 .41 ±3.58 70 .33 ±7.61
> SimSiam (Chen and He, 2021) PFM 69 .97 ±8.40 73 .21 ±9.35 76 .21 ±4.87 64 .56 ±6.73 71 .33 ±8.38 77 .57 ±8.41 75 .63 ±4.33 76 .87 ±7.05
> SAM (Kirillov et al., 2023) PFM 75 .78 ±4.71 78 .28 ±5.64 80 .83 ±4.24 71 .31 ±7.64 70 .12 ±6.20 75 .01 ±6.47 76 .81 ±3.68 78 .24 ±5.38
> MedSAM (Ma et al., 2024) PFM 77.84 ±5.48 81.83 ±5.87 81 .38 ±4.88 71 .24 ±7.90 71 .95 ±4.75 76 .93 ±5.07 78 .36 ±3.24 79 .57 ±5.33
> iBOT (Zhou et al., 2021) PFM-V 71 .48 ±6.78 69 .83 ±7.81 76 .01 ±4.85 65 .65 ±6.45 69 .34 ±6.70 73 .00 ±7.01 73 .92 ±3.50 73 .13 ±6.61
> SimSiam (Chen and He, 2021) PFM-V 72 .39 ±6.83 76 .15 ±7.68 78 .82 ±5.04 67 .87 ±6.94 70 .16 ±7.26 76 .10 ±7.16 77 .19 ±3.89 79 .56 ±5.35
> SOCT (Kreitner et al., 2024) DE --------YoloCurvSeg (Lin et al., 2023) DE 74 .74 ±6.27 77 .96 ±7.06 81 .06 ±4.97 70 .94 ±7.83 71 .40 ±8.22 77 .89 ±8.17 76 .98 ±3.47 78 .48 ±4.77
> Ours(UniVG) DE 77 .39 ±6.00 81 .23 ±6.90 82.74 ±4.36 73.13 ±7.00 73.13 ±5.45 78.80 ±5.51 79.34 ±3.54 81.07 ±4.91

Table 2: Ablation studies on few-shot fundus vascular segmentation and coro-nary artery segmentation tasks. The contributions of our innovations in com-bined learning (CL) and few-shot adaptation (FS) are demonstrated. 

Task CL FS DSC clDice mask image mask image FVS-CHASEDB1 72 .62 ±3.04 73 .53 ±3.75 

✓ 82 .14 ±1.36 85 .62 ±2.32 

✓ ✓ 83 .49 ±1.85 86 .77 ±2.70 

✓ 84 .28 ±1.56 87 .54 ±2.16 

✓ ✓ 84 .85 ±1.51 87 .73 ±2.10 

✓ ✓ ✓ 85 .04 ±1.39 88 .42 ±2.00 

✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 85.39 ±1.37 88.85 ±1.97 

FCS-SBCD 72 .26 ±6.47 58 .81 ±8.13 

✓ 78 .58 ±5.13 69 .53 ±6.84 

✓ ✓ 81 .12 ±4.74 69 .75 ±6.85 

✓ 81 .28 ±2.06 71 .18 ±7.01 

✓ ✓ 81 .98 ±4.68 72 .04 ±6.99 

✓ ✓ ✓ 81 .26 ±5.03 69 .98 ±7.66 

✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 82.74 ±4.36 73.13 ±7.00 

FVS-CHASEDB1 and FCS-SBCD datasets were utilized., we conducted detailed ablation studies under a 5-shot setting. The baseline model is UNet (first row), and in the absence of an image-conditioned generator, we used CycleGAN as the condi-tional generator. The ablation study results (Tab.2) for the FVS-CHASEDB1 task are shown in the table. The baseline model (without any in-novative modules) achieved DSC and clDice scores of 72.62% and 73.53%, respectively. Introducing only mask combined learning improved the DSC score by 9.52%, highlighting the importance of mask-level features in enhancing segmentation performance. Further incorporating mask fine-tuning increased the DSC score to 83.49%. Using image fine-tuning alone also brought some improvement, with the DSC score reach-ing 84.28%. Combining image combined learning with image fine-tuning further improved the DSC score to 84.85%. Ulti-mately, applying both mask and image combined learning along with fine-tuning strategies, the best DSC score for the FVS-CHASEDB1 task was 85.39%, with a clDice score of 88.85%, demonstrating the e ff ectiveness of all proposed innovations. In the FCS-SBCD task, the baseline model achieved DSC and clDice scores of 72.26% and 58.81%, respectively. In-troducing mask combined learning improved the DSC score to 78.58%. Further incorporating mask fine-tuning enhanced the performance, with the DSC score reaching 81.12%. Using image fine-tuning alone also led to significant improvements, achieving a DSC score of 81.28%. Combining Image com-bined learning with image fine-tuning further boosted the DSC score to 81.98%. Finally, applying both mask and image com-bined learning along with fine-tuning strategies, the best DSC score for the FCS-SBCD task was 82.74%, with a clDice score of 73.13%, confirming the e ff ectiveness of these innovations in complex medical image segmentation tasks. 

5.3.2. Hyperparameter ablation study 

We conducted ablation experiments on the hyperparameter related to the number of generated images in the five-shot coro-nary artery segmentation task. The results are shown in Fig. 7 (a). From the figure, it can be observed that as the parameter increases, the performance of the segmentation model gradu-ally improves. Specifically, the performance improvement from increasing the number of generated images from 10 to 200 is greater than that from increasing it from 200 to 2000. It is worth noting that when the number of generated images is set to 0, the training process does not involve any generated images. We also observed the impact of di ff erent numbers of few-shot samples on the final segmentation model performance during downstream task adaptation. The results are shown in Fig. 7 (b). As can be seen from the figure, the performance of the seg-mentation model gradually improves with an increase in sam-ple quantity. Specifically, the most significant performance en-hancement occurs when the sample number increases from 1 to 3. Further increasing the sample size up to 15 leads to perfor-mance stabilization. 

5.4. Framework analysis 5.4.1. Analysis of mask generation 

1) Cluster analysis of generated vascular masks: The masks generated by our method possess both high fidelity and diversity. We compared the distributions of rule-generated coronary artery masks and masks generated by our method against real coronary artery masks. From the t-SNE visualiza-tion (Van der Maaten and Hinton, 2008) in Fig. 8, it can be seen that the masks generated by our method are generally con-sistent with and well mixed with the real masks. Compared to Rule-generated coronary artery masks, the masks generated by our method are more uniformly and widely distributed, indicat-ing that our method produces masks with both high fidelity and diversity. 

2) Visualization of generated masks with di ff erent meth-ods: The masks generated by our method exhibit high visual Given-name Surname et al. / Medical Image Analysis (2026) 15 FCS FDS FBS FOS 

Ours MedSAM GT Image SAM SimSiam -P SimCLR CPS CCT 

> (a) Pre-lay

16 Given-name Surname et al. / Medical Image Analysis (2026) 

> (b) Post-lay FTS

Ours MedSAM GT Image SAM SimSiam -P SimCLR CPS CCT 

Fig. 6: Qualitative evaluation shows the visual superiority of our UniVG compared to other benchmark methods. 0 10 30 50 100 200 300 400 500 1000 2000           

> 68
> 70
> 72
> 74
> 76
> 78
> 80
> 82
> 84
> DSC(%)
> clDice(%)
> 59
> 61
> 63
> 65
> 67
> 69
> 71
> 73
> 75
> (a) The number of generated images N
> 13510 15 20
> 68
> 70
> 72
> 74
> 76
> 78
> 80
> 82
> 84
> 60
> 62
> 64
> 66
> 68
> 70
> 72
> 74
> 76
> 13510 15 20
> 68
> 70
> 72
> 74
> 76
> 78
> 80
> 82
> 84
> 60
> 62
> 64
> 66
> 68
> 70
> 72
> 74
> 76
> (b) The number of few shot quantities
> DSC(%)
> clDice(%)

Fig. 7: In the few-shot coronary artery segmentation task, (a) analyzes the im-pact of the hyperparameter related to the number of generated images, while (b) examines the e ff ect of di ff erent few-shot quantities on the downstream vascular segmentation performance. 

authenticity. A more intuitive observation of the advantages of our method can be seen in Fig. 9. The mask generation meth-ods from left to right are: (a) bifurcation algorithm (Ma et al., 2021), (b) R-SCA is an adapted spatial colonization algorithm that incorporates real vessel topology as initialization, (c) vas-cular mask data-engine without adaption, (d) WGAN (Arjovsky et al., 2017), and (e) our approach. It can be observed that the masks generated by (a), (b), and (c) di ff er significantly from the real coronary artery images. Although the overall vascular mor-phology generated by (d) WGAN is close to real vessels, vessel discontinuities have occurred. Only (e) our approach produces coronary artery images that are closest to the real ones. 

3) Vascular generation methods comparison and down-stream impact: Our proposed UniVG method outperforms existing methods in terms of structural authenticity for vascu-lar generation. We investigated the structural authenticity of generated vascular masks by comparing four di ff erent gener-ation approaches: fractal mask generation (Ma et al., 2021), SCA (Runions et al., 2005, 2007), WGAN (Arjovsky et al., 2017), and our proposed UniVG method, as presented in Table 3. The results demonstrate that our UniVG method achieved the highest structural authenticity with the lowest FID score of Rule -generated coronary artery mask 

Based on our method -generated coronary artery mask 

Real coronary artery mask 

Fig. 8: t-SNE visualization comparing the distribution of coronary artery masks generated by our method, rule-generated coronary artery masks, and real coro-nary artery masks. The masks generated by our method show better uniformity and wider distribution compared to rule-generated masks, indicating high fi-delity and diversity. 

80.90. Among rule-based methods, SCA showed moderate per-formance with an FID score of 147.32, while fractal mask gen-eration exhibited the poorest authenticity with an FID score of 338.54. For deep learning-based approaches, WGAN achieved an intermediate FID score of 231.96, indicating better perfor-mance than rule-based methods but inferior to our approach. All methods were evaluated under identical conditions, gener-ating 500 coronary artery masks that were compared against the same 295 real coronary artery images from the SBCD dataset for FID calculation. Our method achieved the highest authen-Given-name Surname et al. / Medical Image Analysis (2026) 17 (a) Fackactal mask (c) w/o Adaption (e) Ours (b) R -SCA mask (d) WGAN mask       

> Fig. 9: Comparison of coronary artery masks generated by di ff erent methods: (a) bifurcation algorithm, (b) R-SCA vascular generation algorithm, (c) vascu-lar mask data-engine without adaption, (d) WGAN, (e) our approach. In com-parison to other mask generation methods, the vascular masks generated by our approach exhibit high visual authenticity. 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5
> 10.9 0.8 0.7 0.6
> Fig. 10: Generation results of coronary artery masks with di ff erent values of fusion hyperparameter λ1during downstream few-shot adaption.

ticity (FID score of 80.90) and correspondingly delivered the best segmentation performance with Dice and clDice scores of 82.74% and 73.13%, respectively. These experiments demon-strate that the authenticity of generated masks provides guaran-tees for the accuracy of vascular segmentation.                        

> Table 3: Comparison of structural authenticity and downstream segmentation performance across di ff erent vascular mask generation methods on the SBCD dataset. FID scores are calculated between 500 generated coronary artery masks and 295 real coronary artery masks.
> Method Category FID ↓Dice ↑clDice ↑
> Fractal mask (Ma et al., 2021) Rule-based 338.54 81.15 ±4.89 70.33 ±7.49 SCA (Runions et al., 2005, 2007) Rule-based 147.32 81.98 ±4.68 72.04 ±6.99 WGAN (Arjovsky et al., 2017) Deep learning-based 231.96 81.74 ±4.79 71.25 ±7.17 Ours(UniVG) Deep learning-based 80.90 82.74 ±4.36 73.13 ±7.00

4) Fusion parameters a ff ect masks: We analyzed the fusion parameter λ1 in Equ. 15 of the Few-shot Generative Adaptation for mask data-engine. After training the model, we assigned di ff erent values to λ1 and observed its impact on the genera-tion results, as shown in Fig. 10. It can be observed that as 

λ1 increases up to 1, the generated masks transition from not conforming to the coronary distribution at all to gradually ap-proaching the true coronary distribution. 5) LoRA and LoHA combination validation: The com-bination of LoRA and LoHA methods demonstrates superior performance compared to individual fine-tuning strategies in few-shot coronary artery segmentation tasks. To conduct this validation, we employed a few-shot learning approach using five identical masks from the SBCD dataset as fine-tuning sam-ples. The fine-tuned generative model was then used to di-rectly generate 500 synthetic masks, which subsequently served as conditioning inputs to generate 500 corresponding coronary artery images. The generated synthetic data was then combined with the original five real images to train segmentation models for each method comparison. Model performance was eval-uated on the SBCD test set to ensure fair comparison across methods. As shown in Table 4, experimental comparison of LoRA-only, LoHA-only, and hybrid LoRA +LoHA approaches demonstrates that the hybrid method achieves superior perfor-mance with Dice coe ffi cient of 82.74% and clDice of 73.13%. The hybrid approach outperforms individual methods by 1.48% and 0.99% in Dice coe ffi cient compared to LoRA-only and LoHA-only respectively, and by 3.12% and 2.49% in clDice metric respectively, confirming the synergistic benefits of the combination strategy. 

> Table 4: Comparative performance of di ff erent fine-tuning strategies for 5-shot coronary artery segmentation on the SBCD dataset.

Method DSC ↑ clDice ↑

LoRA-only 81 .26 ±4.82 70 .01 ±7.33 

LoHA-only 81 .75 ±4.68 71 .64 ±7.26 

LoRA +LoHA 82.74 ±4.36 73.13 ±7.00 

5.4.2. Analysis of image generation 

1) Eff ects of di ff erent conditional generative models on image quality and segmentation performance: UniVG method significantly outperforms traditional generative models in both image generation quality and downstream segmentation task performance. We investigated the e ff ectiveness of condi-tional generative models by evaluating both image authentic-ity and downstream segmentation performance across three ap-proaches: UniVG, pix2pix (Isola et al., 2017), and CycleGAN (Zhu et al., 2017), as presented in Tab. 5. In terms of image authenticity, UniVG achieved the highest quality with an FID score of 123.04, while pix2pix and CycleGAN showed signif-icantly higher FID scores of 258.38 and 327.92, respectively, indicating that compared to the other two methods, UniVG gen-erates images with higher perceptual similarity to real images. This superior image quality directly translated to better seg-mentation performance, as our proposed UniVG with compo-sitional learning attained the highest downstream performance with a DSC of 82.74% and a clDice of 73.13%. In comparison, pix2pix and CycleGAN correspondingly showed lower clDice scores, with reductions of 2.51% and 3.38%, respectively. No-tably, all models were trained under identical conditions, uti-lizing the same five labeled coronary artery images to gener-ate 500 synthetic images, with FID scores calculated against 295 real coronary artery images and segmentation performance evaluated using identical conditional masks. 

2) E ff ects of di ff erent network architectures on segmen-tation performance: We explored the scenario of replacing the downstream segmentation model with alternative architec-tures, comparing the performance of three distinct models: UNet, VMUNet (Ruan et al., 2024), and Swin-UNet (Cao et al., 2022), in downstream segmentation tasks. As shown in Tab. 6, Swin-UNet achieved the highest performance in coronary artery segmentation, with a DSC of 83.17% and a clDice of 73.24%. These results demonstrate that higher segmentation 18 Given-name Surname et al. / Medical Image Analysis (2026) Table 5: On the SBCD dataset in the few-shot coronary artery segmentation task, the impact of images generated by di ff erent conditional generative models on the downstream segmentation results is analyzed. 

Model FID ↓ DSC ↑ clDice ↑

pix2pix (Isola et al., 2017) 258 .38 80 .86 ±4.91 70 .62 ±7.00 

CycleGAN (Zhu et al., 2017) 327 .92 81 .12 ±4.74 69 .75 ±6.85 

Our (Zhang et al., 2023a) 123.04 82.74 ±4.86 73.13 ±7.00 

performance can be achieved by flexibly substituting the down-stream segmentation model, highlighting the adaptability and versatility of our framework. 

> Table 6: On the SBCD dataset in the few-shot coronary artery segmentation task, the impact of di ff erent downstream segmentation models on the segmen-tation results is analyzed.

Model DSC clDice VMUnet (Ruan et al., 2024) 80 .56 ±4.89 67 .66 ±7.65 

UNet (Ronneberger et al., 2015) 82 .74 ±4.86 73 .13 ±7.00 

Swin-Unet (Cao et al., 2022) 83.17 ±4.54 73.24 ±6.85 

6. DISCUSSION 1) Comparison with SOTA methods on training data requirements and performance : Our proposed approach demonstrates superior data e ffi ciency while maintaining com-petitive segmentation performance across diverse vessel imag-ing modalities. Table 7 demonstrates that our approach achieves competitive performance compared to state-of-the-art methods across 11 vessel segmentation datasets while requiring signifi-cantly fewer training samples. Although our method uses only 5 training samples compared to the 15 to 240 samples needed by SOTA methods, it maintains comparable segmentation ac-curacy on most datasets. Notably, on the CHASEDB1 dataset, our approach (85.39%) even outperforms the SOTA method (84.01%). These results indicate that our few-shot learning ap-proach can preserve competitive segmentation precision while dramatically reducing training data requirements, which holds significant practical value for medical image analysis scenarios where annotated data is scarce.                                                     

> Table 7: Performance comparison between SOTA methods and our approach on 11 vessel segmentation datasets.
> Datasets SOTA SOTA Our Our (SOTA reference) train images DSC train images DSC
> DRIVE (Bhati et al., 2025) 20 84.68 580.32 CHASEDB1 (Bhati et al., 2025) 20 84.01 585.39 HRF (Bhati et al., 2025) 15 83.89 582.23 ORVS (Sarhan et al., 2021) 42 78.11 576.16 OCTA500 (Song et al., 2024) 180 88.68 581.71 DIAS (Liu et al., 2024) 30 78.22 575.99 DSCA (Xie et al., 2024b) 56 89.34 581.11 XACD (Song et al., 2024) 75 83.14 577.39 SBCD (Isensee et al., 2021) 240 86.25 582.74 ARIA (Isensee et al., 2021) 108 89.10 573.13 OCT (Isensee et al., 2021) 240 80.17 576.57

2) Impact of inadequate pretraining on model perfor-mance : Insu ffi cient generation pretraining causes performance degradation, but the impact remains limited. To evaluate our framework’s sensitivity to suboptimal training conditions, we conducted experimental analysis examining how inadequate pretraining steps a ff ect the quality of generated images and sub-sequent segmentation performance. On the SBCD dataset, we compared three configurations: 1) UNet baseline trained with only 5 labeled coronary artery images, 2) UniVG with insuf-ficient pretraining at 100,000 steps, and 3) UniVG with ade-quate pretraining at 141,000 steps. Both UniVG configurations used the same 500 coronary artery mask images as conditions to generate corresponding coronary artery images, which were then combined with the 5 real images for training the segmen-tation model. Table 8 demonstrates that while insu ffi cient pre-training (100,000 steps) causes performance degradation com-pared to adequate pretraining (141,000 steps), with Dice scores decreasing by 1.28% and clDice scores declining by 2.29%, the impact remains manageable. Both UniVG configurations substantially outperformed the UNet baseline, confirming that our framework maintains robust performance levels even under suboptimal training conditions.            

> Table 8: Impact of pretraining steps on coronary artery segmentation perfor-mance: insu ffi cient and adequate training comparison on the SBCD dataset.
> Model Pretraining train steps DSC ↑clDice ↑
> UNet (Ronneberger et al., 2015) -72.26 ±6.47 58.81 ±8.13 Our (UniVG) 100,000 81.46 ±4.82 70.84 ±7.07 141,000 82.74 ±4.36 73.13 ±7.00

3) Multidimensional hyperparameter sensitivity evalua-tion: We designed 15 di ff erent hyperparameter configurations on the SBCD coronary artery dataset to evaluate model robust-ness by systematically adjusting learning rate (3e-5 to 3e-3), batch size (2 to 10), and training epochs (100 to 500). As shown in Fig. 11, learning rate sensitivity analysis (Fig. 11(i)) demonstrates that 3e-4 is the optimal choice (DSC: 82.74% and clDice: 73.13%) while excessive learning rate (3e-3) causes dramatic performance degradation to DSC 51.37%. Batch size sensitivity analysis (Fig. 11(ii)) reveals the model’s good tol-erance to batch size variations with DSC fluctuating within 81.52%-82.74% range and performance di ff erences of only 1.22%. Training epochs sensitivity analysis (Fig. 11(iii)) indi-cates that 300 epochs achieve optimal performance while both insu ffi cient training (100 epochs) and excessive training (500 epochs) lead to performance degradation. The experiment vali-dates the model’s robustness within appropriate hyperparameter ranges with learning rate being the most critical sensitivity fac-tor. 

4) SCA parameter sensitivity evaluation for vascular gen-eration quality optimization: To systematically evaluate the influence of SCA parameters on vascular generation quality, we conducted comprehensive sensitivity analysis by varying attraction distance Da = {10, 15, 20, 25, 30 } pixels, kill dis-tance Dk = {3, 5, 10, 15, 17 } pixels, and segment length Ls 

= {5, 10, 15, 20, 25 } pixels while maintaining other param-eters constant. For each configuration, 2000 coronary artery images were generated as pre-training data, with FID evalu-Given-name Surname et al. / Medical Image Analysis (2026) 19 (Batch Size=4, Epochs=300)                          

> 3e -51e -43e -41e -33e -3
> 85.0
> 75.0
> 65.0
> 55.0
> 45.0
> DSC (%)
> clDice (%)
> 75.0
> 70.0
> 60.0
> 50.0
> 40.0
> 84.0
> 83.0
> 82.0
> 81.0
> 80.0
> DSC (%)
> clDice (%)
> 74.0
> 73.0
> 72.0
> 71.0
> 70.0
> 83.0
> 82.5
> 82.0
> 81.5
> 81.0
> DSC (%)
> clDice (%)
> 74.0
> 73.5
> 73.0
> 72.5
> 72.0
> (Learning Rate=3e -4, Epochs=300) (Learning Rate=3e -4, Batch Size=300)
> Batch Size
> (ii)
> 246810
> Learning Rate
> (i)
> Training Epochs
> (iii)
> 100 200 300 400 500
> DSC clDice DSC clDice
> DSC clDice DSC clDice DSC clDice DSC clDice
> DSC clDice DSC clDice DSC clDice DSC clDice

Fig. 11: Hyper-parameter sensitivity analysis on SBCD dataset for coronary artery vessel segmentation. 

ation using 500 generated images compared against 295 real SBCD coronary artery masks, and segmentation performance assessed on the SBCD test set. As shown in Fig.12, the at-traction distance analysis Fig.12.(i) demonstrates performance peaking at Da =20 pixels with optimal FID scores (173.62 di-rect, 90.43 fine-tuned) and highest segmentation performance (Dice: 82.71 ±4.21%, clDice: 72.65 ±6.59%), while extreme values significantly degrade quality. The kill distance analysis Fig.12.(ii) shows Dk =10 achieves optimal performance, with both lower (Dk =3, FID: 211.31) and higher values (Dk =17, FID: 185.30) demonstrating reduced quality. The segment length analysis Fig.12.(iii) reveals Ls =15 achieves best perfor-mance, with extreme values like Ls =25 showing dramatically increased FID (324.41), providing practical guidance for pa-rameter tuning across di ff erent application scenarios. 

5) Biophysical plausibility validation through Murray’s law compliance analysis: Our experimental validation demon-strates that our vascular generation method can achieve equiva-lent biophysical properties to real vascular networks. We con-ducted Murray’s law(Murray, 1926) compliance analysis on both the real vascular masks from the DRIVE dataset and 500 generated vascular mask images. The evaluation framework analyzed vessel bifurcation points and computed diameter re-lationships according to Murray’s law: rγ 

> 0

= rγ 

> 1

+ rγ 

> 2

, where γ

represents the branching exponent and r0, r1, r2 denote parent and child vessel radii respectively. For each bifurcation point, the Murray ratio (MR) was calculated as MR = P rγ 

> i

/rγ 

> 0

, with deviation quantified as |1 − MR |. The compliance score was computed using CS = 1/(1 + mean deviation), where higher scores indicate better adherence to Murray’s law. We pro-cessed 40 real retinal vessel masks from the DRIVE dataset and 500 generated masks using our UniVG framework, with 

γ set to 2 (Jessen et al., 2023). As shown in Table 9, our gener-ated vessels achieved mean compliance scores of 74.61%, com-pared to 74.74% for real vessels, representing a di ff erence of only 0.13%. These results validate that our vascular generation method has preserved the fundamental biophysical characteris-tics essential for realistic vascular network generation. 

6) Diversity validation through generation scale analy-sis: The experimental results demonstrate that generation diver-sity reaches saturation around 1,500 to 2,000 masks, with per-formance gains exhibiting marginal returns beyond this range. We conducted diversity evaluation experiments by generating FID score                  

> 350
> 300
> 250
> 200
> 150
> 100
> 50
> 010 15 20 25 30
> Da
> (i)
> Segmentation performance (%)
> 85.0
> 82.5
> 80.0
> 77.5
> 75.0
> 72.5
> 70.0
> 67.5
> 65.0
> DSC clDice Finetuned FID FID
> FID score
> 350
> 300
> 250
> 200
> 150
> 100
> 50
> 03
> Dk
> (ii)
> 510 15 17
> 85.0
> 82.5
> 80.0
> 77.5
> 75.0
> 72.5
> 70.0
> 67.5
> 65.0
> Segmentation performance (%)
> DSC clDice Finetuned FID FID
> 350
> 300
> 250
> 200
> 150
> 100
> 50
> 0
> FID score
> DSC clDice Finetuned FID FID 85.0
> 82.5
> 80.0
> 77.5
> 75.0
> 72.5
> 70.0
> 67.5
> 65.0
> Segmentation performance (%)
> 510 15 20 25
> Ls
> (iii)
> (Dk=10, Ls=15)
> (Da=20, Ls=15)
> (Da=20, Dk=10)

Fig. 12: Parameter sensitivity analysis of SCA parameters on generated vascu-lar structure quality. Da represents attraction distance (pixels), Dk represents kill distance (pixels), Ls represents segment length (pixels). 20 Given-name Surname et al. / Medical Image Analysis (2026) Table 9: Murray’s law compliance comparison between real and generated vas-cular masks. Compliance scores (CS) indicate biophysical plausibility, with higher scores indicating better adherence to Murray’s law. 

Mask category Real mask Generated mask CS 74.74 ±2.0 74.61 ±4.2 varying quantities of coronary artery masks (500, 1,000, 1,500, 2,000, and 2,500) and computed Inception Score (IS) to quan-tify mask diversity and quality. As shown in Fig.13 (a), IS in-creased from 1.61 ±0.06 at 500 masks to 1.65 ±0.06 at 2,000 masks, with a slight decrease to 1.64 ±0.02 at 2,500 masks. This change indicates that when the number of generated masks ex-ceeds 2,000, the vascular masks generated based on real vas-cular conditions exhibit repetitive structural patterns, leading to a decline in the upward trend of the IS value. For down-stream segmentation evaluation, we used the synthesized masks to pre-train the generative model, fine-tuned this model using 5 coronary artery images, subsequently synthesized 500 masks to train a U-Net segmentation network, and evaluated the perfor-mance on 295 images from the SBCD test set. As shown in Fig. 13 (b), DSC increased from 82.23 ±4.53% at 500 masks to 82.71 ±4.21% at 2,000 masks and 82.74 ±4.36% at 2,500 masks, with primary performance gains concentrated in the 1,500 to 2,000 mask range, while improvements exhibited diminishing returns between 2,000 and 2,500 masks. These results indicate that using approximately 1,500 to 2,000 synthesized coronary artery masks provides su ffi cient structural priors to e ff ectively support generative learning and coronary artery segmentation on the SBCD dataset. 

7. CONCLUSIONS 

In this paper, we propose UniVG, a novel generative data-engine foundation model for universal few-shot vascular image segmentation. UniVG e ff ectively addresses the challenges of vascular image segmentation in data-scarce scenarios by lever-aging compositional learning and few-shot generative adapta-tion. By integrating generative modeling with large-scale vas-cular pre-training, our approach significantly enhances data di-versity, model generalization, and segmentation accuracy with minimal annotated data. To support this, we develop UniVG-58K, a dataset comprising 57,075 unlabeled vascular images and a large collection of pseudo-vascular structures, provid-ing the field with a comprehensive pre-training resource for fu-ture research. Extensive experiments on 11 vascular segmen-tation tasks validate the e ff ectiveness of UniVG, demonstrat-ing its ability to generate diverse vascular images and signifi-cantly improve few-shot segmentation performance. Notably, our method achieves results comparable to or exceeding fully supervised models using only five annotated images, highlight-ing its e ffi ciency and practicality. By providing a scalable, generalizable, and data-e ffi cient so-lution for vascular segmentation, UniVG represents a promising advancement in the field. Future work will explore extensions to 3D vascular and further optimization of generative adaptation strategies to enhance domain-specific segmentation. (b) Number of pretraining masks                   

> Segmentation performance evaluation
> 500 1000 1500 2000 2500
> 83.2
> 82.9
> 82.6
> 82.3
> 82.0
> DSC(%)
> DSC
> (b) Number of pretraining masks
> Segmentation performance evaluation
> 500 1000 1500 2000 2500
> 83.2
> 82.9
> 82.6
> 82.3
> 82.0
> DSC(%)
> DSC
> 1.66
> 1.64
> 1.60
> 1.62
> Inception Score (IS)
> 500 1000 1500 2000 2500
> (a) Number of pretraining masks
> IS Score
> Mask generation diversity and quality evaluation
> 1.66
> 1.64
> 1.60
> 1.62
> Inception Score (IS)
> 500 1000 1500 2000 2500
> (a) Number of pretraining masks
> IS Score
> Mask generation diversity and quality evaluation
> Fig. 13: Performance of synthetic mask diversity and downstream segmentation across di ff erent scales of pretraining masks.

Acknowledgments 

This work was supported in part by the State Key Project of Research and Development Plan under Grants 2022YFC2401601; in part by the National Natural Sci-ence Foundation of China under Grant 62101249, and Grant T2225025; in part by the Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province under Grant BK20210291; in part by the Jiangsu Provincial Double-Innovation Doctor Program under Grant JSSCBS20220202; in part by the Key Research and Development Programs in Jiangsu Province of China under Grant BE2021703 and BE2022768; in part by China Postdoc-toral Science Foundation under Grant 2021TQ0149 and Grant 2022M721611, and by the Big Data Computing Center of Southeast University. 

Appendix A. More details of UniVG datasets 

We introduce a series of diverse and representative datasets that constitute UniVG-58K. These datasets cover five vascu-lar modalities: fundus imaging, OCTA, OCT, brain DSA, and coronary artery DSA. Each dataset has been carefully prepro-cessed to ensure consistency in resolution and format. Below, we provide detailed descriptions of the datasets used for each imaging modality. Given-name Surname et al. / Medical Image Analysis (2026) 21 Table .10: UniVG-58K Dataset and 11 Downstream Datasets: Covering vascular Images of Five Modalities. N /A entries marked with ”—”.                                                                                                                                              

> Dataset Modality Pre-training Downstream task Pre-training number Downstream number Fine-tune images Test DiaRetDB1 (Kauppi et al., 2007) Fundus ✓89 ———e-Ophtha (Decenciere et al., 2013) Fundus ✓463 ———IDRID (Porwal et al., 2018) Fundus ✓516 ———MESSIDOR (Decenci` ere et al., 2014) Fundus ✓1200 ———Refuge (Orlando et al., 2020) Fundus ✓1200 ———APTOS (Karthik and Dane, 2019) Fundus ✓3662 ———Eyepacs (Gulshan et al., 2016) Fundus ✓35129 ———DRIVE (Asad et al., 2014) Fundus ✓—40 535 CHASEDB1 (Henry et al., 2020) Fundus ✓—28 523 HRF (Li et al.) Fundus ✓—45 540 ORVS (Sarhan et al., 2021) Fundus ✓—49 544 ARIA (Bankhead et al., 2012) Fundus ✓—142 5137 XACD (Ma et al., 2021) Coronary Artery DSA ✓✓1621 126 5121 ARCADE (Maxim Popov et al., 2023) Coronary Artery DSA ✓3000 ———SBCD Coronary Artery DSA ✓—300 5295 ADSD (Danilov et al., 2021) Coronary Artery DSA ✓8325 ———DIAS (Liu et al., 2024) Brain DSA ✓✓441 60 555 DSCA (Xie et al., 2024b,a) Brain DSA ✓—224 5219 OCT (Li et al., 2024) OCT ✓✓600 300 5295 OCTA500 (Li et al., 2024) OCTA ✓✓600 300 5295 ROSE (Ma et al., 2020) OCTA ✓229 ———Total 57075 1614 55 1559

Appendix A.1. Fundus vascular 

We have integrated a series of publicly available and rep-resentative diabetic retinopathy datasets, which cover a wide range of imaging conditions and lesion characteristics. The se-lected datasets include DiaRetDB1, e-Ophtha, IDRID, MESSI-DOR, Refuge, APTOS 2019, and Eyepacs, with detailed de-scriptions provided below: DiaRetDB1 (Kauppi et al., 2007) is a publicly available benchmark dataset designed for diabetic retinopathy detection research. It contains 89 color fundus images (50° FOV) with resolutions of 1500 ×1152 pixels, collected from diverse clin-ical settings. Expert ophthalmologists have annotated lesions including microaneurysms, hemorrhages, and exudates, along with DR severity grading. e-Ophtha (Decenciere et al., 2013) dataset, developed by the French Research Agency, is a publicly available ophthalmic image database for diabetic retinopathy (DR) and ocular le-sion detection. It comprises two subsets: e-Ophtha EX: 47 images with exudates (pathological cases) and 35 normal im-ages. e-Ophtha MA: 148 images with microaneurysms (early DR signs) and 233 normal images All images were acquired with 45° FOV fundus cameras and annotated by expert oph-thalmologists. The dataset provides pixel-level lesion masks for algorithm validation and is commonly used for automated DR screening studies. Access requires institutional agreement via the French Telemedicine Atlas platform. IDRID (Porwal et al., 2018) is a large-scale multimodal dataset for diabetic retinopathy and diabetic macular edema analysis. It contains 516 color fundus images (50° FOV) with ultra-high resolution (4288 ×2848 pixels), split into 413 training and 103 test images. MESSIDOR dataset (Decenci` ere et al., 2014) is a pioneer-ing large-scale benchmark for diabetic retinopathy screening research. It contains 1,200 color fundus images acquired from three French medical centers using 45° FOV cameras with three resolutions: 1440 ×960, 2240 ×1488, and 2304 ×1536 pixels. Refuge dataset (Karthik and Dane, 2019), from the MICCAI 2018 /2020 challenges, is a multi-center benchmark for glau-coma detection and optic disc /cup segmentation. It contains 1,200 color fundus images with 45° FOV. APTOS 2019 Blindness Detection dataset (Karthik and Dane, 2019) is a large-scale competition dataset for diabetic retinopathy (DR) severity grading, organized by the Asia Pa-cific Tele-Ophthalmology Society. It contains 3,662 color fun-dus images collected from diverse clinical environments across India, with resolutions ranging from 1734 ×1734 to 5184 ×3456 pixels. Each image is graded by ophthalmologists into 5 DR severity levels (0: No DR to 4: Proliferative DR) following the International Clinical Diabetic Retinopathy Scale. Eyepacs (Gulshan et al., 2016) dataset comprises 35,126 di-abetic retinopathy (DR) fundus images, categorized into five severity levels (0-4). This open-source dataset was released through the 2019 Kaggle Diabetic Retinopathy Detection com-petition. Fundus images were captured by technicians from Aravind Eye Hospital, India, in rural areas with limited med-ical resources. Experienced ophthalmologists subsequently re-viewed and annotated all images for DR grading. The dataset exhibits substantial variability in image resolution, ranging from 433 × 289 pixels to 5184 × 3456 pixels, reflecting real-world imaging conditions in resource-constrained environ-ments. DRIVE (Asad et al., 2014) dataset is a benchmark dataset for retinal vessel segmentation. It comprises a total of 40 color fundus images stored in JPEG format, including 7 pathological cases with abnormalities. These images were collected as part of a diabetic retinopathy screening program in the Netherlands. All images were captured using a Canon CR5 non-mydriatic 3CCD camera with a 45-degree field of view (FOV). Each im-age has a resolution of 584 ×565 pixels and 8-bit depth per color channel. The dataset is equally divided into a training set (20 images) and a test set (20 images). Both sets include a circu-lar FOV mask (approximately 540 pixels in diameter) for each 22 Given-name Surname et al. / Medical Image Analysis (2026) 

image. In the training set, manual vessel segmentation was per-formed by a single ophthalmologist. For the test set, two in-dependent observers manually segmented each image, with the first observer’s annotations serving as the gold standard for per-formance evaluation. CHASEDB1 (Henry et al., 2020) is a publicly available dataset for fundus image analysis, released by the Department of Computer Science at the University of Reading, UK. This dataset comprises 28 fundus images captured from both the left and right eyes of 28 subjects (including 14 healthy indi-viduals and 14 patients with diabetic retinopathy). Each image has a resolution of 999 ×960 pixels. The primary objective of the CHASEDB1 dataset is to provide researchers with a stan-dardized platform for developing and evaluating retinal vessel segmentation algorithms. Every fundus image in the dataset is accompanied by corresponding manually annotated vessel seg-mentation masks, which were meticulously labeled by qualified medical professionals. HRF (Li et al.) is a publicly available database specifically established for comparative studies of automated retinal image segmentation algorithms. The dataset currently comprises 15 images from healthy subjects, 15 images from patients with di-abetic retinopathy, and 15 images from glaucoma patients. Each image is accompanied by a corresponding binary gold-standard vessel segmentation map. For specific subsets of the dataset, a field-of-view (FOV) mask is also provided to delineate the re-gion of interest. All segmentation annotations were generated through collaboration between experts in retinal image analy-sis and clinicians from partner ophthalmology clinics, ensur-ing high reliability. Due to its rigorous annotation protocol and standardized format, HRF has become one of the most widely used benchmark datasets in the field of retinal vessel segmenta-tion. ORVS (Sarhan et al., 2021) dataset is a newly established collaborative e ff ort between the Department of Computer Sci-ence and the Department of Vision Science at the University of Calgary. The dataset comprises 49 retinal images collected from a clinical facility in Calgary, Canada, with a division of 42 images for training and 7 images for testing. All images were acquired using a Zeiss Visucam 200 fundus camera with a 30-degree field of view (FOV). Each image has a resolution of 1444 ×1444 pixels and a 24-bit depth per pixel. ARIA (Bankhead et al., 2012) dataset is a comprehen-sive retinal image collection comprising three distinct subsets: ARIA-AMD (23 cases with age-related macular degeneration), ARIA-DR (59 diabetic retinopathy cases), and ARIA-H (61 healthy controls). This multimodal dataset provides expert-annotated vascular segmentation masks and pathological labels, with images stored in uncompressed TIFF format at a resolution of 768 ×576 pixels. 

Appendix A.2. OCTA vascular 

ROSE (Ma et al., 2020) dataset is an open-source OCTA retinal vessel segmentation dataset, comprising two subsets: ROSE-1 and ROSE-2. The ROSE-1 dataset consists of 117 OCTA images from 39 subjects (including 26 Alzheimer’s dis-ease patients and 13 healthy controls). Each subject has en-face (horizontal cross-sectional) angiograms of the superficial vas-cular complex (SVC), deep vascular complex (DVC), and an in-ner retinal slab combining both SVC and DVC. The scans cover a 3 ×3 mm² region centered on the fovea, with an image resolu-tion of 304 ×304 pixels. ROSE-1 provides two types of vessel annotations: centerline-level and pixel-level annotations. The ROSE-2 dataset contains a total of 112 OCTA images. All im-ages in this subset are en face angiograms of the SVC, acquired from a 3 ×3 mm² fovea-centered region. Only centerline-level annotations are provided. OCTA-500 (Li et al., 2024) dataset comprises paired three-dimensional OCT and OCTA imaging data from 500 eyes, in-cluding six types of projection images, four categories of tex-tual metadata (age, gender, eye laterality, and disease classifica-tion), and two types of segmentation labels (retinal large vessels and foveal avascular zone). Six distinct projection types were generated from the OCT and OCTA datasets by applying either average or maximum intensity projection methods across three anatomical boundaries: the inner limiting membrane, the outer plexiform layer, and Bruch’s membrane. 

Appendix A.3. OCT vascular 

OCT dataset from the OCTA-500 dataset (Li et al., 2024) comprises 300 annotated three-dimensional scans with corre-sponding vascular segmentation labels. The dataset provides co-registered structural OCT and angiographic OCTA data, en-abling simultaneous analysis of retinal morphology and vascu-lature. 

Appendix A.4. Brain DSA vascular 

DIAS (Liu et al., 2024) is a dataset that contains 60 brain DSA mask annotations, each corresponding to five arterial phase frames (we manually selected vascular images that align well with the mask annotations; the original images have a res-olution of 800 ×800 pixels, and both images and masks were re-sized to 512 ×512 pixels), as well as 441 unlabeled brain DSA images. DSCA (Xie et al., 2024b), which contains 224 brain DSA images and their corresponding masks with varying resolu-tions, including 512 ×512, 1024 ×1024, 952 ×952, 512 ×472, 1232 ×1232, 1432 ×1432, and 742 ×960 pixels (all images and masks are resized to 512 ×512 pixels). For the few-shot evalua-tion, we randomly select 5 annotated images as the training set and use the remaining images as the test set. 

Appendix A.5. Coronary artery DSA vascular dataset 

ARCADE dataset contains 3,000 X-ray coronary angiogra-phy images, designed for two tasks: coronary artery segmen-tation (1,500 images) with annotations of vascular branches according to the Syntax Score criteria, and stenosis detection (1,500 images) with pixel-level localization of plaques and stenotic lesions. The data was acquired using standard angiog-raphy techniques, with a resolution of 1024 ×1024 pixels. XACD (Ma et al., 2021) dataset contains coronary angiogra-phy images acquired during stent placement using the General Electric Innova IGS 520 system. Each image has a resolution of 512 ×512 pixels and is single-channel. This dataset includes Given-name Surname et al. / Medical Image Analysis (2026) 23 

1,621 coronary angiography images and 126 independent coro-nary angiography images, accompanied by vessel segmentation maps annotated by experienced radiologists. SBCD dataset, which originates from the Second People’s Hospital of Shenzhen and contains 300 X-ray angiography im-ages (each image comes with corresponding expert segmenta-tion annotations, and the dataset includes segmentation labels for both the left coronary artery (LCA) and the right coronary artery (RCA), with 150 images featuring the LCA and the other 150 images featuring the RCA; all images have a resolution of 512 ×512 pixels). For the few-shot evaluation, we randomly se-lect 5 annotated images as the training set and use the remaining images as the test set. 

References 

Arjovsky, M., Chintala, S., Bottou, L., 2017. Wasserstein generative adversar-ial networks, in: International conference on machine learning, PMLR. pp. 214–223. Asad, A., Azar, A.T., El-Bendary, N., Hassaanien, A.E., et al., 2014. Ant colony based feature selection heuristics for retinal vessel segmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1403.1735 . Bacchin, A., Gottardi, A., Menegatti, E., Ghidoni, S., Barcellona, L., et al., 2023. Fsg-net: a deep learning model for semantic robot grasping through few-shot learning, in: PROCEEDINGS-IEEE INTERNATIONAL CON-FERENCE ON ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION, IEEE. pp. 1793–1799. Bankhead, P., Scholfield, C.N., McGeown, J.G., Curtis, T.M., 2012. Fast retinal vessel detection and measurement using wavelets and edge location refine-ment. PloS one 7, e32435. Berger, A.H., Lux, L., Shit, S., Ezhov, I., Kaissis, G., Menten, M.J., Rueckert, D., Paetzold, J.C., 2025. Cross-domain and cross-dimension learning for image-to-graph transformers, in: 2025 IEEE /CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV), IEEE. pp. 64–74. Bhati, A., Jain, S., Gour, N., Khanna, P., Ojha, A., Werghi, N., 2025. Dynamic statistical attention-based lightweight model for retinal vessel segmentation: Dysta-retnet. Computers in Biology and Medicine 186, 109592. Bommasani, R., Hudson, D.A., Adeli, E., Altman, R., Arora, S., von Arx, S., Bernstein, M.S., Bohg, J., Bosselut, A., Brunskill, E., et al., 2021. On the op-portunities and risks of foundation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.07258 .Cao, H., Wang, Y., Chen, J., Jiang, D., Zhang, X., Tian, Q., Wang, M., 2022. Swin-unet: Unet-like pure transformer for medical image segmentation, in: European conference on computer vision, Springer. pp. 205–218. Chen, S., Bortsova, G., Garc´ ıa-Uceda Ju´ arez, A., Van Tulder, G., De Bruijne, M., 2019. Multi-task attention-based semi-supervised learning for medi-cal image segmentation, in: Medical Image Computing and Computer As-sisted Intervention–MICCAI 2019: 22nd International Conference, Shen-zhen, China, October 13–17, 2019, Proceedings, Part III 22, Springer. pp. 457–465. Chen, X., He, K., 2021. Exploring simple siamese representation learning, in: Proceedings of the IEEE /CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 15750–15758. Chen, X., Yuan, Y., Zeng, G., Wang, J., 2021. Semi-supervised semantic seg-mentation with cross pseudo supervision, in: Proceedings of the IEEE /CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 2613–2622. Cheng, Z., Wang, S., Xin, T., Zhou, T., Zhang, H., Shao, L., 2024. Few-shot medical image segmentation via generating multiple representative descrip-tors. IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging . Dang, V.N., Galati, F., Cortese, R., Di Giacomo, G., Marconetto, V., Mathur, P., Lekadir, K., Lorenzi, M., Prados, F., Zuluaga, M.A., 2022. Vessel-captcha: An e ffi cient learning framework for vessel annotation and segmentation. Medical Image Analysis 75, 102263. Danilov, V.V., Klyshnikov, K.Y., Kutikhin, A.G., Gerget, O.M., Frangi, A.F., Ovcharenko, E.A., 2021. Angiographic dataset for stenosis detection. URL: 

https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:245758375 .Decenciere, E., Cazuguel, G., Zhang, X., Thibault, G., Klein, J.C., Meyer, F., Marcotegui, B., Quellec, G., Lamard, M., Danno, R., et al., 2013. Teleophta: Machine learning and image processing methods for teleophthalmology. Irbm 34, 196–203. Decenci` ere, E., Zhang, X., Cazuguel, G., Lay, B., Cochener, B., Trone, C., Gain, P., Ord´ o˜ nez-Varela, J.R., Massin, P., Erginay, A., et al., 2014. Feed-back on a publicly distributed image database: the messidor database. Image Analysis & Stereology , 231–234. DuMont Sch¨ utte, A., Hetzel, J., Gatidis, S., Hepp, T., Dietz, B., Bauer, S., Schwab, P., 2021. Overcoming barriers to data sharing with medical image generation: a comprehensive evaluation. NPJ digital medicine 4, 141. Ebrahem, A., Jessen, E., ten Eikelder, M.F., Gangwar, T., Mika, M., Schillinger, D., 2024. Connecting continuum poroelasticity with discrete synthetic vas-cular trees for modelling liver tissue. Proceedings of the Royal Society A 480, 20230421. Falcetta, D., Marciano, V., Yang, K., Cleary, J., Legris, L., Rizzaro, M.D., Pit-siorlas, I., Chaptoukaev, H., Lemasson, B., Menze, B., et al., 2025. Vessel-verse: A dataset and collaborative framework for vessel annotation, in: Inter-national Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention, Springer. pp. 655–665. Feldman, P., Sinnona, M., Delrieux, C., Siless, V., Iarussi, E., 2025. Vessel-gpt: Autoregressive modeling of vascular geometry, in: International Con-ference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention, Springer. pp. 662–672. Galati, F., Cortese, R., Prados, F., Lorenzi, M., Zuluaga, M.A., 2024. Federated multi-centric image segmentation with uneven label distribution, in: Inter-national Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention, Springer. pp. 350–360. Galati, F., Falcetta, D., Cortese, R., Casolla, B., Prados, F., Burgos, N., Zu-luaga, M.A., 2023. A2v: A semi-supervised domain adaptation frame-work for brain vessel segmentation via two-phase training angiography-to-venography translation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.06075 . Goodfellow, I., Pouget-Abadie, J., Mirza, M., Xu, B., Warde-Farley, D., Ozair, S., Courville, A., Bengio, Y., 2014. Generative adversarial nets. Advances in neural information processing systems 27. Gu, R., Zhang, J., Wang, G., Lei, W., Song, T., Zhang, X., Li, K., Zhang, S., 2022. Contrastive semi-supervised learning for domain adaptive segmen-tation across similar anatomical structures. IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging 42, 245–256. Gulshan, V., Peng, L., Coram, M., Stumpe, M.C., Wu, D., Narayanaswamy, A., Venugopalan, S., Widner, K., Madams, T., Cuadros, J., et al., 2016. Development and validation of a deep learning algorithm for detection of diabetic retinopathy in retinal fundus photographs. jama 316, 2402–2410. He, K., Chen, X., Xie, S., Li, Y., Doll´ ar, P., Girshick, R., 2022. Masked au-toencoders are scalable vision learners, in: Proceedings of the IEEE /CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 16000–16009. He, K., Fan, H., Wu, Y., Xie, S., Girshick, R., 2020. Momentum contrast for un-supervised visual representation learning, in: Proceedings of the IEEE /CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 9729–9738. He, Y., Huang, F., Jiang, X., Nie, Y., Wang, M., Wang, J., Chen, H., 2024. Foundation model for advancing healthcare: Challenges, opportunities, and future directions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.03264 . Henry, H.Y., Feng, X., Wang, Z., Sun, H., 2020. Mixmodule: Mixed cnn kernel module for medical image segmentation, in: 2020 IEEE 17th International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging (ISBI), IEEE. pp. 1508–1512. Ho, J., Jain, A., Abbeel, P., 2020. Denoising di ff usion probabilistic models. Advances in neural information processing systems 33, 6840–6851. Hu, D., Li, H., Liu, H., Oguz, I., 2024. Domain generalization for retinal vessel segmentation via hessian-based vector field. Medical Image Anal-ysis 95, 103164. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/ article/pii/S1361841524000896 , doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/ j.media.2024.103164 .Hu, E.J., Shen, Y., Wallis, P., Allen-Zhu, Z., Li, Y., Wang, S., Wang, L., Chen, W., 2021. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.09685 . Hyeon-Woo, N., Ye-Bin, M., Oh, T.H., 2021. Fedpara: Low-rank hadamard product for communication-e ffi cient federated learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.06098 . Isensee, F., Jaeger, P.F., Kohl, S.A., Petersen, J., Maier-Hein, K.H., 2021. nnu-net: a self-configuring method for deep learning-based biomedical image segmentation. Nature methods 18, 203–211. Isola, P., Zhu, J.Y., Zhou, T., Efros, A.A., 2017. Image-to-image translation with conditional adversarial networks, in: Proceedings of the IEEE confer-ence on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 1125–1134. Jaeger, P.F., Kohl, S.A., Bickelhaupt, S., Isensee, F., Kuder, T.A., Schlemmer, H.P., Maier-Hein, K.H., 2020. Retina u-net: Embarrassingly simple ex-24 Given-name Surname et al. / Medical Image Analysis (2026) ploitation of segmentation supervision for medical object detection, in: Ma-chine learning for health workshop, PMLR. pp. 171–183. Jessen, E., Steinbach, M.C., Debbaut, C., Schillinger, D., 2023. Branching exponents of synthetic vascular trees under di ff erent optimality principles. IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering 71, 1345–1354. Jessen, E., Steinbach, M.C., Schillinger, D., 2025. Optimizing non-intersecting synthetic vascular trees in nonconvex organs. IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering . Karthik, M., Dane, S., 2019. Aptos 2019 blindness detection. Kaggle https: // kaggle. com /competitions /aptos2019-blindness-detection Go to ref-erence in , 5. Kauppi, T., Kalesnykiene, V., Kamarainen, J.K., Lensu, L., Sorri, I., Raninen, A., Voutilainen, R., Uusitalo, H., K¨ alvi¨ ainen, H., Pietil¨ a, J., 2007. The di-aretdb1 diabetic retinopathy database and evaluation protocol., in: BMVC, Citeseer. p. 10. Kervadec, H., Dolz, J., Tang, M., Granger, E., Boykov, Y., Ayed, I.B., 2019. Constrained-cnn losses for weakly supervised segmentation. Medical image analysis 54, 88–99. Khan, K.B., Khaliq, A.A., Jalil, A., Iftikhar, M.A., Ullah, N., Aziz, M.W., Ullah, K., Shahid, M., 2019. A review of retinal blood vessels extraction techniques: challenges, taxonomy, and future trends. Pattern Analysis and Applications 22, 767–802. Kim, B., Oh, Y., Ye, J.C., 2022. Di ff usion adversarial representation learning for self-supervised vessel segmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.14566 . Kingma, D.P., 2013. Auto-encoding variational bayes. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6114 . Kirillov, A., Mintun, E., Ravi, N., Mao, H., Rolland, C., Gustafson, L., Xiao, T., Whitehead, S., Berg, A.C., Lo, W.Y., et al., 2023. Segment anything, in: Proceedings of the IEEE /CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 4015–4026. Kozi´ nski, M., Mosinska, A., Salzmann, M., Fua, P., 2020. Tracing in 2d to re-duce the annotation e ff ort for 3d deep delineation of linear structures. Med-ical image analysis 60, 101590. Kreitner, L., Paetzold, J.C., Rauch, N., Chen, C., Hagag, A.M., Fayed, A.E., Sivaprasad, S., Rausch, S., Weichsel, J., Menze, B.H., et al., 2024. Syn-thetic optical coherence tomography angiographs for detailed retinal vessel segmentation without human annotations. IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging . Li, M., Huang, K., Xu, Q., Yang, J., Zhang, Y., Ji, Z., Xie, K., Yuan, S., Liu, Q., Chen, Q., 2024. Octa-500: a retinal dataset for optical coherence tomogra-phy angiography study. Medical image analysis 93, 103092. Li, R., Li, M., Li, J., Zhou, Y., . Connection sensitive attention u-net for accurate retinal vessel segmentation. arxiv 2019. arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.05558 . Lin, D., Dai, J., Jia, J., He, K., Sun, J., 2016. Scribblesup: Scribble-supervised convolutional networks for semantic segmentation, in: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 3159– 3167. Lin, F., Xia, Y., Deo, Y., MacRaild, M., Dou, H., Liu, Q., Wu, K., Ravikumar, N., Frangi, A.F., 2024. Unsupervised domain adaptation for brain vessel segmentation through transwarp contrastive learning, in: 2024 IEEE Inter-national Symposium on Biomedical Imaging (ISBI), IEEE. pp. 1–5. Lin, L., Peng, L., He, H., Cheng, P., Wu, J., Wong, K.K., Tang, X., 2023. Yolocurvseg: You only label one noisy skeleton for vessel-style curvilinear structure segmentation. Medical Image Analysis 90, 102937. Liu, W., Tian, T., Wang, L., Xu, W., Li, L., Li, H., Zhao, W., Tian, S., Pan, X., Deng, Y., et al., 2024. Dias: A dataset and benchmark for intracranial artery segmentation in dsa sequences. Medical Image Analysis 97, 103247. Liu, Y., Tu, W., Zhou, S., Liu, X., Song, L., Yang, X., Zhu, E., 2022. Deep graph clustering via dual correlation reduction, in: Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, pp. 7603–7611. Luo, X., Hu, M., Liao, W., Zhai, S., Song, T., Wang, G., Zhang, S., 2022. Scribble-supervised medical image segmentation via dual-branch network and dynamically mixed pseudo labels supervision, in: International Con-ference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention, Springer. pp. 528–538. Ma, J., He, Y., Li, F., Han, L., You, C., Wang, B., 2024. Segment anything in medical images. Nature Communications 15, 654. Ma, X., Qin, C., You, H., Ran, H., Fu, Y., 2022. Rethinking network design and local geometry in point cloud: A simple residual mlp framework. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.07123 . Ma, Y., Hao, H., Xie, J., Fu, H., Zhang, J., Yang, J., Wang, Z., Liu, J., Zheng, Y., Zhao, Y., 2020. Rose: a retinal oct-angiography vessel segmentation dataset and new model. IEEE transactions on medical imaging 40, 928–939. Ma, Y., Hua, Y., Deng, H., Song, T., Wang, H., Xue, Z., Cao, H., Ma, R., Guan, H., 2021. Self-supervised vessel segmentation via adversarial learning, in: Proceedings of the IEEE /CVF International Conference on Computer Vi-sion, pp. 7536–7545. Van der Maaten, L., Hinton, G., 2008. Visualizing data using t-sne. Journal of machine learning research 9. Maxim Popov, A., et al., 2023. Arcade: Automatic region-based coronary artery disease diagnostics using x-ray angiography images dataset phase. Mishra, S., Zhu, P., Saligrama, V., 2022. Interpretable compositional repre-sentations for robust few-shot generalization. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 46, 1496–1512. Moccia, S., Momi, E., Hadji, S.E., Mattos, L., 2018. Blood vessel segmentation algorithms - review of methods, datasets and evaluation metrics. Computer methods and programs in biomedicine 158, 71–91. doi: 10.1016/j.cmpb. 2018.02.001 .Murray, C.D., 1926. The physiological principle of minimum work: I. the vascular system and the cost of blood volume. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 12, 207–214. Ning, H., Wang, C., Chen, X., Li, S., 2024. An accurate and e ffi cient neural net-work for octa vessel segmentation and a new dataset, in: ICASSP 2024-2024 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), IEEE. pp. 1966–1970. Orlando, J.I., Fu, H., Breda, J.B., Van Keer, K., Bathula, D.R., Diaz-Pinto, A., Fang, R., Heng, P.A., Kim, J., Lee, J., et al., 2020. Refuge challenge: A uni-fied framework for evaluating automated methods for glaucoma assessment from fundus photographs. Medical image analysis 59, 101570. Ouali, Y., Hudelot, C., Tami, M., 2020. Semi-supervised semantic segmen-tation with cross-consistency training, in: Proceedings of the IEEE /CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 12674–12684. Peng, L., Lin, L., Cheng, P., Huang, Z., Tang, X., 2022. Unsupervised domain adaptation for cross-modality retinal vessel segmentation via disentangling representation style transfer and collaborative consistency learning, in: 2022 IEEE 19th International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging (ISBI), IEEE. pp. 1–5. Porwal, P., Pachade, S., Kamble, R., Kokare, M., Deshmukh, G., Sahasrabud-dhe, V., Meriaudeau, F., 2018. Indian diabetic retinopathy image dataset (idrid): a database for diabetic retinopathy screening research. Data 3, 25. Raghu, A., Raghu, M., Bengio, S., Vinyals, O., 2019a. Rapid learning or feature reuse? towards understanding the e ff ectiveness of maml. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.09157 . Raghu, M., Zhang, C., Kleinberg, J., Bengio, S., 2019b. Transfusion: Under-standing transfer learning for medical imaging. Advances in neural infor-mation processing systems 32. Rombach, R., Blattmann, A., Lorenz, D., Esser, P., Ommer, B., 2022. High-resolution image synthesis with latent di ff usion models, in: Proceedings of the IEEE /CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 10684–10695. Ronneberger, O., Fischer, P., Brox, T., 2015. U-net: Convolutional net-works for biomedical image segmentation, in: Medical image computing and computer-assisted intervention–MICCAI 2015: 18th international con-ference, Munich, Germany, October 5-9, 2015, proceedings, part III 18, Springer. pp. 234–241. Ruan, J., Li, J., Xiang, S., 2024. Vm-unet: Vision mamba unet for medical image segmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.02491 . Runions, A., Fuhrer, M., Lane, B., Federl, P., Rolland-Lagan, A.G., Prusinkiewicz, P., 2005. Modeling and visualization of leaf venation pat-terns, in: ACM SIGGRAPH 2005 Papers, pp. 702–711. Runions, A., Lane, B., Prusinkiewicz, P., 2007. Modeling trees with a space colonization algorithm. Nph 7, 6. Sarhan, A., Rokne, J., Alhajj, R., Crichton, A., 2021. Transfer learning through weighted loss function and group normalization for vessel segmentation from retinal images, in: 2020 25th International Conference on Pattern Recognition (ICPR), IEEE. pp. 9211–9218. Shu, Y., Li, H., Xiao, B., Bi, X., Li, W., 2022. Cross-mix monitoring for medical image segmentation with limited supervision. IEEE Transactions on Multimedia 25, 1700–1712. Snell, J., Swersky, K., Zemel, R., 2017. Prototypical networks for few-shot learning. Advances in neural information processing systems 30. Song, D., Huang, W., Liu, J., Islam, M.J., Yang, H., Wang, S., 2024. Optimized vessel segmentation: A structure-agnostic approach with small vessel en-hancement and morphological correction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.15251 Given-name Surname et al. / Medical Image Analysis (2026) 25 .Song, Y., Wang, T., Cai, P., Mondal, S.K., Sahoo, J.P., 2023. A comprehen-sive survey of few-shot learning: Evolution, applications, challenges, and opportunities. ACM Computing Surveys 55, 1–40. Sorscher, B., Ganguli, S., Sompolinsky, H., 2022. Neural representational ge-ometry underlies few-shot concept learning. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 119. doi: 10.1073/ pnas.2200800119 .Tajbakhsh, N., Jeyaseelan, L., Li, Q., Chiang, J.N., Wu, Z., Ding, X., 2020. Em-bracing imperfect datasets: A review of deep learning solutions for medical image segmentation. Medical image analysis 63, 101693. Tang, M., Djelouah, A., Perazzi, F., Boykov, Y., Schroers, C., 2018. Normal-ized cut loss for weakly-supervised cnn segmentation, in: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 1818– 1827. Tetteh, G., Efremov, V., Forkert, N.D., Schneider, M., Kirschke, J., Weber, B., Zimmer, C., Piraud, M., Menze, B.H., 2020. Deepvesselnet: Vessel segmen-tation, centerline prediction, and bifurcation detection in 3-d angiographic volumes. Frontiers in Neuroscience 14, 592352. Tian, Z., Zhao, H., Shu, M., Yang, Z., Li, R., Jia, J., 2020. Prior guided feature enrichment network for few-shot segmentation. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence 44, 1050–1065. Wang, K., Liew, J.H., Zou, Y., Zhou, D., Feng, J., 2019. Panet: Few-shot image semantic segmentation with prototype alignment, in: proceedings of the IEEE /CVF international conference on computer vision, pp. 9197–9206. Wang, R.Q., Zhang, X.Y., Liu, C.L., 2021. Meta-prototypical learning for domain-agnostic few-shot recognition. IEEE Transactions on neural net-works and learning systems 33, 6990–6996. Wittmann, B., Wattenberg, Y., Amiranashvili, T., Shit, S., Menze, B., 2025. ves-selfm: A foundation model for universal 3d blood vessel segmentation, in: Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference, pp. 20874–20884. Wu, L., Zhong, Z., Fang, L., He, X., Liu, Q., Ma, J., Chen, H., 2023. Sparsely annotated semantic segmentation with adaptive gaussian mixtures, in: Pro-ceedings of the IEEE /CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 15454–15464. Xie, Q., Guo, M., Mou, L., Zhang, D., Chen, D., Shan, C., Zhao, Y., Su, R., Zhang, J., 2024a. Dsca: A digital subtraction angiography sequence dataset and spatio-temporal model for cerebral artery segmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.00341 . Xie, Q., Zhang, D., Mou, L., Wang, S., Zhao, Y., Guo, M., Zhang, J., 2024b. Dsnet: A spatio-temporal consistency network for cerebrovascular segmen-tation in digital subtraction angiography sequences, in: International Con-ference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention, Springer. pp. 199–208. Yagis, E., Aslani, S., Jain, Y., Zhou, Y., Rahmani, S., Brunet, J., Bellier, A., Werlein, C., Ackermann, M., Jonigk, D., et al., 2024. Deep learning for 3d vascular segmentation in hierarchical phase contrast tomography: a case study on kidney. Scientific Reports 14, 27258. Yang, R., Zhang, S., 2024. Enhancing retinal vascular structure segmentation in images with a novel design two-path interactive fusion module model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.01362 . Yang, S., Du, J., Guo, J., Zhang, W., Liu, H., Li, H., Wang, N., 2024. Vil-ref: A chinese vision-language retinal foundation model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.10894 . Zhang, C., Lin, G., Liu, F., Yao, R., Shen, C., 2019. Canet: Class-agnostic seg-mentation networks with iterative refinement and attentive few-shot learn-ing, in: Proceedings of the IEEE /CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 5217–5226. Zhang, L., Rao, A., Agrawala, M., 2023a. Adding conditional control to text-to-image di ff usion models, in: Proceedings of the IEEE /CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 3836–3847. Zhang, S., Metaxas, D.N., 2023. On the challenges and perspectives of founda-tion models for medical image analysis. Medical image analysis 91, 102996. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2306.05705 .Zhang, X., Jin, Z., Wu, S., Wang, F., Peng, G., Zhang, X., Huang, Y., Chen, J., Feng, J., 2025a. Pasc-net: Plug-and-play shape self-learning convolu-tions network with hierarchical topology constraints for vessel segmenta-tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.04008 . Zhang, X., Ou, N., Basaran, B.D., Visentin, M., Qiao, M., Gu, R., Matthews, P.M., Liu, Y., Ye, C., Bai, W., 2025b. A foundation model for lesion seg-mentation on brain mri with mixture of modality experts. IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging . Zhang, Z., Zhang, X., Qi, Y., Yang, G., 2023b. Partial vessels annotation-based coronary artery segmentation with self-training and prototype learning, in: International Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention, Springer. pp. 297–306. Zhao, T., Gu, Y., Yang, J., Usuyama, N., Lee, H.H., Kiblawi, S., Naumann, T., Gao, J., Crabtree, A., Abel, J., et al., 2025. A foundation model for joint segmentation, detection and recognition of biomedical objects across nine modalities. Nature methods 22, 166–176. Zhou, J., Wei, C., Wang, H., Shen, W., Xie, C., Yuille, A., Kong, T., 2021. ibot: Image bert pre-training with online tokenizer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.07832 . Zhou, Z.H., 2018. A brief introduction to weakly supervised learning. National science review 5, 44–53. Zhu, J.Y., Park, T., Isola, P., Efros, A.A., 2017. Unpaired image-to-image trans-lation using cycle-consistent adversarial networks, in: Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision, pp. 2223–2232.