Title: Secure Authentication in Wireless IoT: Hamming Code Assisted SRAM PUF as Device Fingerprint

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.15810v1

Published Time: Mon, 20 Apr 2026 00:40:19 GMT

Number of Pages: 10

Markdown Content:
# Secure Authentication in Wireless IoT: Hamming Code Assisted SRAM PUF as Device Fingerprint 

Florian Lehn 1, Pascal Ahr 1, and Hans D. Schotten 1, 2 

> 1

German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence, Germany 

> 2

Division of Wireless Communications and Radio Positioning, RPTU University Kaiserslautern-Landau, Germany 

Email: {florian.lehn, pascal.ahr, hans.schotten}@dfki.de Please note: This is a preprint submitted to arXiv, licensed under arXiv.org perpetual, non-exclusive license. This work is accepted but not yet published at the 30th ITG-Symposium, Mobile Communications - Technologies and Applications in Osnabrueck, Germany. 

Abstract— Static Random Access Memory (SRAM) Physically Unclonable Functions (PUFs) make use of intrinsic manufacturing variations in memory cells to derive device-unique responses. Employing such hardware-rooted fingerprints for authentication, this work demonstrates a threshold-based authentication proof of concept for constrained Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT) devices. The proposed scheme can reliably cap the the post-authentication bit error rate (BER) below 1 %. Inherent SRAM PUF unreliability is addressed by a resource-efficient combination of Hamming code (HC) Error Correction (EC) and Temporal Majority Voting (TMV). Increasing HC redundancy or TMV count significantly reduces the BER, albeit with diminishing returns and increasingly prohibitive computational overhead. Furthermore, this work quantifies the threshold gap between strict reliability and security constraints. This gap is reframed as a design budget which enables the resource-aware calibration of the acceptance threshold, PUF response length, and stabilization technique, without violating designed-for error limits. Larger responses make reliability optimizations increasingly obsolete. This comparative analysis establishes a comprehensive design space for PUF EC, guiding future implementations in balancing EC quality against resource constraints such as computational demand, power consumption, and implementation complexity. 

Index Terms— SRAM PUF, Authentication, Hardware Security, Hamming Code, Error Correction, Majority Voting, Reliability, IoT, Computational Overhead, Resource Utilization. 

# 1 Introduction 

The fourth industrial revolution relies on Big Data and Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT). While Big Data collects, stores, and processes large volumes of highly diverse data, the IIoT infras-tructure serves as the primary source generating this data. The combination of both technologies enables novel insights into in-dustrial environments. The IIoT is composed of numerous small, internet-connected sensor nodes. Typically, those devices are cost-sensitive and highly resource-constrained, characterized by low computational power and a reliance on low-capacity batteries or even battery-less operation [1, 2]. Due to these constraints, security remains a critical challenge in IIoT devices. To secure communications, especially across wireless networks, robust authentication is essential. Usually handled via conventional methods such as asymmetric cryptography, these methods can be compromised or are too resource-intensive for IIoT devices [2,3]. Consequently, Physically Unclonable Functions (PUFs) have been demonstrated to be a suitable alternative [3, 4]. Static Random Access Memory (SRAM) PUFs derive device-unique responses R to a startup challenge C, forming a Challenge-Response Pair (CRP) like a digital fingerprint. This fingerprint is extracted from intrinsic hardware imperfections caused by uncontrollable manufacturing variations. A drawback of intrinsic SRAM PUFs is the imperfect reliability of R. This is caused by unstable SRAM cells or environmental influences such as temperature or voltage fluctuations [5]. With two ESP32-S3 microcontrollers communicating via a Wireless Local Area Network (WLAN) Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) point-to-point connection, this work provides a proof of concept that the unreliability inherent to PUFs, which manifests in the bit error rate (BER) of a PUF-based authentica-tion process, can be addressed by resource-efficient strategies like basic Hamming code (HC), Majority Voting (MV), and an authentication acceptance threshold 𝜏 BER . Here, different Single Error Correction (SEC) and Single Error Correction, Double Error Detection (SECDED) schemes are compared, for which parity bits are stored as helper data. Hamming code serves as an Error Correction (EC) scheme based on XOR logic operations. These bitwise manipulations are directly performed by the microcontroller’s Arithmetic Logic Unit (ALU), thus making them both fast and low-power. Con-sequently, HCs requires significantly lower computational over-head compared to more complex ECs such as polar codes, 1

> arXiv:2604.15810v1 [cs.CR] 17 Apr 2026

making them highly suitable for low-power Microcontroller Units (MCUs) [6]. The rest of this paper is structured as follows: First, Section 2 provides an overview of related work. Thereafter, Section 3 de-tails the design of the SRAM PUF-based authentication testbed. Section 4 experimentally assesses authentication performance for various EC and MV configurations and associated 𝜏 BER cali-brations. Finally, Section 5 summarizes findings and highlights future research directions. 

# 2 Related Work 

Authentication, especially in IIoT domains relying on resource-constrained devices, is one of the main applications of SRAM PUFs and has been extensively discussed in the literature [1,2,7]. Despite advantages such as retrofit capability, zero additional hardware overhead, and having low power and cost requirements while still featuring strong security properties, SRAM PUFs tend to produce unreliable responses. To address this drawback, various stabilization concepts have been proposed. Error-Correcting Codes (ECCs), such as polar codes and HCs, focus on correcting bit flips of the PUF to provide a stable response. This post-processing is divided into phases, including the creation of helper data [6, 8]. Additionally, there are pre-selection and masking schemes to exclusively include stable bits in the response while discarding unstable ones [9], or in combination with an ECC, such as HC, to correct unstable bits [6]. Another approach involves stabilizing the response using MV. Instead of using the raw base response, there is a post-processing step that combines a set of responses. Differing in the voting dimension, there are two schemes: Spatial Majority Voting (SMV) and Temporal Majority Voting (TMV). SMV, as in [10], groups adjacent bit responses and selects the binary value inside the voting window with the highest occurrence or based on a certain threshold [11]. In contrast, TMV selects the binary value based on repeated responses for a specific bit location within the time dimension [12]. However, the landscape of these PUF stabilization techniques is fragmented, and a standardized combined approach is miss-ing. Additionally, while these stabilization and EC techniques improve reliability, they can introduce prohibitive computational complexity, incur high energy overheads, require substantial Non-Volatile Storage (NVS) to store helper data, or lead to significant entropy loss [6, 10, 11]. This introduces compet-ing design trade-offs, of which there is a lack of comparative real-world analysis. Furthermore, applying strict authentication thresholds inherently forces a compromise between security and usability, creating a direct inverse relationship between the False Acceptance Rate (FAR) and False Rejection Rate (FRR) [13], which necessitates an application-specific calibration to balance these competing metrics, as well as critical resource limitations in IIoT devices. Motivated by these constraints, the main contribution of this work lies in combining a complexity-aware HC with TMV in a threshold-based authentication scheme. The objective is to mitigate the inherent instability of SRAM PUFs for authenti-cation in IIoT while focusing on resource-efficient solutions. Specifically, this requires assessing and balancing the associated computational and memory overheads, and calibrating the au-thentication threshold in a strictly resource and security-aware manner. Consequently, this work provides a comprehensive and comparative design space exploration for low-overhead PUF-assisted authentication primitives, yielding insights highly relevant for the application of resource-constrained IIoT devices in real-world environments. 

# 3 Setup for Evaluation 

The employed ESP32-S3 MCUs run FreeRTOS to enable wire-less communication via the included Wi-Fi stack. To capture the SRAM startup pattern reliably, the evaluated addresses must reside in a memory region that is never overwritten by the C runtime startup sequence. In the ESP-IDF toolchain, the run-time copies initialised variables from flash and zeroes the .bss 

segment before app_main is called. Therefore a PUF array is placed in the .noinit section using the GCC attribute:   

> static uint8_t puf_array [ CONFIG_PUF_SIZE ] __attribute__ (( section (".noinit")));

The linker assigns a fixed address to this region, ensuring that neither the startup code nor the NVS flash subsystem ever accesses it. This approach is adopted, as it provides the strongest determinism guarantee. . The ESP32 family supports deep sleep. This power saving mode disconnects the main SRAM and the Central Processing Unit (CPU) from power, only the Real-Time Clock (RTC) SRAM remains powered for the hardware timers and wakeup logic. RTC memory makes it possible to store persistent data, like the MV results. To implement TMV, the ESP32 deep-sleeps between PUF readings to power-cycle main SRAM and obtain statistically independent samples. The power-off time can be tailored to the SRAM properties of the hardware in use via the ESP-IDF libraries. The MV occurs during system startup at the beginning of the main task, prior to Wi-Fi and other initializations. This sequence is necessary because deep sleep powers off the main CPU and it’s main SRAM, thereby deleting the current execution Entity Verifier  

> ENROLL_REQ
> N × (read SRAM, tally, deep sleep) → R
> Hamming encode(R) → parity → NVS
> ENROLL_RESP (R)
> Store reference: R → NVS
> ENROLL_ACK
> Enrollment
> Authentication
> AUTH_REQ
> N × (read SRAM, tally, deep sleep) → r'
> Reconstruct codeword(r', parity ← NVS)
> Hamming decode → R'
> AUTH_RESP (R')
> BER = HD(R', R) / n
> ACK (BER ≤ )

Figure 1: Sequence diagram of the PUF-based authentication protocol, illustrating the enrollment and authentication phases. 2state and resetting the entire system. The majority voted PUF response is then kept in memory for future authentication requests. Crucially, the SRAM memory is explicitly zeroed before each evaluation cycle before deep sleep to mitigate arbitrary SRAM data remanence effects [14, 15], preventing dependencies on previous execution states and prior PUF evaluations during the MV process. This routine guarantees that the pre-power-down state of the memory is always identical, yielding highly reproducible PUF responses. For EC, helper data is generated during enrollment after MV and stored in NVS flash of the entity to persist across subsequent SRAM power or deep sleep cycles. Alternatively, if the threat model requires it, EC could similarly be performed by the verifier. Fig. 1 highlights the SRAM PUF-assisted authentication protocol as implemented in software on two ESP32-S3 MCUs. To clarify the computation overhead of MV and EC, the tech-niques are implemented as follows: MV acquires 𝑁 independent PUF readings by power-cycling the ESP32 via configurable deep-sleep intervals. On each boot the raw SRAM PUF re-sponse is immediately transformed into a per-bit counter stored in RTC memory, which persists across deep sleep. Each counter accumulates 𝑁 passes of PUF size 𝑛 counter increments before thresholding each counter against 𝑁 /2 to produce the final bit string on the last boot. For EC, only the parity bits are persisted in NVS as a single packed byte per codeword, loaded as one contiguous byte array at authentication time. The full Hamming codeword is then reconstructed on-the-fly by combining the current raw PUF reading with the stored parity before syndrome-based SEC or SECDED is applied in a single pass over all codewords. 

# 4 Results of Evaluation 

Data collection was performed on a setup involving, in total, six ESP32-S3 entity MCUs running at 160 MHz under controlled conditions in a climate chamber at 21 ◦C and 50 % relative humidity, configured as highlighted in Fig. 1, with one verifier connected to one entity via a TCP WLAN connection. The climate chamber setup is shown in Fig. 2. Based on preliminary testing the deep sleep time between PUF readings is configured to 50 ms . On the verifier, measurements are logged to an onboard SD card. Each ECC and MV configuration gets its own separate enrollment and subsequent authentication sweep. Due to evaluation time restrictions, each sweep is performed for 45 

iterations per device, with results aggregated across all entity devices into the same distribution plots. All PUF responses are initially extracted at a full length of 2048 bits. To evaluate smaller PUF sizes 𝑛 , these baseline responses are partitioned into 

𝑘 = 2048 /𝑛 collected adjacent blocks, proportionally expanding the available sample pool for shorter response lengths. While this device and per-config iteration count is sufficient to validate the ECC and MV design space (see Section 4.1) and calibrate an error-constrained and resource-aware acceptance threshold (see Section 4.2), the FAR analysis will rely on an analytical impostor model rather than empirical inter-device measurements. Multi-board empirical validation of FARs and other inter-device security metrics with a larger and diversified chip population remains future work. 

Figure 2: Experimental setup for measurements within a CTS environmental testing chamber. The composite view includes a smaller detailed inset photograph, showing four specific ESP32-S3 circuit boards with labeled connection cables during simulta-neous testing. 50.0% 52.0%     

> Uniformity (%)
> 0
> 10
> 20
> Count
> No ECC H(7,4) H(8,4) H(12,8) H(13,8) H(21,16) H(22,16) Ideal (50%)
> (a) Without MV and EC. 50.0% 52.0%
> Uniformity (%)
> 0
> 20
> 40
> 60
> Count
> No ECC H(7,4) H(8,4) H(12,8) H(13,8) H(21,16) H(22,16) Ideal (50%) (b) With MV ( 𝑁 =20 ) and EC.

Figure 3: Uniformity distributions per measured ECC scheme before (a) and after (b) PUF stabilization techniques. 

4.1 Design Space Exploration for Robust PUF Authentication 

The subsequent design space exploration is essentially balancing three competing pillars: reliability, resource overhead (mem-ory/CPU/energy), and bit uniformity. This works reliability optimization strategy hinges on two core principles: 

• Helper Data Generation: Here the work discusses the overhead of storing parity bits for EC, in this case HC. 

• Temporal Reliability: Using MV (reading the SRAM 𝑁 

times) to filter out unstable bits. This work assesses a symmetric voting configuration, where the same amount of votes is applied during enrollment and authentication (𝑁 enroll = 𝑁 auth = 𝑁 ). For both cases the work also discusses the associated execution time overhead. 

4.1.1 Bit Uniformity 

Uniformity, following [16, 17], measures the bit bias in a PUF response as the fractional Hamming-Weight (HW). In an ideal case this yields a uniform distribution of Unif ≈ 50% . Fig. 3 highlights that the evaluated SRAM PUF-assisted authentication approach approximates this ideal. It also demonstrates that MV and HC EC tighten the distribution, removing some of the inherent noise. 31 5 10 20   

> Vote configuration
> 0.0%
> 2.0%
> 4.0%
> 6.0%
> BER after ECC (%)
> No ECC H(21,16) H(22,16) H(12,8) H(13,8) H(7,4) H(8,4) Auth. threshold 𝜏 = 3%

(a) PUF response size 𝑛 = 2048 .1 5 10 20   

> Vote configuration
> 0.0%
> 5.0%
> 10.0%
> 15.0%
> 20.0%
> BER after ECC (%)
> No ECC H(21,16) H(22,16) H(12,8) H(13,8) H(7,4) H(8,4) Auth. threshold 𝜏 = 3%

(b) PUF response size 𝑛 = 64 .

Figure 4: Post-correction BER vs. MV count for each EC scheme for (b) 𝑛 = 64 and (a) 𝑛 = 2048 bits. Median trends are connected by lines, with shaded bands indicating the interquartile range (IQR). Box-and-whisker distributions show the full per-iteration spread at each vote count, with whiskers extending to 1.5×interquartile range (IQR). The dashed red line marks a potential 3 % 𝜏 BER authentication threshold. 

4.1.2 Reliability 

The authentication BER for different EC configurations is pre-sented in Fig. 4, which indicates the post-correction BER as a function of MV count 𝑁 for all evaluated ECCs. The BER calcu-lation is based on the normalized Hamming-Distance (HD) [17] between the enrolled response and the response transmitted for authentication. All EC variants exhibit a monotonic BER reduction with increasing 𝑁 , but with diminishing returns, especially beyond 

𝑁 ≈ 5. SECDED provides a marginal mean improvement over standard SEC HCs. In a standard SEC-only code, a 2-bit error produces a nonzero syndrome (the calculated error pattern) that is indistinguishable from that of a single-bit error at a different position, which can be seen as a form of syndrome aliasing. This causes the decoder to miscorrect, flipping an additional bit and turning two errors into three. The extended parity bit in SECDED detects this case, suppressing the miscorrection and leaving the two original errors uncorrected rather than creating a third. By preventing such 3-bit miscorrections, SECDED eliminates some of the higher BER outliers seen in standard SEC codes, resulting in narrower interquartile ranges (IQRs) in Fig. 4. Consequently, the mitigated syndrome aliasing phenomenon can be observed in the reduced dispersion of the SECDED box plots. In addition, for smaller PUF response sizes 𝑛 , fewer codewords per response 0%  

> 20%
> 40%
> 60%
> 80%
> 100%
> Code rate (%)
> No ECC H(7,4) H(8,4) H(12,8) H(13,8) H(21,16) H(22,16)
> ECC variant
> 0500 1000 1500 2000
> Parity bits added
> 0 b 1536 b 2048 b 1024 b 1280 b 640 b 768 b
> Parity bits added Code rate (%)

Figure 5: Trade-off between NVS overhead and data efficiency for each HC variant for a 256-byte PUF response, where the code rate 𝑅 = 𝑛 /𝑘 relates data bits 𝑛 to codeword bits 𝑘 .are formed, so a single miscorrected block has a disproportionate impact on the overall BER, amplifying the outlier effect due to miscorrections, which is visible in Fig. 4 when comparing (b) 

𝑛 = 64 and (a) 𝑛 = 2048 bits. Therefore, as demonstrated in Fig. 4b, for small 𝑛 , the whiskers and outliers of the HC-corrected BER distributions, especially those that are SEC-only with low redundancy such as H(21,16) or H(12,8), can exceed those of the uncorrected baseline, confirming that miscorrection can degrade worst-case reliability beyond the no-ECC case when only few codewords average out the effect. Nevertheless, the mean BER across all MV and EC configurations (the diamond markers in Fig. 4), stays the same when comparing lower 𝑛 (4b) and higher 

𝑛 (4a), only the statistical spread is altered. Additionally, as expected, the BER improves as the number of HC data bits, so the code rate, decreases, with H(7, 4) configu-rations outperforming H(12 , 8) and H(21 , 16 ) variants. Taking into account fewer data bits per HC correction block reduces the potential for > 1 bit (SEC) or > 2 bit (SECDED) uncor-rectable and undetectable bit flips and thereby false miscorrection attempts within a single codeword. 

4.1.3 Reliability vs. Memory Overhead 

Designers must evaluate whether the suppression of error alias-ing and the resulting reliability gains justify the increased helper data storage overhead of the additional SECDED parity bit. In addition, the performance gain of fewer data bits per codeword comes at the cost of increased helper data overhead. Fig. 5 illustrates this EC memory overhead, with a higher code rate implying higher data efficiency but also worse reliability (see Fig. 4). Smaller correction blocks like H(7,4) impose a signif-icantly lower data-to-parity ratio, forcing a trade-off between maximizing HC EC quality and minimizing the parity overhead. This reliability vs. memory overhead trade-off is is especially relevant for HC implementations on resource-constrained de-vices like the ESP32 family with limited NVS flash for helper data storage. Furthermore, the public transmission and storage of helper data introduce severe security vulnerabilities, as they can inadvertently leak information about the underlying secret key [8] or be exploited by machine learning models to predict PUF responses [3], imposing strict constraints on the assumed threat model. Future real-world deployments must mitigate these advanced attack vectors, but such techniques remain beyond the scope of this work and readers are referred to related work [3, 8]. 44.1.4 Computational Demand 

The computational demand and execution time overhead is crucial in selecting the appropriate PUF stabilization technique. This demand can be characterized via the execution time overhead and is generally directly proportional to the energy demand of the operation. This discounts some differences in the power demand of different architectural operations. Data locality, for example, is important. Moving data by accessing memory often has a higher power demand than local arithmetic operations. Increasing the MV count has a high impact as it does not just increase CPU time, but also increases the number of energy-demanding SRAM read cycles. In this TMV implementation specifically, it also creates repeated boot cycles per count. These repeated reads and especially boot cycles are expected to be the primary energy driver. Similarly, choosing a HC with a higher memory overhead leads to increased energy-intensive NVS flash transitions to retrieve stored helper data. Nevertheless, without conducting detailed energy demand measurements, this work takes on the more focused approach of quantifying the general computational overhead via execution time measurements. Fig. 6 highlights the execution time trade-offs between dif-ferent EC codes and MV vote counts. While decreasing the code rate has little effect on pure computation time, the resulting parity overhead significantly increases NVS read cycles and associated execution times, making these factors, alongside security implications [3, 8] and correction quality, the primary drivers in selecting the appropriate HC variant. With increasing 

𝑁 , MV exhibits a significant BER improvement (see Fig. 4) but also the most prohibitive impact on the execution time (see Fig. 6b), especially due to the boot overhead which does not even capture the full reboot cost, because only the ESP-IDF software timer is used for measurement, and it is initialised only after the first-stage bootloader and the second-stage firmware loader from flash have already completed. Additionally, the power-off sleep times are excluded, which carry considerable latency but negligible energy overhead due to the low deep-sleep current draw. Therefore, considering the diminishing returns in increasing 𝑁 (see Fig. 4) but increasingly prohibitive overhead (see Fig. 6b), selecting the right combination of MV count 𝑁 

and HC code rate is paramount in meeting resource constraints and PUF reliability requirements simultaneously. Consequently, for a given reliability requirement, the MV count 𝑁 and HC code rate should be selected as small as possible. 

4.2 Resource-Aware Threshold Calibration for Authentication 

This section is about meeting real-world constraints via the selection of a device-specific authentication threshold 𝜏 BER that balances FAR and FRR while simultaneously quantifying the available design budget for resource optimizations for a fixed EC and MV setting. The FAR and FRR represent the core security-usability trade-off in threshold-based authentication systems [18]. In HD-based threshold systems, as the FAR is lowered (increasing security) by decreasing the threshold, the FRR increases (reducing user convenience), creating a direct inverse relationship [13]. Consequently, for every EC config-uration the FAR and FRR are assessed in Fig. 7 based on the real-world genuine authentication measurement results (FRR) and an analytical impostor PUF response (FAR) distribution for No ECC H(7,4) H(8,4) H(12,8) H(13,8) H(21,16) H(22,16)          

> ECC variant
> 0𝜇 s
> 1,000 𝜇 s
> 2,000 𝜇 s
> 3,000 𝜇 s
> 4,000 𝜇 s
> ECC total overhead ( 𝜇 s)
> (a) Boxplot distribution of HC EC execution time for each code variant without MV. Variance reflects the number of bit errors requiring correction, which differs between iterations due to SRAM noise. EC execution is composed of EC computation time (syndrome computation and error correction) and memory overhead, mainly NVS transactions to retrieve helper data. No ECC
> H(7,4)
> H(8,4)
> H(12,8)
> H(13,8)
> H(21,16)
> H(22,16)
> ECC variant
> 0 ms
> 200 ms
> 400 ms
> 600 ms
> Incl. boot overhead (ms)
> 0 ms
> 5 ms
> 10 ms
> Excl. boot overhead (ms)
> Mean computation time
> SRAM read Boot overhead Majority vote ECC computation ECC memory overhead
> (b) Mean on-device computation time per EC variant for a MV con-figuration of 𝑁 =10 .Times are decomposed into SRAM readout (blue, negligible), MV computation (orange), and EC computation (red) and memory access overhead (grey). From the boot overhead (green) deep-sleep discharge intervals are excluded.

Figure 6: PUF authentication timing breakdown. (a) shows the HC EC time distribution per variant. (b) shows that MV dominates computation time, with EC correction contributing a comparatively small, slightly variant-dependent overhead. varying 𝜏 BER acceptance thresholds. The plots in Fig. 7 highlight these two different types of errors, which move in opposite directions. The y-axis represents the probability of a legitimate user being rejected (FRR) or an impostor being accepted (FAR). Fig. 7 presents the results based on sweeping through 𝜏 BER from an extremely strict to an extremely lenient authentication acceptance threshold. In this analysis, the impostor PUF response and the associated BER distribution after authentication are modeled analytically for a 𝑛 -bit SRAM PUF response. Assuming ideal cell-to-cell independence and a uniform bit probability 𝑝 = 0.5, the number of bit-flips between two independent responses follows a Binomial distribution 𝑋 ∼ 𝐵 (𝑛, 𝑝 ). As the bit length 𝑛 of the PUF response increases, the spread ( 𝜎 ) of the binomial distribution for the impostor narrows significantly relative to the mean and vice versa. Fig. 7 visually highlights this, because if a high enough PUF response bit-length (e.g., 𝑛 = 2048 in Fig. 7a) is selected, the analytical impostor distribution exhibits extreme concentration around the mean. Consequently, this shows as a wide margin of separation between the genuine empirical FRR and the theoretical FAR curves in Fig. 7. To visually demonstrate how bias effects shift the impostor distribution, models with slight 50 10 20 30 40 50 60 

BER threshold 𝜏 (%) 

0.0

0.5

1.0                       

> Error rate
> SM ec = 39.4%
> SM ec = 42.5%
> SM ec = 42.8%
> SM ec = 42.0%
> SM ec = 42.2%
> SM ec = 41.1%
> SM ec = 41.4%
> bias ≤20% bias ≤10% bias ≤5% FAR (unbiased)
> 𝜏 max = 43.4% (FAR ≤1e-09) FRR — No ECC
> 𝜏 min No ECC = 4.0% (FRR ≤1%) FRR — H(7,4)
> 𝜏 min H(7,4) = 0.9% (FRR ≤1%) FRR — H(8,4)
> 𝜏 min H(8,4) = 0.6% (FRR ≤1%) FRR — H(12,8)
> 𝜏 min H(12,8) = 1.3% (FRR ≤1%) FRR — H(13,8)
> 𝜏 min H(13,8) = 1.2% (FRR ≤1%) FRR — H(21,16)
> 𝜏 min H(21,16) = 2.3% (FRR ≤1%) FRR — H(22,16)
> 𝜏 min H(22,16) = 2.0% (FRR ≤1%)

(a) FAR and FRR vs. acceptance threshold analysis for 𝑛 = 2048 .0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 

BER threshold 𝜏 (%) 

0.0

0.5

1.0                       

> Error rate
> SM ec = 1.6%
> SM ec = 4.7%
> SM ec = 7.8%
> SM ec = 1.6%
> SM ec = 3.1%
> SM ec = 0.0%
> SM ec = 0.0%
> bias ≤20% bias ≤10% bias ≤5% FAR (unbiased)
> 𝜏 max = 14.1% (FAR ≤1e-09) FRR — No ECC
> 𝜏 min No ECC = 12.5% (FRR ≤1%) FRR — H(7,4)
> 𝜏 min H(7,4) = 9.4% (FRR ≤1%) FRR — H(8,4)
> 𝜏 min H(8,4) = 6.2% (FRR ≤1%) FRR — H(12,8)
> 𝜏 min H(12,8) = 12.5% (FRR ≤1%) FRR — H(13,8)
> 𝜏 min H(13,8) = 10.9% (FRR ≤1%) FRR — H(21,16)
> 𝜏 min H(21,16) = 14.1% (FRR ≤1%) FRR — H(22,16)
> 𝜏 min H(22,16) = 14.1% (FRR ≤1%)

(b) FAR and FRR vs. acceptance threshold analysis for 𝑛 = 64 .

Figure 7: FAR and FRR vs. acceptance threshold analysis without MV. The graphs (a) ( 𝑛 = 2048 ) and (b) ( 𝑛 = 64 )illustrate the trade-off between security (preventing unauthorized access, FAR) and reliability (ensuring legitimate access, FRR) as the acceptance threshold 𝜏 BER is varied. SM ec analysis is based on 𝛼 FAR = 10 −9 and 𝛼 FRR = 0.01 .bit biases 𝑝 ≠ 0.5 are also included in the analysis in Fig. 7. Once the threshold grows beyond the mean almost every theoretical impostor PUF response from the binomial model is considered authentic because random chance satisfies that requirement. This analytical model is essentially the same concept as in [13]. In contrast, they introduce their analytical models using pre-measured mean reliability and uniqueness of their SRAM PUF. SRAM PUFs sufficiently approximate this binomial model [13], as also highlighted in the previous uniformity results (see Fig. 3) and in the other close-to-ideal SRAM PUF qualities observed in related work [5, 19]. In Fig. 7, this work employs this analytical binomial model only for the FAR analysis (the ideal impostor) but uses actual empirical measurement curves for the FRR (the legitimate user). The analytical model just serves as a reference for ideal randomness and uniformity, against which the measured genuine noise distributions of the authentication iterations are compared. We consider this approach as sufficient, as the focus of this work is not empirical inter-device FAR security testing, but the resource-reliability trade-off. Here, the binomial impostor model provides a clean, reproducible FAR security baseline that isolates the variable this work cares about: how EC and MV configurations shift the FRR curve relative to a fixed theoretical FAR reference bound. Nevertheless, future analyses with different requirements may employ more complex mathematical models. These models could abandon ideal intra-and inter-device independence assumptions to account for real-world hardware realities, such as stuck bits, non-uniform cell probabilities, and spatial correlations between chips. Visually, in Fig. 7, the ideal operating window where the threshold should be placed is the flat gap between the FRR lines hitting zero and the FAR line starting to rise. Within this gap, both the FRR and FAR are effectively zero, so the probabilities of an authentic node getting locked out or a malicious impostor node getting authenticated illegally are below a negligible threshold. However, these security guarantees warrant a formal definition. This work aims to define the operating window for threshold selection using strict FAR and FRR error constraints based on the observed empirical FRR and analytical FAR values. Let 

𝛼 FRR be the maximum acceptable FRR, and let 𝛼 FAR be the maximum acceptable FAR. This work defines a lower bound threshold, 𝜏 𝑚𝑖𝑛 , that satisfies the reliability constraint: 

FRR (𝜏 min ) ≤ 𝛼 FRR 

Similarly, an upper bound threshold 𝜏 𝑚𝑎𝑥 satisfies the security constraint against an impostor being accepted: 

FAR (𝜏 max ) ≤ 𝛼 FAR 

Under the assumption of ideal bit independence and uniformity of the modeled impostor response, the probability of a false acceptance for a threshold placed anywhere in this operating range is strictly bounded by the designed-for error limit 𝛼 FAR .By establishing strict upper limits for acceptable error rates 

𝛼 FAR and 𝛼 FRR , the boundary thresholds 𝜏 𝑚𝑖𝑛 and 𝜏 𝑚𝑎𝑥 that satisfy these constraints can then be numerically determined. In this analysis, 𝛼 FRR is conservatively set to 𝛼 FRR = 0.01 , as the limited sample count of the genuine BER measurements is insufficient to reliably observe the rare outliers needed to define a stricter threshold. An error-constrained security margin ( SM ec ) to quantify this operating window is then formally defined as the difference between these two bounded thresholds, representing the robust tolerance zone available for threshold calibration: 

SM ec = 𝜏 max − 𝜏 min (1) If 𝜏 min > 𝜏 max , it indicates that the genuine PUF noise exceeds the maximum threshold permissible to block impostors. In this scenario, the system is fundamentally broken, as no threshold can satisfy both 𝛼 FRR and 𝛼 FAR simultaneously. Therefore, a valid operating window strictly requires SM ec > 0. If SM ec ≤ 0,the magnitude of the negative margin quantifies the severity of the distribution overlap and serves as a diagnostic metric for failed PUF-assisted authentication primitives. When a valid margin exists, this work recommends selecting the acceptance threshold at the reliability boundary: 𝜏 BER = 𝜏 min . A potential violation of 𝛼 FRR is less severe, as it degrades user convenience but does not compromise the system’s security guarantees. If enough CRPs are available, the legitimately rejected entity can reinitiate the authentication process with a fresh challenge from the verifier. In addition, setting the threshold as strictly as possible maximizes the distance to 𝜏 max , thereby converting the entire SM ec into a margin of safety against false acceptances. Crucially, this work reframes SM ec not just as a safety buffer, but as a quantifiable design budget. Fig. 7 highlights SM ec 

for 𝛼 FAR = 10 −9 and 𝛼 FRR = 0.01 . Depending on the ideal qualities of the PUF and these error thresholds, a highly robust configuration (e.g., 𝑛 = 2048 with strong HC EC, see Fig.7a) can yield a massively wide SM ec , indicating that the system is over-provisioned for the required 𝛼 constraints. This excess margin reveals the potential headroom available for resource op-timization. By actively optimizing the security margin, trading 6away excess SM ec by reducing the PUF response length 𝑛 or utilizing less computationally demanding EC and MV schemes, designers can potentially significantly lower computational and energy overheads, or consequently opt for weaker hardware, while still strictly satisfying the designed-for security thresholds. If SM ec = 0, there is exactly one theoretical threshold that mathematically satisfies the constraints, but under real-world conditions a margin of zero means that environmental fluctu-ations, such as temperature changes, could break the security guarantees. Therefore, a practical operating window only exists when SM ec > 0 whilst embedding some additional margin of safety. Consequently, the engineering goal is to scale down the resource utilization until a target SM target ec is achieved, leaving only a small, deliberate safety buffer above zero to account for real-world environmental fluctuations that might otherwise break the security guarantees. A future algorithm to optimize the resource efficiency of the authentication scheme would solve for SM target ec by locking acceptable error rates in place. This approach would mathematically optimize EC, MV, and PUF response length using the empirically determined correlations, actively altering the algorithmic parameters until the system perfectly fits the security requirements with minimal resource overhead (i.e., SM ec → SM target ec ≈ 0). For now, the evaluations of the subsequent Sections offer a comparative summary of SM ec for various configurations of the implemented authentication system for specific security targets 

𝛼 FAR . To start, Fig. 8 illustrates how SM ec scales with PUF size 

𝑛 across all evaluated configurations at 𝛼 FAR = 10 −6.

4.2.1 Relative Impact of MV, 𝑛 , and HC EC 

All EC and MV configurations exhibit an increasingly robust security margin SM ec with increasing 𝑛 , 𝑁 or decreasing HC code rate. The magnitude of each parameter’s contribution differs substantially: At 𝛼 FAR = 10 −6 scaling 𝑛 from 64 to 2048 bits improves SM ec by approximately 28 %, whereas maximising 𝑁 

(from 1 to 20 votes) or switching to the most redundant ECC variant each add only ≈ 6 % at 𝑛 = 256 bits. This asymmetry arises because just by increasing 𝑛 the impostor BER distribution becomes more concentrated, and the genuine empirical BER distribution becomes tighter, shifting both 𝜏 max and 𝜏 min so that they separate more from each other and the SM ec improves, whereas 𝑁 and HC EC affect 𝜏 min alone. Consequently, for a high 𝑛 , the results show, that the law of large numbers works in an engineer’s favor to create a nearly impassable statistical barrier for authentication, even for relatively lenient acceptance thresholds. Nevertheless, Fig. 8 highlights that increasing 𝑛 similarly to increasing 𝑁 or decreasing the HC code rate at some point yields diminishing returns in increasing SM ec . Consequently, the combined use of all three might be necessary in practice for very strict error thresholds or when a small 𝑛 is dictated by resource restrictions. 

4.2.2 Impact of Tightened Security Constraints 

Fig. 9 plots the shift in the error-constrained security margin 

ΔSM ec across PUF size 𝑛 as the 𝛼 FAR requirement is tightened. Trivially, stricter security guarantees also reduce SM ec leaving less potential for resource optimizations. Fig. 9 highlights that making 𝛼 FAR stricter (e.g., 10 −6 → 10 −9) has a greater effect 16 128 1024 

PUF size (bits) 

> 0
> 20
> 40
> 𝜏 BER  (%)  𝜏 min
> 𝜏 max

(a) H(7,4), 𝑁 = 1, 𝛼 FAR = 10 −6.16 128 1024 

PUF size (bits)  

> 0
> 20
> 40
> 𝜏 BER  (%)  𝜏 min
> 𝜏 max

(b) H(7,4), 𝑁 = 20 , 𝛼 FAR = 10 −6.4 8 16 32 48 64 128 256 512 1024 2048  

> PUF size (bits)
> −40
> −20
> 0
> 20
> 40
> SM ec  (%)
> ECC No ECC H(7,4) H(8,4) H(12,8) H(13,8) H(21,16) H(22,16) Vote count N = 1 N = 5 N = 10 N = 20
> 𝛼 FAR zones
> 10 −6: 5–10% zone
> 10 −9: 5–10% zone
> 10 −12 : 5–10% zone

(c) SM ec scaling across all configurations vs. PUF size 𝑛 .16 32 48 64 128 256 

> PUF size (bits)
> 0
> 10
> 20
> SM ec  (%)

(d) SM ec scaling zoomed in across all configurations vs. PUF size 𝑛 .

Figure 8: Evolution of the error-constrained security margin (SM ec ) at 𝛼 FAR = 10 −6. (a) and (b) show SM ec bounded by 𝜏 min 

and 𝜏 max for an exemplary configuration. Green denotes valid operating windows ( SM ec > 0) and red marks unviable configu-rations. (c) maps SM ec scaling versus 𝑛 , isolating configurations above a safe limit SM min  

> ec

= 5 % where excess resource overhead is constrained by an acceptable upper bound in 5–10% target 

𝛼 FAR zones. (d) provides a closer view. on SM ec at smaller values of 𝑛 . For example, for 2048 -bit measurements, the choice between 𝛼 FAR = 10 −6 and 𝛼 FAR =

10 −9 makes little difference ( ≈ 1.4% ). However, for 64 to 

128 bit responses, the difference is significant. The oscillations are a quantisation artefact: as 𝑛 grows, the integer number of bits separating the two acceptance thresholds can only change in unit steps, so ΔSM ec falls gradually between consecutive steps and rises sharply at each forward step, tracing a sawtooth whose amplitude envelope decays as 1/√𝑛 . At 𝑛 ≤ 16 , the Binomial impostor distribution has so few discrete outcomes that 𝜏 max floors at 0 % under all 𝛼 FAR targets, making ΔSM ec 

identically zero. The PUF response is too short for the FAR constraint to differentiate between the security levels. When 

𝛼 FAR is made stricter 𝜏 max shifts, and the SM ec is reduced by a fixed amount at a given 𝑛 . Because an ideal binomial impostor source is used ΔSM ec can also be analytically determined. When 

𝛼 FRR is tightened, the resulting ΔSM ec values are inherently less 74 8 16 32 48 64 128 256 512 1024 2048            

> PUF size 𝑛 (bits)
> −10
> 0
> ΔSM ec  (%)  strict 𝛼 FAR (relaxed: 10 −6)
> 10 −7(+1 dec.)
> 10 −8(+2 dec.)
> 10 −9(+3 dec.)
> 10 −10 (+4 dec.)
> 10 −11 (+5 dec.)
> 10 −12 (+6 dec.)

Figure 9: Change in ΔSM ec when tightening 𝛼 FAR from 10 −6,as a function of PUF size 𝑛 for an ideal impostor with no bias. 4 8 16 32 48 64 128 256 512 1024 2048           

> PUF size 𝑛 (bits)
> −5
> 0
> ΔSM ec  (%)  Cell bias ( 𝛼 FAR =10 −6)bias =0.05
> bias =0.10
> bias =0.20

Figure 10: Change in ΔSM ec for non-ideal bit bias. predictable than in the 𝛼 FAR case, as in this work, 𝜏 min is derived from empirical genuine BER measurements with finite sample counts rather than a closed-form model. Nevertheless, assuming the genuine BER also follows a binomial distribution as shown in [13], ΔSM ec behaves analogously for Δ𝛼 FRR and Δ𝛼 FAR , so the analysis presented for the FAR extends qualitatively to the FRR. 

4.2.3 PUF Bias Effects on Threshold Calibration 

Fig. 10 shows that SM ec is highly dependent on the ideal qualities of the PUF response, as SM ec degrades with increased bit bias in the binomial impostor model. The sawtooth pattern arises due to similar reasons as in 4.2.2. 

4.2.4 Imperfect PUF Uniqueness 

Similarly to 4.2.3, imperfect PUF uniqueness caused by inter-chip correlation reduces SM ec . The impostor inter-chip HD is binomially modeled, where the baseline per-bit mismatch probability is proportionally reduced by a positive inter-chip cor-relation factor 𝜌 chip ∈ [ 0, 1). Because correlated chips generate inherently more similar responses, the theoretical impostor HD distribution shifts closer to the genuine authentication distribu-tion. Consequently, to mathematically maintain a strict target (𝛼 FAR ), the maximum permissible impostor threshold 𝜏 max must be lowered. Fig. 11 illustrates this correlation-induced shift 

ΔSM ec , plotting the difference between an uncorrelated and a correlated baseline. As expected, it shows, a larger correlation factor 𝜌 chip necessitates a stricter threshold, yielding a larger loss in SM ec . The characteristic sawtooth behavior again arises from the discrete nature of the binomial quantile at finite PUF sizes 𝑛 .

4.2.5 Excluding Overprovisioned Configurations 

Out of all tested configurations in Fig. 8, for a given reliability constraint ( 𝛼 FRR = 0.01 ) and security constraint (e.g., 𝛼 FAR =

10 −6), the configurations within the shaded target bands are deemed most appropriate, as resource overhead is strictly capped to prevent overprovisioning. These bands isolate an operational window where the security margin is bounded strictly between a 4 8 16 32 48 64 128 256 512 1024 2048             

> PUF size 𝑛 (bits)
> −5.0
> −2.5
> 0.0
> ΔSM ec  (%)  Inter-chip correlation ( 𝛼 FAR =10 −6)
> 𝜌 chip =1 %
> 𝜌 chip =2 %
> 𝜌 chip =3 %
> 𝜌 chip =10 %

Figure 11: Impact of inter-chip correlation 𝜌 chip on SM ec .necessary safety floor ( SM min  

> ec

≥ 0) against unaccounted for PUF noise and inter-chip dependencies, and an acceptable overhead ceiling SM ceil ec . Configurations within this zone safely satisfy all error constraints while exhibiting little wasteful headroom for further resource optimization. Although visualized here as a broader selection band ( SM min  

> ec

≤ SM target ec ≤ SM ceil ec ) to illustrate the available design space, a practical deployment would aggressively optimize resources by collapsing this target directly to the safety floor ( SM target ec = SM min  

> ec

). To account for non-ideal PUF behavior that was not empiri-cally assessed in this work, for instance, correlations between chips (see 4.2.4), a fixed safety offset of SM min  

> ec

= 5 % is applied. This is assumed to be sufficient, due to the close-to-ideal unifor-mity results of the implemented SRAM PUF (see Fig. 3) and predictably good SRAM PUF uniqueness and randomness as shown in related work [5, 13, 19]. But this safety offset has to be individually assessed based on the PUF. Statistically, 𝜏 max remains zero at small 𝑛 until 𝛼 FAR > 0.5𝑛 

(approximately 𝑛 ≳ 20 for 𝛼 FAR = 10 −6 and 𝑛 ≳ 30 for 𝛼 FAR =

10 −9), marking the theoretical threshold beyond which a strictly positive security margin ( SM ec > 0) becomes possible. At small 

𝑛 close to this bound, a counter-intuitive non-monotonic SM ec 

inversion can be observed in Fig. 8 for some of the HC EC and MV configurations. This effect is due to evaluating a statistical quantile ( 𝜏 min derived from 𝛼 FRR ) against an asymmetric, multi-modal distribution of genuine post-authentication BER, caused by rare clustered errors that increasingly start to fragment the distribution at smaller 𝑛 . Decreasing 𝑛 increasingly isolates clustered erroneous bits into a shrinking fraction of rare worst-case outlier responses, leaving a proportionally larger pool of perfect, error-free ones. This creates competing effects: while the increased dispersion of the BER distribution at lower 𝑛 

(see Fig. 4) initially drives 𝜏 min up, the growing sample pool of perfect responses causes the percentile thresholding at the 𝛼 FRR 

boundary to increasingly mask the rare outliers in some cases. In these cases, once this masking effect overpowers the increasing dispersion, the 𝜏 min threshold counter-intuitively stops increasing or is even pulled back towards zero. This statistical effect can be amplified by HC miscorrections because these induce additional errors in a codeword, making the effect less noticeable in the no-ECC case. If errors were truly randomly scattered across bits, smaller 𝑛 would always yield a wider non-fragmented BER distribution. The 99th percentile ( 𝜏 𝑚𝑖𝑛 for 𝛼 FRR = 0.01 ) would then always decrease monotonically as 𝑛 grows. Consequently, once the growing fragmentation of the per-response BER distribution starts to have a stronger impact on the 𝜏 min computation with decreasing 𝑛 , this effect increasingly degrades the validity of SM ec . Therefore, SM ec is only a reliable indicator of a resource-aware and error-constrained operating window available for threshold calibration above a lower bound 

𝑛 min . Based on a visual inspection of Fig. 8, rather than a 8formal empirical assessment, this bound 𝑛 min appears to lie at approximately 𝑛 ≳ 64 for 𝛼 FAR = 10 −6, beyond which this effect ceases to have a noticeable impact. Since 𝑛 min strongly depends on the magnitude of PUF error clustering and the nature of the BER distribution at small 𝑛 it is in need to be individually assessed. Therefore, only configurations in Fig. 8 that exceed 𝑛 ≳ 𝑛 min and fall within a specific 𝛼 FAR target zone are considered candidates for a resource-aware 𝜏 BER calibration. Below this threshold, this work advises against relying on SM ec ,as the metric becomes severely distorted by the exact shape of the distribution, a characteristic assumed to be highly device-specific and therefore unreliable when used to assess whether a SRAM PUF-assisted authentication schemes reliably meets certain 𝛼 FAR and 𝛼 FRR targets. For a shift in the security constraint 𝛼 FAR the offsets ΔSM ec 

in Fig. 9 would need to be applied to the SM ec curves in Fig. 8. Instead, each additional 𝛼 FAR target zone in Fig. 8 is reconstructed analytically by shifting the baseline band by the 𝜏 max difference between baseline and target constraints, without re-plotting the empirical SM ec lines. For configurations within these target zones, the trade-offs among 𝑛 , 𝑁 , and the HC EC variant, such as the computational overhead discussed in Section 4.1, now dictate the final selection. 

4.2.6 Implications of the Results 

The target zones in Fig. 8 indicate, designers can opt for a larger PUF response 𝑛 and relax the acceptance threshold in-stead of resorting to implementing complex and computationally demanding HC EC or MV schemes, whilst meeting the same security guarantees at a designed-for SM target ec . Only shorter PUF responses thus necessitate stronger MV and HC EC. Crucially, as Fig. 8 shows, HC EC can even worsen the security margin compared to the baseline at smaller 𝑛 < 128 . Only after 𝑛 > 128 

this apparent performance inversion is reliably reverted and Fig.8 shows the expected pattern of HCs with lower codes rates always outperforming higher code rates. This is in contrast to the aver-age BER which reliably improves with the code rate independent of 𝑛 (see Fig.4). With fewer HC codewords per PUF response, due to smaller 𝑛 , a single miscorrected block or other clustered errors disproportionately affect the per-response BER, creating worse outliers than without EC (see also Fig. 4), which can lead to a significant fragmentation of the BER distribution. For larger PUF sizes, the correctly decoded blocks, where single-bit errors are eliminated, increasingly outweigh the rare miscorrections, and the net effect of EC becomes reliably positive. Again due to the percentile thresholding computation explained in Sec-tion 4.2.5, this results in no-ECC actually reliably outperforming some HC variants in meeting SM target ec at smaller 𝑛 (for exam-ple, see H(21,16) in Fig 8 at 𝑛 = 64 ). Consequently, at small values of 𝑛 , HC configurations with efficient code rates (e.g., H(21,16) or H(22,16)) are often unviable. This makes it difficult to justify HC deployment over increasing 𝑛 , which naturally improves the security margin and renders such PUF stabilization techniques increasingly obsolete. For MV, the main drawback remains the computational overhead discussed in Section 4.1. This makes small 𝑛 only attractive in edge cases, when a large 

𝑛 is prohibitively expensive, due to an increasingly large CRP database, NVS limitations, wireless transmission overheads, or other constraints. Here, the results highlight that the system can be made significantly stricter without degrading usability through one of three approaches: moderate MV ( 𝑁 ≲ 5) com-bined with low-redundancy HCs, low code rate HC EC alone, or aggressive MV ( 𝑁 ≳ 5). Consequently, only for a small 𝑛 , select-ing the appropriate reliability optimization in threshold-based PUF-assisted authentication remains an application and device-specific challenge. To this end, this implementation presented a representative assortment of resource-aware solutions. However, designers must also balance the quality of the selected reliability enhancement against the mentioned security implications of increased helper data storage [3, 8] and the computational and memory overheads discussed in Section 4.1. Combined, these diverse factors introduce a multitude of competing dimensions in this design space exploration that engineers must consider when deciding on an authentication configuration. Consequently, to satisfy the strict resource constraints of IIoT devices, this work recommends a balanced authentication approach. Here, the authors assume the perfect trade-off to be highly device and application-unique and in need to be individually assessed. Specifically, whenever a large 𝑛 is feasible, to meet security guar-antees in a resource-efficient way (i.e., SM ec → SM target ec ≈ 0)it is preferred to opt for a more lenient acceptance threshold at such larger 𝑛 , and when necessary, pair it with a lightweight HC SECDED, rather than high MV counts. 

# 5 Conclusion and Outlook 

This work presented a highly secure threshold-based SRAM PUF-assisted authentication scheme tailored for resource-constrained IIoT environments. To this end, it formally defined an error-constrained security margin ( SM ec ) to quantify the operating window available for threshold calibration between the strict boundaries of acceptable false acceptance (FAR) and rejection rates (FRR). This novel metric was systematically utilized as a measurable design budget, highlighting the potential to safely scale down computational overhead without violating predefined security and reliability guarantees. It depends heavily on ideal SRAM PUF qualities, and larger responses ( 𝑛 ) permit signifi-cantly more lenient acceptance thresholds, rendering reliability optimizations increasingly obsolete. The evaluation demonstrated the viability of using MV paired with low-overhead HCs to effectively maintain FRR compli-ance under strict thresholds, particularly when resource limits mandate shorter PUF responses. All evaluated EC variants exhibited a monotonic mean per-response post-authentication BER reduction with increasing MV count and decreasing HC EC code rate. More redundant and computationally expensive combined configurations reliably cap the mean BER below 1%, with both strategies yielding diminishing returns, but in-creasingly prohibitive overheads. SECDED HCs exhibit only marginally better mean BER, but the results show that increased SEC miscorrection-induced outliers, manifesting in an increased fragmentation of the genuine BER distribution, can actually significantly worsen the SM ec at smaller 𝑛 even when compared to the base case. This suggests SECDED deployment is preferred at small 𝑛 , even though it must be carefully evaluated against the additional parity overhead on a per-application basis. Combined, these results facilitate a robust design space explo-ration of various SRAM PUF-assisted authentication configura-tions, guiding future implementations in trading off excess SM ec 

against processing time, energy requirements, and implementa-9tion overhead. Here, as a first step in this direction, this work clearly demonstrated EC quality and computational overheads of MV and HCs. Future work could expand upon this by incorporating detailed power and energy profiling, multi-board empirical FAR testing and more complex mathematical impostor models. 

# Acknowledgment 

This research was conducted within the ALPAKA and SUSTAINET_guarDian research project, funded by the German Federal Ministry of Research, Technology and Space (BMFTR) under the grant 16KIS1841K and 16KIS2239K. 

# References 

[1] Fadi Farha, Huansheng Ning, Karim Ali, Liming Chen, and Christopher Nugent. SRAM-PUF-based entities authentica-tion scheme for resource-constrained IoT devices. IEEE Internet of Things Journal , 8(7):5904–5913, 2021. doi: 10.1109/JIOT.2020.3032518. [2] Ujjwal Guin, Adit Singh, Mahabubul Alam, Janice Cañedo, and Anthony Skjellum. A secure low-cost edge device authentication scheme for the internet of things. In 2018 31st International Conference on VLSI Design and 2018 17th International Con-ference on Embedded Systems (VLSID) , pages 85–90, 2018. doi: 10.1109/VLSID.2018.42. [3] Abdulaziz Al-Meer and Saif Al-Kuwari. Physical unclonable functions (PUF) for IoT devices. ACM Comput. Surv. , 55(14s), 2023. doi: 10.1145/3591464. [4] G. Edward Suh and Srinivas Devadas. Physical unclonable functions for device authentication and secret key generation. In 2007 44th ACM/IEEE Design Automation Conference , pages 9–14, New York, NY, USA, 2007. Association for Computing Machinery. doi: 10.1145/1278480.1278484. [5] Daniel E. Holcomb, Wayne P. Burleson, and Kevin Fu. Power-up SRAM state as an identifying fingerprint and source of true random numbers. IEEE Transactions on Computers , 58(9):1198–1210, 2009. doi: 10.1109/TC.2008.212. [6] Hoang-Long Pham, Duy-Hieu Bui, Xuan-Tu Tran, and Orazio Aiello. SRAM-based physically unclonable function using lightweight hamming-code fuzzy extractor for energy harvesting beat sensors. In 2024 International Conference on Advanced Technologies for Communications (ATC) , pages 499–504, 2024. doi: 10.1109/ATC63255.2024.10908150. [7] Christoph Lipps, Andreas Weinand, Dennis Krummacker, Christoph Fischer, and Hans D. Schotten. Proof of concept for IoT device authentication based on SRAM PUFs using AT-MEGA 2560-MCU. In 2018 1st International Conference on Data Intelligence and Security (ICDIS) , pages 36–42, 2018. doi: 10.1109/ICDIS.2018.00013. [8] Bin Chen, Tanya Ignatenko, Frans M. J. Willems, Roel Maes, Erik van der Sluis, and Georgios Selimis. A robust SRAM-PUF key generation scheme based on polar codes. In GLOBECOM 2017 -2017 IEEE Global Communications Conference , pages 1–6, 2017. doi: 10.1109/GLOCOM.2017.8254007. [9] Manuel Penz, Martina Zeinzinger, Michael Kargl, Florian Eiben-steiner, Phillip Petz, and Josef Langer. SRAM PUFs for device au-thentication on resource-constrained systems. In 2025 9th Interna-tional Conference on Cryptography, Security and Privacy (CSP) ,pages 169–176, 2025. doi: 10.1109/CSP66295.2025.00035. [10] Patrick Koeberl, Jiangtao Li, and Wei Wu. A spatial majority voting technique to reduce error rate of physically unclonable func-tions. In Roderick Bloem and Peter Lipp, editors, Trusted Systems ,pages 36–52, Cham, 2013. Springer International Publishing. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-03491-1_3. [11] Sara Faour, Mališa Vučinić, Filip Maksimovic, David C. Bur-nett, Paul Mühlethaler, Thomas Watteyne, and Kristofer Pis-ter. TMVS: Threshold-based majority voting scheme for ro-bust SRAM PUFs. In 2024 IEEE Symposium on Comput-ers and Communications (ISCC) , pages 1–8, 2024. doi: 10.1109/ISCC61673.2024.10733719. [12] Mudit Bhargava, Cagla Cakir, and Ken Mai. Reliability enhance-ment of bi-stable PUFs in 65nm bulk CMOS. In 2012 IEEE International Symposium on Hardware-Oriented Security and Trust , pages 25–30, 2012. doi: 10.1109/HST.2012.6224314. [13] Yuting Zhang and Yunfei Ge. Evaluation of microcontroller-based SRAM PUF and the authentication scheme. In Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Computer, Internet of Things and Control Engineering (CITCE ’24) , pages 79–86, New York, NY, USA, 2025. Association for Computing Machinery. doi: 10.1145/3705677.3705691. [14] Muqing Liu, Chen Zhou, Qianying Tang, Keshab K. Parhi, and Chris H. Kim. A data remanence based approach to generate 100% stable keys from an SRAM physical unclonable func-tion. In 2017 IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Low Power Electronics and Design (ISLPED) , pages 1–6, 2017. doi: 10.1109/ISLPED.2017.8009192. [15] Shaza Zeitouni, Yossef Oren, Christian Wachsmann, Patrick Koeberl, and Ahmad-Reza Sadeghi. Remanence decay side-channel: The PUF case. IEEE Transactions on Informa-tion Forensics and Security , 11(6):1106–1116, 2016. doi: 10.1109/TIFS.2015.2512534. [16] Abhranil Maiti, Vikash Gunreddy, and Patrick Schaumont. A systematic method to evaluate and compare the performance of physical unclonable functions. In Peter Athanas, Dionisios Pnevmatikatos, and Nicolas Sklavos, editors, Embedded Systems Design with FPGAs , pages 245–267. Springer New York, New York, NY, 2013. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4614-1362-2_11. [17] Basel Halak. Physically Unclonable Functions . Springer Interna-tional Publishing, Cham, 2018. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-76804-5. [18] A. K. Jain, A. Ross, and S. Prabhakar. An introduction to biometric recognition. IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology , 14(1):4–20, 2004. doi: 10.1109/TCSVT.2003.818349. [19] Mario Barbareschi, Ermanno Battista, Antonino Mazzeo, and Nicola Mazzocca. Testing 90 nm microcontroller SRAM PUF quality. In 2015 10th International Conference on Design & Technology of Integrated Systems in Nanoscale Era (DTIS) , pages 1–6, 2015. doi: 10.1109/DTIS.2015.7127360. 

10