Title: Valency Classification of Mapudungun Verbal Roots. Established by the language's own morphotactics

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.00789v2

Published Time: Fri, 03 Apr 2026 00:50:16 GMT

Number of Pages: 35

Markdown Content:
# Valency Classification of 

# Mapudüngun Verbal Roots 

# Established by the language’s own morphotactics 

## Andrés Chandía 

andres@chandia.net 

Department of Catalan Philology and General Linguistics University of Barcelona PhD programme: Cognitive Science and Language Supervised by Dr. Elisabet Comelles (elicomelles@ub.edu) and Dr. Irene Castellón (icastellon@ub.edu) 

Abstract 

In the previous work, a lexical (re)categorisation —or confirmation of the given category— of roots identified as verbal was undertaken to determine their original category accurately. Building on this, the present paper offers an account of the valency classification of those Mapudüngun roots confirmed to be verbal, using the language’s own morphotactics; specifically, by examining the permissible and restricted combinations of various suffixes with roots or verbal stems in the Mapuche verb form. As with all work conducted thus far, the results presented here aim to improve the morphological analyser ( Düngupeyüm ) with all verified findings incorporated into the system. From a theoretical per-spective, we also hope to contribute to the recognition and understanding of issues related to the valency of Mapuche verb forms. 

Keywords: Mapuche; Mapudüngun; FST; finite state transducer; morphology; morphosyntax; affixes; suffixes; morphemes; verbs; valency; verbal roots; parts of speech 

> arXiv:2604.00789v2 [cs.CL] 2 Apr 2026

Resumen 

En el trabajo inmediatamente anterior, se llevó a cabo una (re)categorización léxica —o confirma-ción de la categoría asignada— de raíces identificadas como verbales, para determinar con precisión su categoría original. Sobre esta base, el presente artículo ofrece una descripción de la clasificación valencial de aquellas raíces del Mapudüngun confirmadas como verbales, mediante la propia morfotáctica de la lengua; específicamente, examinando las combinaciones permitidas y restringidas de diversos sufijos con raíces o temas verbales que ocurren en la forma verbal Mapuche .Como todo el trabajo realizado hasta ahora, los resultados presentados aquí tienen como objetivo me-jorar el analizador morfológico ( Düngupeyüm ) incorporando todos los temas estudiados al sistema. Desde una perspectiva teórica, también esperamos contribuir al reconocimiento y comprensión de cuestiones relacionadas con la valencia de las formas verbales Mapuche .

Palabras clave: Mapuche; Mapudüngun; FST; transductor de estados finitos; morfología; morfosintaxis; afijos; sufijos; morfemas; verbos; valencia; raíces verbales; categorías gramaticales 

Resum 

En el treball immediatament anterior, es va dur a terme una (re)categorització lèxica —o confirmació de la categoria assignada— de les arrels identificades com a verbals, per a determinar amb precisió la seva categoria original. A partir d’allò, el present article ofereix una descripció de la classificació de la valència d’aquelles arrels del Mapudüngun confirmades com a verbals, mitjançant la morfotàctica pròpia de la llengua; específicament, examinant les combinacions permeses i restringides de diversos sufixos amb arrels o temes verbals que apareixen en la forma verbal Maputxe .Com tot el treball realitzat fins ara, els resultats presentats aquí tenen com a objectiu millorar l’analit-zador morfològic ( Düngupeyüm ) incorporant tots els temes estudiats en el sistema. Des d’una perspectiva teòrica, també esperem contribuir al reconeixement i comprensió de qüestions relacionades amb la valència de les formes verbals Maputxe .

Paraules clau: Maputxe; Mapudüngun; FST; transductor d’estats finits; morfologia; morfosintaxi; afixos; sufixos; morfemes; verbs; valència; arrels verbals; categories gramaticals 

# Contents 

1 Introduction 4

1.1 The Study of Verbal Valency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5

2 Methodology 5

2.1 Lexical Category of the Roots . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52.2 Valency of Verbal Roots . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 623 Transitivity and Intransitivity in Mapudüngun : Morphological Criteria 7

3.1 Suffixes -nie , -künu and -(kü)le . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73.2 Adjectiviser -fal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83.3 Causative Suffix -(ü)m . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11 3.4 Causative Suffix -(ü)l . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14 3.4.1 Labile Roots and the Causative -(ü)l . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15 3.4.2 Considerations on Certain Verbal Roots . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19 3.5 Labile Roots and Directional Suffixes in Verbal Action . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22 3.5.1 Labile Roots Incorporated into Düngupeyüm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23 3.6 Labile Roots and Other Suffixes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24 3.7 Transitiviser Suffix -tu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25 3.7.1 Applicative Suffix -tu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26 

4 Transitivising Properties of Various Suffixes 29 

4.1 Transitivity Induced by the Aspectual Suffixes -nie and -künu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29 4.2 Transitivity with -(ñ)ma (Experimentative) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32 

5 Conclusions 32 

31 Introduction 

In this article, we present the methodologies employed for the reclassification of the valency of Mapuche verb roots (see §2), following a prior reclassification of lexical roots (Chandía, 2025), and the outcomes of this process. This article further delineates the intricacies involved in reclassifying the valency of roots categorised as verbal (see §2.2) in accordance with the classification established by Ineke Smeets in her 2008 publication, “A Grammar of Mapuche ”. Additionally, it encompasses roots that were identified as verbal in the preceding lexical analysis. The reader is invited to peruse the initial article (Chandía, 2025), which is concise and establishes the foundation for the work that led to the creation of both documents. As with all the research related to the Düngupeyüm 1 project and carried out to improve our computational morphological analysis system (Chandía, 2012, 2021, 2022), this work is based on Smeets (2008)’s grammatical description. The system’s initial implementation was totally based on her work. The accurate determination of verb root valency is crucial to this computational system, while valency influences the composition of verb forms, which also include suffix incorporation and morphological changes. This factor is essential for correctly identifying the suffixes present in a verb form. During the tool’s development, several observations by Smeets (2008) were verified and modified. Her description of Mapudüngun grammar, based on data from ten informants, does not fully capture the language’s diversity or all its phenomena. In any case, Smeets (2008)’s “A Grammar of Mapuche ” significantly contributes to computational morphological analysis by identifying a fixed position for about one hundred suffixes in 

Mapuche verb forms and providing their morphotactics. Following Smeets (2008)’s description, suffixes occupy relatively fixed positions, with verbal affixes arranged in thirty-six numbered slots, from right to left. Some slots contain mutually exclusive suffixes due to grammatical or semantic reasons. In Mapudüngun , a minimal verb form starts with a root, some optional derivational suffixes attached and one inflectional suffix (sometimes two or three). A mood marker is required in slot four for finite forms, as well as a person marker in slot three. While up to seven or eight suffixes can follow the root (see E.01 and Figure 1 in Chandía, 2025), verbs typically have between four and six suffixes in spontaneous speech. Smeets (2008)’s classification of verb roots by valency, based on recorded usage, is now considered potentially inaccurate. As is common knowledge in the field, a considerable number of verbs that traditionally fall into the transitive category are observed in intransitive contexts, and conversely, a significant proportion of verbs that traditionally fall into the intransitive category can also be found in transitive contexts (de Dios, 2013: 425). In Mapudüngun , as in other agglutinative languages, suffixes can transform verb valency, making them either transitive or intransitive regardless of their original valency. Semantic classification 2 might not yield a single valency for each verb, so the most frequent valency is used. Syntactic classification describes how verbal forms behave in sentences, which can vary depending on the context 3.In Mapudüngun , behaviour is marked by morphosyntactic indices due to its polysynthetic nature 4. Being an agglutinative language, Mapudüngun uses suffix clusters to represent what other languages might express with       

> 1Available on https://www.chandia.net/dungupeyum/ .
> 2Zúñiga (2024) offers a semantic interpretation not for classifying verb roots, but for explaining the selection of applicative suffixes, including -tu . In this work, the suffix -tu is discussed from a morphological perspective in §3.7.
> 3Golluscio (2007, 2010), Zúñiga (2006, 2009b, 2011, 2024) provide an in-depth study of the valency of Mapuche verbs from a syntactic perspective.
> 4“... SYNTHESIS refers to how many meaningful morphemes can combine to form a word in a language. If there are few ... it is referred to as analysis. If there are more ... it is synthesis. If there are many ... it is polysynthesis” (Zúñiga, 2006: 199).

4phrases or sentences. Thus, verb valency is influenced by suffixes, sentence elements, and semantic value of all of them 5.This work employs morphology, with a particular focus on the language’s inherent morphotactics, to ascertain verbal valency. Although semantics and syntax have been employed on occasion to address ambiguities (see §2.2), these techniques were applied only superficially. 

## 1.1 The Study of Verbal Valency 

In recent decades, significant progress has been made in the field of verb valency classes, with numerous distinguished linguists contributing to this area of research. “Valency Classes in the World’s Languages” (Malchukov & Comrie, 2015) compiles an investigation into the argument-structure properties of verbs of different valency classes from a typological perspective. The objective is to ascertain general patterns in verb syntax through an empirical examination of a cross-linguistically comparable list of verbs grounded semantically, rather than syntactically, and limited to verb meanings which are likely to have equivalents across languages. This investigation covers a set of 70 core verb meanings across 30 languages, incorporating a Mapudüngun study conducted by Zúñiga (2011). As previously mentioned, this research is undertaken through the semantics of the verbs, and for many of the languages studied, their morphology reflects either the valency the verb turns into, or the valency needed by a specific affix to participate. Building on the findings of this research on Mapudüngun , we have undertaken a process akin to what is termed “reverse engineering” in computational fields. By analysing the morphology inherent in the forms, we have sought to determine whether a given verb root is transitive, intransitive, or labile, with the aim of identifying its most fundamental —and ideally unique— valency. 

# 2 Methodology 

As noted in §1, accurately identifying the valency of verb roots is crucial for the computational system developed. This is essential for morphological analysis, as many rules governing root and suffix combinations depend on this classification or valency changes during word formation. This ensures an unambiguous analysis or one with minimal ambiguity (see footnote 14 in Chandía, 2025). In the future, it may be possible to dispense with this classification, which some researchers (de Dios, 2013: 425) consider outdated. To do so, the system would need to be reconfigured, after classifying Mapudüngun 

verb roots from alternative perspectives. This process would enable the development of morphotactics and morphosyntactic combination rules based on different constraints. For now, the valency classification of verbs will continue to be integrated within the developed computational system. 

## 2.1 Lexical Category of the Roots 

The verb roots listed by Smeets (2008) in her dictionary were taken to verify their valency classification and to modify it if necessary. First, it was ensured that these were indeed verb roots and not verbalised forms of     

> 5Tubino (2017) provides an excellent explanation related to the topics covered in this article, including the associated terms. In the introduction, she highlights the interweaving of morphology and syntax in agglutinative languages. In section two, she defines and describes verbal valency and introduces valency change processes in Spanish and English. In section three, the author explains these processes in Yaqui —a language that, like Mapudüngun , is also agglutinative— and the affixes involved in these processes.

5other lexical categories. This task is explained in Chandía (2025) with the results presented in Table 3 of that work. 

## 2.2 Valency of Verbal Roots 

In a subsequent phase of the study detailed in this article, the roots belonging to the verb class are classified based on their valency. However, it is possible that some roots may have been misidentified and are, in fact, part of a different lexical category. This may occur because in Mapudüngun , roots belonging to categories different than the verbal one are frequently verbalised, which can lead to uncertainty regarding the initial category of the root. The review will begin examining the roots classified as intransitive to verify whether they truly express this valency or the transitive one. This classification is not straightforward and is even complicated in Mapudüngun .As de Augusta (1903: 294) noted, “Some neutral verbs 6 are also used as transitive of the 1 st class”. On the one hand, the Capuchin was referring to the final form of the verb, since some suffixes add a semantic-grammatical nuance that makes transitive verb forms containing intransitive roots (there are also labile roots, which will be addressed in §3.4.1). Below are some examples of roots that are evidently intransitive 7 but can form transitive verbal predicates. E.01a and E.01c are intransitive, while E.01b and E.01d are transitivised by the causative morphemes -(ü)l 

and -(ü)m respectively. 

E.01 

a. küpa -n (de Augusta, 1903: 295)                 

> iv.come +ind1sg
> ‘I came’ b. küpa -l -ün
> iv.come +ca +ind1sg
> ‘I brought’; literal: ‘I made come’ c. püra -n (de Augusta, 1903: 296)
> iv.go-up +ind1sg
> ‘I went up’ d. püra -m -ün
> iv.go-up +ca +ind1sg
> ‘I lifted up’
> literal: ‘I made to go up’

On the other hand, as Moreno (2000: 353-370) explains and was introduced in §1, verbs can be classified from three perspectives: semantic, syntactic, and morphological. The latter approach, which will be discussed in more detail in §3, involves identifying those suffixes that combine exclusively with verb roots of a particular valency. This pattern has been observed in Mapudüngun .Syntactic analysis allows us to observe the valency reflected by a verb when it interacts with other elements in a sentence. This means that depending on how the sentence is constructed and the lexical items it includes,        

> 6Neutral verbs are those commonly referred to today as ‘intransitive’.
> 7In Mapudüngun , intransitive verbs are often translated using the pronominal form in Spanish when the verb is not intransitive in its simple form in Spanish. For example, wüyü-‘marearse – get dizzy’, allfü-‘dañarse – get damaged’, ñuwi-‘perderse – get lost’, etc.

6a verb will behave as either transitive or intransitive (see footnote 3). In terms of semantics, we can apply this classification criterion to a verb based on the phrase it appears in, in which case it should align with the syntactic projection. However, it’s also possible to analyse the verb form in isolation. As explained in §1, the valency value obtained can be unique to that form, the most frequent for that form, or it could be determined that the verb is labile—behaving as either transitive or intransitive with similar frequency. Obviously, this depends on the syntactic realisation of the phrase in which the analysed form appears. 

# 3 Transitivity and Intransitivity in Mapudüngun :

## – Morphological Criteria – 

In the course of the valency classification of Mapuche roots, reference will be made to various specific aspects of the interaction between affixes and roots that must be given due consideration. Such considerations will primarily involve discussion of the postulates of Smeets (2008), and from these, the development of ideas or explanations regarding the observed behaviour involving the scrutinised elements. The aim of this task is to identify morphological criteria that allow for the recognition of verbal root valency. 

## 3.1 Suffixes -nie , -künu and -(kü)le 

The suffix -nie adds a sense of durability maintained by the agent of the action. For example, with this suffix, ‘separate’ becomes ‘keep separated’; the suffix is labelled as ‘Progressive Persistent’, +PRPS .The suffix -künu denotes an activity that has a sense of durability where the agent neither maintains nor interrupts it. For example, with this suffix, ‘separate’ becomes ‘leave/keep separated’ (as it was) 8; the suffix is labelled as ‘Perfect Persistent’. The morpheme -(kü)le 9 is labelled ‘Stative’. Depending on the type of verb, this suffix either adds the notion of a state or an acquired property, or that of an event that persists for at least some time. Some verbs can be interpreted in either way depending on the context in which they occur. For example, püra-le-y can mean both ‘it is up’ and ‘it is going up’; pire-le-y can mean ‘it is snowy’ or ‘it is snowing’; arof-küle-y can mean ‘he is sweaty’ or ‘he is sweating’ (examples from Smeets, 2008: 282). Verbs that contain -nie or -künu are transitive; the action is directed towards the direct object. Verbs that contain -(kü)le are intransitive and do not take suffixes in slot 6. Therefore, verbs that logically require a patient do not take -(kü)le (Smeets, 2008: 169). ... “Verbs that logically require a patient”... are transitive verbs. The author notes that -(kü)le does not appear in transitive verbs. This would allow us to recognise as intransitive any verbal root that occurs with the stative suffix -(kü)le , which is debatable, as in her own work, this morpheme is found combined with transitive roots and occurring in transitive verbal forms. See the following examples:                          

> 8We propose that -künu is not a suffix when immediately follows the root, but rather forms a compound verbal theme. In this case, it is the verbal root künu-‘leave’ that, for example, forms verbs such as weyel-kunu ‘let swim’, anü-kunu ‘let sit’, lüg-künu
> ‘let whiten’, ‘whiten’, treka-künu ‘let walk’ ( treka-künu-w-a-n ‘I will go for a walk’; literal: ‘I will let myself walk’), etc. The verb el-, also meaning ‘leave’, functions similarly, except that the main verb would be expressed as a participle in translation, for example, anü-el-‘leave seated’.
> 9When suffixes are presented with part of them in parentheses, it indicates that there are two allomorphs of the morpheme, in this case -küle and -le ; for other suffixes, such as -(ü)m , the allomorphs would be -üm and -m . The phonological contexts for the different variants generally involve the presence of a preceding vowel or consonant.

7E.02 

a. elu -w -küle -fu -n ñi tripa -ya -l (Smeets, 2008: 292; 21)                 

> tv.give +ref +st +ri +ind1sg -sp.my -iv.leave +fut +ovn
> ‘I was ready to leave’; literal: ‘I was about to give me my exit’ 10
> b. fey -pi -le -y -ø ta -ti (Smeets, 2008: 92; 48)
> dp.that -tv.say +st +ind +3 -dp -dp
> ‘he said so’; literal: ‘That was he saying, yes 11 ’

In E.02a, the verb elu- ‘give’ is transitive, and its use in the phrase is also reflexive (a property provided by the suffix -(u)w ). In E.02b, there is pronominal incorporation 12 ; from a syntactic point of view, this could be equivalent to nominal incorporation, and about this, Salas (2006) writes: A highly productive construction of verbal themes is the so-called “direct object incorporation” or “object incorporation”: the verbal theme (simple or complex) combines with the noun that serves as its object, and verbal inflection is directly added to the resulting unit (Salas, 2006: 181). The object (direct object) identified in this statement confirms the transitivity of the verb in E.02b. Addition-ally, in this example, we find the transitive verb pi- ‘say’, which provides another argument that contradicts Smeets (2008)’s earlier statement. She also mentions that “verbs containing -nie or -künu are transitive”; this should be interpreted to mean that verbal forms containing these suffixes are transitive, not necessarily the roots themselves, as these could be intransitive roots made transitive. For instance, in E.03, the intransitive root ngül- ‘get together, meet’ is part of a verbal form made transitive by the causative ( CA , from now on) suffix -(ü)m (see §3.3). 

E.03           

> ngül -üm -nie -y -ø plata (Smeets, 2008: 111; 10)
> iv.get-together +ca +prps +ind +3 -nn
> ‘he saves money’; literal: ‘he makes money gather’

Ultimately, it cannot be determined if a verbal root is transitive when the forms it participates in also include the suffixes -nie or -künu . In §4.1, a detailed examination of these morphemes is provided, along with additional aspects that support this conclusion. 

## 3.2 Adjectiviser -fal 

The semantic contribution of the suffix -fal makes the form it attaches to be interpreted as something feasible to do. In Düngupeyüm it is recognised as an “applicable action adjectiviser”, and labelled ‘ +ADJDO ’ ( ADJ 

for ‘adjective’ and DO for ‘doable’, meaning ‘feasible’). Smeets (2008: 312) lists this suffix among the productive derivational nominalizers and explains that forms containing this nominalizer function as adjectives (for this reason it has been reclassified as an adjectiviser      

> 10 The system returns an alternative analysis of the verbal form that does not contradict its meaning and is also formed with a transitive root: tv.el_set_put+ref.w+st.le+ri.fu+ind1sg.n . With this analysis, the literal translation would be “[I] was about to let me my exit”.
> 11 Depending on the context, the form tati can be interpreted in various ways; the phrase containing it does not provide additional context in the source, so its interpretation is somewhat open in this case.
> 12 The grammatical term ‘object’ refers to a noun, pronoun, or noun phrase that is affected by the action of the verb in a given sentence (Fiktorius, 2019: 63).

8in this work). For example, if the verb i- ‘eat’ appears with -fal , it refers to something that is ‘edible’. Furthermore, it is noted that this suffix only combines with transitive forms; this could be a good way to identify verbs of such valency. Unfortunately, the occurrence of lexical items formed with the adjectiviser -fal 

is very rare; in the memories of the longko Paskwal Koña (Wilhelm, Koña & Lenz, 1930), there is only one example, E.04g. An alternative analysis is proposed for the suffix -fal which does not contradict the interpretation of the form containing it. In other words, ifal continues to mean ‘edible’ with the following new analysis—where E.04a, E.04c, E.04e are Smeets (2008)’s, and E.04b, E.04d, E.04f, E.04g are the alternative analyses proposed: 

E.04 

a. i -fal (Smeets, 2008: 312; 10)                                              

> eat +nom (+ADJDO in Düngupeyüm )‘edible’ b. i-fa -l -ø
> tv.eat +dp.this +ca +nom
> ‘edible’ c. allkü -fal (Smeets, 2008: 312; 11)
> hear +nom (+ADJDO in Düngupeyüm )‘audible’ d. allkü -fa -l -ø
> iv.hear +dp.this +ca +nom
> ‘audible’ e. pepi -l -fal (Smeets, 2008: 312; 12)
> be-able +ca +nom (+ADJDO in Düngupeyüm )‘feasible, practicable’ f. pepi -l -fa -l -ø
> tv.be-able +ca +dp.this +ca +nom
> ‘feasible, possible’ g. üde -fa -l -ø (Wilhelm et al., 1930: 271)
> tv.hate +dp.this +ca +nom
> ‘abominable’

Smeets (2008: 314) includes the vacuous morpheme -ø in the list of unproductive nominalizers. If the analysis introduced here is correct, this suffix would increase its productivity. According to the alternative analysis, forms ending in -fal are composed of a verbal theme formed by the main verb, which provides the semantic information, and the demonstrative pronoun -fa ‘this, here (among other possible interpretations)’. The compound becomes a transitive or intransitive verbal theme as it retains the valency of the verbal member of the compound. This verbal theme is followed by the CA -(ü)l and, nominalising (or adjectivising 13 ) the verb, the suffix -ø . According to this analysis, the form ifal could be paraphrased as ‘this that makes (itself) be eaten’, and by extension, ‘edible’. The analysis extends to forms ending in -l , a suffix that Smeets (2008: 313) also includes among the unpro-ductive nominalisers. According to our analysis, it corresponds to the CA rather than to a nominaliser, as shown in the following examples where the first meaning in English is Smeets (2008)’s:  

> 13 In many languages, depending on the syntactic position of the word and/or the usage by the speaker, nominal forms can function adjectivally, and adjectival forms can function nominally. This is also the case in Mapudüngun , but not only for forms whose original category is one of the two, but also for nominalised and adjectivised forms.

9E.05 

a. apo -l -ø                       

> iv.get-filled +ca +nom
> ‘filling’ – ‘aquello lleno, relleno, rellenado’ – ‘that which is full, stuffed’ b. ina -l -ø
> av.near +ca +nom
> ‘the next’, ‘bank (of river)’ – ‘el siguiente’, la orilla’ – ‘the next, the following, the shore’ c. wüne -l -ø
> aj.preceding_higher +ca +nom
> ‘the first’ – ‘el primer (puesto/lugar), el primero’ – ‘the first (position/place)’ d. tripa -l -ø
> iv.go-out_leave +ca +nom
> ‘end’ – ‘el [que ha] salido’, ‘el de fuera’ – ‘the one [who has] gone out’, ‘the one [from] outside’ e. montu -l -ø
> iv.escape_survive +ca +nom
> ‘protector’ – ‘el libertador’, ‘el salvador’ – ‘the liberator’, ‘the saviour’

This analysis reflects a possible strategy available in Mapudüngun for creating nouns or adjectives (depending on the use given), from intransitive verbs or other verbalised categories. The causative is added to the verb stem, and the form is left uninflected and undeclined. For the purposes of the analysis, and due to the existence of nominalisers that function similarly but have a specific form, this mechanism is represented by the addition of a vacuous nominalizer, -ø . Finally, the nominalizer suffix -fal may not exist, but this is still an issue to be confirmed. It should be noted, based on what has been discussed so far, that the restriction revealed by Smeets (2008: 312)—that the suffix -fal only combines with transitive roots—can be reformulated. It can be proposed that transitive roots can be accompanied by the causative morpheme -(ü)l as long as they form a compound with the determiner fa- ‘this, here’, and that this compound ultimately becomes an adjective or noun, as the verbal form from which it originates undergoes no derivation or inflection process. Another possibility is that the -fal recognised as a nominalizer by Smeets (2008: 312) and as an adjectiviser in Düngupeyüm may actually be the same suffix also recognised by her as +FORCE (force majeure), with only slight variations in intensity and consequently in function, depending on its position. Also note that Smeets (2008: 272) indicates that the suffix -fal “...either (1) implies that there is a necessity or obligation for the subject to perform the action, or (2) that the subject orders someone else to perform the action”. And the causative, as Zúñiga (2006: 390) indicates, is a “...verbal voice that shows the subject of the verb does not perform the action but instead commands or assigns others to do it”. As seen, the semantic effect is comparable, if not the same. In the explanations for E.18 and E.19, the suffix +FORCE , which has the same form, -fal , will be related to the combination of the determiner fa- and the causative -(ü)l , just as in the previous paragraphs when explaining the alternative analysis of the adjectiviser ( +ADJDO ). In conclusion, it is proposed that the suffix -fal might suggest that the subject of the sentence is either required or obligated to carry out an action, or that the subject instructs someone else to perform the action when it appears in an inflected verbal form. However, this sense of obligation (or strong likelihood) transfers to the action itself when the suffix appears in a form that remains uninflected. In both cases, there is the exception that the causative -(ü)l can occur with transitive verbal roots. Since everything related to the suffix -fal has not yet been confirmed, the system retains the rules that recognise it 10 as both an adjectiviser and +FORCE , as well as the rules that separate its components and analyse them as proposed. Returning to the topic at hand, and as previously mentioned, verifying forms that end in -fal is a reliable method for determining that the verbal root with this suffix is transitive. Unfortunately, cases are very sporadic, making this task rather unproductive. 

## 3.3 Causative Suffix -(ü)m 

The causative form is a “...verbal voice that indicates that the subject of the verb does not perform the action, but instead instructs or assigns others to do it” (Zúñiga, 2006: 390). Therefore, in Mapudüngun , this suffix modifies the verbal voice to indicate that the subject requests, orders, or prompts someone else to perform the action expressed by the verb; as a result, intransitive verbs are transitivised. With regard to this causative morpheme, authors state the following: The suffix -(ü)m is not productive and only combines with about 35 roots. the causative morpheme 

-(ü)m is found exclusively with intransitive verbs (Smeets, 2008: 299). The suffix -(ü)m is used exclusively with intransitive verbs... (Golluscio, 2007: 210). The Mapuche language has two causative morphemes used to alter the transitivity of verbs. The morpheme -(ü)l (see §3.4) is employed with agentive intransitive verbs, while the morpheme -m 

is used with unaccusative intransitive verbs 14 ... (Longkon, 2011a: 110). It appears, according to the three citations presented above, that there is a strong basis for recognising intransitive verbal roots accompanied by the affix -(ü)m . All three authors agree that only intransitive roots can be combined with the causative morpheme -(ü)m , which also has the effect of making transitive a form derived from an intransitive root. To verify this assumption, examples from Smeets (2008) and some extracted from Koña ’s autobiography (Wilhelm et al., 1930) will be presented and analysed. Although the work of Longkon (2011a) has been consulted, material from this source is not included because the linguist does not delve deeply into this topic and provides very few examples. Examples from Golluscio (2007) are also not included because, after checking them out, of the 17 roots she presents as causativisable with -(ü)m ,ten are intransitive and the remaining seven belong to other lexical categories, meaning they are not verbal roots according to the categorisation used in this work (see Chandía, 2025); in summary, the author confirms her assertion with these examples, although only ten correspond to verbal roots. With regard to the examples of Smeets (2008), it has also been verified whether the causative suffix -(ü)m 

appears exclusively with intransitive verbal roots. Here, some of these examples will be presented, along with other instances where the author shows occurrences of a transitive root combined with the causative suffix 

-(ü)m . These cases will be explained, including some compounds with transitive roots that incorporate the suffix in question. The suffix -(ü)m is the only one that causes a phonological change in the root that precedes it. This radical change is the rule and occurs as follows:  

> 14 Inergative (agentive) and unaccusative verbs are two types of intransitive verbs; in the words of the author herself, “inergative verbs denote activities or processes that depend on the will of an agent” (Longkon, 2011a: 85) and “unaccusative verbs are those whose syntactic subjects are their notional objects. Their semantic function is to denote an affected or unaffected theme” (Longkon, 2011a: 86).

11 E.06 

a. la ‘dead’ + -üm → la ng üm ‘kill’ (prothesis, sound insertion ng 15 )b. af ‘end’ + -üm → apüm ‘finish, complete’ (alternation (‘sandhi 16 ’) of f for p)c. na g ‘down’ + -üm → na küm ‘take down’ (alternation (‘sandhi’) of g for k)

The following E.07a and E.07c illustrate two exceptions to the radical change just described, as shown by Smeets (2008). However, these exceptions have not been found in the memoirs of Paskwal Koña (Wilhelm et al., 1930), although they do appear in de Augusta’s dictionary (Chandía, 2014), as shown in E.07b and E.07d. 

E.07 

a. lle güm- ‘grow sth.’ – ‘cultivar algo’ (Smeets, 2008: 29) 

lle güm ‘make come up (eg. plants)’ (p. 53) 

lle g-üm ‘cause to come up (eg. plants)’ (p. 299) 

lle g-üm ‘(Vt) make seeds come up (the sun)’ (p. 528) b. lle gümün : (from llegün ) tr. give birth, deliver (a baby) (de Augusta) c. na güm ‘cause to go down’ (Smeets, 2008: 29) 

na güm ‘take down’ (p. 53) d. na gümün : tr. Huapi 17 . → na kümün (de Augusta) 

As for other examples from Smeets (2008), E.08a provides the definition of püna-; it is the entry in her dictionary (p. 551) where this root is established as transitive. E.08b shows the subentry that includes the causative suffix ( CA ), which makes the verb transitive. If the root were indeed transitive, this would be an exception, or the verb might be misclassified in terms of valency. It has been confirmed that püna- is an intransitive verbal root, and therefore, it is possible to causativise this root by adding the morpheme -(ü)m .de Augusta lists püna- as intransitive, and E.08c to E.08h are all the verb forms generated with this verb found in the memoirs of Paskwal Koña (Wilhelm et al., 1930), all of which are used in an intransitive manner: 

E.08 

a. püna- (Vt) to stick, to glue – ‘pegar, encolar’; pünaeyew ti chiklet ‘she got stuck to her chewing gum’ – ‘ella se quedó pegada a su chicle’; literal: ‘it stuck her gum’; pünafiñ ‘I stuck to her, I hung around her’ – ‘me pegué a ella, me arrimé a ella’; literal: ‘I stuck myself to him/her – *me le pegué 18 ’b. püna-m (Vt) to glue something to -– ‘encolar/pegar algo a (algo más)’ c. epu püna-le-ka-rke-fu-y ‘two [of them] remained firmly stuck together’ d. kom püna-wi-ng-ün ‘all of them stuck together’ 

> 15

The digraph ng represents the / N/ sound in Mapudüngun .

> 16

Although the term ‘sandhi’ is typically used for phonological changes occurring at word boundaries, it could also be applied here because the phonological changes occur at the morphemic boundaries of a polysynthetic language—one in which morphemes often correspond to entire words in other languages. 

> 17

de Augusta refers to a topolect; wapi means ‘island’. Lake Rangko , located in the Los Ríos Region of Chile, has thirteen islands, the largest of which is known as “Isla Wapi ”; this is the area to which de Augusta refers. Meanwhile, in Argentine Patagonia, there is a lake called “ Nawel Wapi ” (Jaguar Island), with its largest island also named “ Nawel Wapi ”, sometimes referred to simply as Wapi .

> 18

Certainly, this is an ungrammatical (and jarring) expression in Spanish, but it best interprets the Mapuche verb in the example. 

12 e. kura mew püna-ntüku-le-y ‘on the rocks, they are stuck’ f. püna-kon-küle-y ‘they get nailed’; literal: ‘they are stuck entering’ g. püna-n 19 -kon-küle-y ‘they are found stuck’ h. püna-ntüku-y trawa mew ‘they stick strongly to the skin’ 

The following examples illustrate some complexities of Mapudüngun . In E.09a, to the left of the label -CR.TV (Transitive Compounded Stem) are the forms making up the verbal compound: two verbal roots (one intransitive, one transitive) and the causative -(ü)m . This example shows that the causative is added to the intransitive root when it appears first and the transitive root second, determining the compound’s valency 20 :

E.09 

a. püra -m -ye -nie -fi -y -ø -iñ (Smeets, 2008: 474; 47) 

iv.go-up +ca +tv.carry -cr.tv +prps +3p +ind +1 +pl 

‘we kept it up’ – ‘lo mantuvimos arriba/levantado/elevado’; literal: ‘we made it go up by carrying it’ b. tofkü -ñ 21 -püra -m (Smeets, 2008: 558) 

iv.spit +iv.go-up +ca -cr.iv 

‘(Vt) spit up [to]’ – ‘escupir hacia arriba [a]’; literal: ‘spit going up [towards]’ c. are -ngül -üm -üñma -e -n -ew ñi mansun (Smeets, 2008: 227; 10) 

tv.lend +iv.gather +ca -cr.tv +io +inv +ind1sg +3a sp.my nn.ox 

‘he lent my ox’ – ‘él prestó mi buey’; literal: ‘he lent [it] making [it] join [with the others] my ox’ d. reng -üm -nak -üm (Smeets, 2008: 554) 

iv.sediment +ca +av.down +ca -cr.tv 

‘(Vt) cause something to settle and thicken’ – ‘causar que algo se asiente y espese’; 

literal: ‘make [it] sediment by lowering [it]’ 22 

When the compound is formed by two intransitive roots, as in E.09b, the causative can be attached to either of the two roots (in this case, the second one) within the verbal compound. Conversely, when the first root is transitive and the second is intransitive, as in E.09c (reverse order compared to E.09a), the causative suffix 

-(ü)m is added to the second root, which remains within the verbal compound. From this perspective, E.09d confirms the method for forming compounds as detailed above. Here, there is a double causativisation; reviewing the literal translation reveals a kind of pleonasm—two combined actions to achieve the goal indicated by the compound verbal form. Additionally, as observed in E.09d about verb + verb compounds, “both the first and the second verbal roots in such a compound can take a suffix from slots 33 to 35 23 ”. 

> 19

The previous E.08f and the following E.08h suggest that this -n might be an epenthetic phonological element (a phonological adjustment) as in E.08h ( tüku- → ntüku-) and not the Simple Verbal Noun morpheme as proposed by Smeets (2008) for some analyses of similar forms. 

> 20

The resulting verbal compound (from two or more verbal roots) derives its valency from the later component (Smeets, 2008: 315). 

> 21

The -ñ- between tofkü- and püra- is a phonological adjustment. In fact, püra-, which causes the appearance of this phonological prosthesis, should be represented as ñpüra-; see footnote 19. 

> 22

Including these examples has revealed that, although combining the verbal roots would result in an intransitive verbal compound, the addition of the causative to the second root causes the compound to become transitive. This observation will be added as a rule to the Düngupeyüm .

> 23

The suffixes from these slots are: -ka Factitive: S33, -tu Applicative: S33, -(ü)l Causative: S34, -(ü)m Causative: S34, -ye 

Oblique Object: S34, -(ñ)ma Experimentative: S35. 

13 The following examples come from the autobiography of the longko Paskwal Koña (Wilhelm et al., 1930), and they confirm, as indicated by the three cited authors regarding this topic, that the causative morpheme 

-(ü)m only combines with intransitive verbal roots (E.10a). However, it also combines with nominal roots (E.10b), adjectival roots (E.10c), adverbial roots (E.10d), and a couple of demonstratives (E.10e): 

E.10 

a. füy -üm -el                                          

> iv.tighten_hold-on +ca +ovn
> ‘held, fastened’; literal: ‘make it held/fastened’ b. chaw -üm -ke -i -ng -u
> nn.father_man +ca +hab +ind +3 +dl
> ‘they brood’; literal: ‘they make fathering 24 ’c. firkü -m -nge -ke -y -ø
> aj.fresh_cool +ca +pass +hab +ind +3
> ‘they let [it] cool down’; literal: ‘they make [it] be cool’ d. üng -üm -uw -pu -y -ø -iñ
> av.while +ca +ref +loc +ind +1 +pl
> ‘we waited there (the rest of us)’; literal: ‘we made ourselves whiling there’ e. fa -m -a -el
> dp.this_here +ca +fut +ovn
> ‘do this’

The list of verbs identified by the authors as limited has expanded upon reviewing the text dictated by the 

longko to the Capuchin priest (Wilhelm et al., 1930). In Table 4 of Chandía, 2025 are all the roots that have so far been confirmed to combine with the causative suffix -(ü)m ; this list is not definitive as there are still uncertainties in several cases, and additionally, there are 545 more words yet to be verified. To conclude the review of the causative suffix -(ü)m , it has been observed that it is a reliable mechanism for determining that the verb root it attaches to is intransitive. However, it is also necessary to first verify whether the root is indeed verbal or belongs to another category. Furthermore, as noted by the authors, not all intransitive roots accept causativisation with -(ü)m . In this regard, it would be important to assess the claims made by the three authors concerning the role of telicity or atelicity of verbs in the selection of the causative suffix. 

## 3.4 Causative Suffix -(ü)l 

According to Smeets (2008), the allomorph of -l is -ül , whereas for Golluscio (2007) it is -el . Smeets (2008: 300) adds that “the suffix -ül has the optional allomorph -el ” for some verbs. The interchange between ü and 

e is common in Mapudüngun , often even within the same speaker. In the pair of articles being presented, we use -ül (hence we present the morpheme as -(ü)l ), as it appears to be the preferred form in the Ngülumapu 

dialects, the Mapuche territory extending across present-day Chile. Longkon (2011a) has already been cited regarding this suffix. According to this citation, she notes that the suffix -(ü)l is also causative and is added to intransitive verb roots, specifically those of the inergative type.        

> 24 The Mapuche use the term ‘fathering’ to refer to ‘incubating eggs’. The habituative suffix -ke can either indicate that it is a habitual action of birds or that the action extends over time as a custom. Finally, the dual number suffix -u might have been used mistakenly instead of -ün , which indicates an indeterminate plural, or it may refer to the two entities involved in the action, the bird and the egg.

14 Regarding this morpheme, the other two authors state that: “-(ü)l may derive from the verb el-, which means ‘place [in the world], create, form’ 25 , and -(ü)l is used with intransitive and labile verbs” (see §3.4.1). Note 26 : Both Smeets (1989) and Aranovich (2003) provide examples of causativisation of transitive verbs with -(ü)l . However, my consultant Fresia Melliko mentioned that the basic function of -(ü)l in these verbal constructions is applicative; the causative interpretation is possible, but depends on the discourse context” (Golluscio, 2007: 209). “The suffix -(ü)l is productive. It combines with both transitive and intransitive verbs, as well as with loan verbs (unlike -(ü)m )” (Smeets, 2008: 299). The three authors agree that the causative suffix -(ü)l combines with intransitive roots, whether they are of 

Mapuche origin or Spanish loanwords, which is not the case for the causative -(ü)m , which only combines with 

Mapudüngun roots. However, Longkon (2011a) argues that the CA suffix only combines with intransitive roots, while Golluscio (2007) slightly expands the suffix’s applicability to include labile verbal roots (see §3.4.1). On the other hand, Smeets (2008) directly includes transitive roots among the forms that can present the morpheme -(ü)l 27 

3.4.1 Labile Roots and the Causative -(ü)l 

Labile verbs in Mapudüngun are roots that can be used transitively or intransitively without needing specific suffixes to act transitively. Golluscio (2007: 214) provides two examples of labile roots combining with the causative suffix -(ü)l : kim- and watro-. However, in this study, the root kim- is excluded because, according to the categorical classification in Chandía (2025) (see §2.1), it belongs to the adjective class ( -AJ. kim _-wise_knower ) and is thus not a true verbal root but a verbalised one, making it prone to either valency. In the case of watro- ‘split’, according to de Augusta’s definition (Chandía, 2014) and the examples provided by Golluscio (2007: 214; 10a, 10b), it appears to be an ambitransitive 28 verb. Paskwal Koña (Wilhelm et al., 1930) uses this verb only four times (E.11a to E.11d), but none are in the transitive form: 

E.11 

a. watro -nge -y -ø ñi i -nge -a -l                                                    

> iv.split +pass +ind +3 sp.their tv.eat +pass +fut +ovn
> ‘they are harvested for consumption’; literal: ‘they are split for eating [later]’
> 25 It also means ‘leave’, as in ‘leave something placed’, ‘leave something forgotten’, ‘leave something painted’, etc. (see footnote 8).
> 26 This text is included as a footnote in the cited text; it has been deemed appropriate to reproduce it here as well.
> 27 Smeets (2008) reports three very similar suffixes in form and allomorphy, which also occur in adjacent slots: the ‘Causative’
> -l with allomorphs -ül ,-el and -lel ; slot 34. The ‘More Implicated Object’ -l with allomorphs -ül and -el ; slot 29. And the ‘Benefactive’ -el with allomorphs -l and -lel ; slot 27. Zúñiga (2009b: 18) comments that he has not found sufficient evidence to support the view that the benefactive is a distinct suffix separate from the causative. In support of Harmelink’s conclusion, reformulated by Zúñiga (2009b)—“there is only one suffix that not only causativises intransitives but also applicativises transitives”—the following observation is made: in Smeets (2008), in all examples containing both suffixes, one is always followed by the other ( +CA+BEN ,-l-el ), meaning that no intermediate suffixes occur, even though six slots have been established between +CA and +BEN where other suffixes could appear. Slot 33: -tu ‘Applicative’, -ka ‘Factitive’. Slot 32: -nie ‘Progressive Persistent’, -künu ‘Perfect Persistent’. Slot 31: -(u)w ‘Reflexive/Reciprocal’. Slot 30: -(k)iaw ‘Circular Movement’, -(kü)tie
> ‘Intensifier’. Slot 29: -(ü)l ‘More Implicated Object’. Slot 28: -(kü)le ‘Stative’, -meke ‘Progressive’. It would be worth checking other texts to see if other morphemes occur between -l and -(l)el .
> 28 As Golluscio (2007) states, labile verbs are a subtype of ambitransitive verbs in which the same verb form is used for both transitive and intransitive meanings, but without any morphological change.

15 b. watro -n uwa fün -küle -lu                    

> iv.split +pvn nn.corn nn.fruit +st +svn
> ‘the spadix separated from the plant’; literal: ‘[the] split [of the] maize [is what] is spiked’ c. watro -ntu -ye -a -fi -ñ wün mew
> iv.split -tv.take -cr.tv +oo +fut +3p +ind1sg nn.mouth +inst
> ‘I will crush it between my teeth’; literal: ‘I will take it to split in [my] mouth’ d. fey watro -y -ø kuykuy
> av.then iv.split +ind +3 nn.bridge
> ‘that [one] broke’; literal: ‘then it split [the] bridge 29 ’

According to Smeets (2008: 570), watro- is considered labile, meaning ‘(Vi, Vt) break’. However, only one of her analysed examples is intransitive (E.12a), which Smeets (2008) herself identifies as such. Another example (E.12b) shows watro- used transitively but no analysis is presented. In this case segmentation and analysis are done using Düngupeyüm . Without additional context, it’s unclear if the translation is accurate. A translation suggesting an intransitive use could be ‘his cup broke completely’. 

E.12 

a. watro -ka -w -üy -ø (Smeets, 2008: 388; 33)          

> iv.split +fac +ref +ind +3
> ‘it broke into (various) pieces; it was destroyed’ – ‘se quebró en (varios) pedazos; fue destruido’; literal: ‘it broke completely’ b. watro -ka -y -ø ñi tasa (Smeets, 2008: 570)
> iv.break_split +fac +ind +3 sp.his nn.cup
> ‘he broke his cup in various pieces’ – ‘quebró su taza en varios pedazos’

In Smeets (2008), only two roots have been identified that, according to the categorisation in this work (see §2.1), are verbal, combine with the causative suffix -(ü)l 30 , are ambitransitive according to her notes, and provide analysed examples. Sometimes the author notes that certain roots combine with specific suffixes but, unfortunately, does not always provide examples. These roots are llüka- meaning ‘be frightened, fear,’ and 

üta- meaning ‘graze.’ For üta-, there is only one example (E.13b) that includes the causative suffix -(ü)l , and there isn’t enough material in this work to determine the valency behaviour of the root. However, consulting CORLEXIM (Chandía, 2014), both de Valdivia and Febrés indicate that the root corresponding to ‘graze’ includes the causative, üta-l-ün , meaning ‘make graze’. de Augusta, on the other hand, does document the ditransitive use and provides an example of a transitive use (E.13a), which again could be translated intransitively as “the horse grazes [on grass]”: 

E.13 

a. üta-ke-y kachu kawellu (de Augusta) ‘the horse eats [grazes] grass’ b. üta -l -uw -küle -a -fu -y -ø (Smeets, 2008: 453; 22)     

> iv.graze +ca +ref +st +fut +ri +ind +3
> ‘they graze [their cattle]’ – ‘ellos apacentan [su ganado]’; literal: ‘they could make graze [their livestock]’

The longko Koña (Wilhelm et al., 1930) forms only one 31 verb with the root üta- and uses it intransitively:          

> 29 This phrase comes from an epew (a type of fable) told by Paskwal Koña , where the ‘bridge’ refers to a stick used as a makeshift crossing.
> 30 According to Smeets (2008: 300), -el is a less common allomorph that appears only with certain verbs.
> 31 There is another verb with this root in Koña (Wilhelm et al., 1930): ütal -tüku-lel-nge-ke-y TV.ütaf_press_fit-in -

16 E.14 

kachu ñi üta -ya -m 

nn.grass sp.its iv.graze +fut +ivn 

‘its grazing’; literal: ‘grass for [its] grazing’ 

The root llüka- ‘become afraid, fear’ is not definitively shown to be labile based on the examples in Smeets (2008). The root is described as ‘(Vi, Vt) become afraid, fear’. This definition does not inherently suggest transitivity in English or Spanish (‘tener miedo, temer’). The book includes an example (E.15a) that might imply a transitive use of the verb with llüka-. However, this transitivity depends on the translation, and while ‘fear’ or ‘temer’ can be both transitive and intransitive, this does not guarantee the same usage in other languages, as seen in the two possible literal interpretations of E.15a. Nonetheless, during the course of this study, the root llüka- reappeared while examining the lability of certain verbs that manifest their transitive sense. In these cases, it is possible to use directional verbal suffixes, which are exclusively used with transitive forms (see §3.5). In that section, the lability of this verbal root was indeed confirmed. In the next examples, E.15b and E.15c illustrate how the causative suffix transitivises the verb final form. Finally, the demonstration is provided by E.15d and E.15e that the same verb roots maintain their intransitivity in complete verbal forms in the absence of valency-altering morphemes. 

E.15 

a. llüka -ya -e -y -ø -u -ø (Smeets, 2008: 193; 57) 

iv.become-afraid_fear +fut +inv +ind +1 +dl +1t2a 

‘you expect me to be afraid of you’ – ‘tu esperas que te tenga miedo’; 

literal: ‘I will fear you / I will be frightened with you’ b. llüka -l -ka -ke -fu -y -ng -ün (Smeets, 2008: 228; 6) 

iv.become-afraid_fear +ca +fac +hab +ri +ind +3 +pl 

‘they used to intimidate’ – ‘ellos solían intimidar’; literal: ‘they used to cause a lot of fear’ c. llüka -l -ka -che -ke -y -ø (Smeets, 2008: 375; 25) 

iv.become-afraid_fear +ca +fac +nn -cr.iv +hab +ind +3 

‘he frightens people’ – ‘él asusta a las personas’; literal: ‘he causes fear in people’ d. llüka -la -y -ø (Smeets, 2008: 420; 56) 

iv.become-afraid_fear +neg +ind +3 

‘he was not afraid’ – ‘él no se asustaba; él no estaba atemorizado’; literal: ‘he did not fear’ e. llüka -ke -fu -n (Smeets, 2008: 417; 28) 

iv.become-afraid_fear +hab +ri +ind1sg 

‘I became afraid’ – ‘tuve miedo; me volví temeroso’; literal: ‘I would always fear’ 

In the autobiography of the longko (Wilhelm et al., 1930), twenty-one verbal roots 32 that combine with the causative suffix -(ü)l were found. Almost all the roots are intransitive, except for two that form both transitive and intransitive verbs, meaning they are labile or bivalent roots, as shown in E.16 below. 

TV.tuku_put_insert -CR.TV +BEN +PASS +HAB +IND +3 . However, this corresponds to the meaning recorded by de Valdivia for a form differing by one phoneme, ütaf-: ‘press, fit in’. The phrase from the text is Ka kiñe fücha kuchillo 

ütal tükulelngekey... translated as ‘they fit a large knife’, which suggests there might have been an error in transcription or a slip of the tongue by the narrator. 

> 32

About one hundred and ten verbal roots that were not forming compounds were checked. Since this task took too much time, we decided to postpone the verification of these roots when they participate in verbal compounds and exhibit a suffix in one of the forms that the causative can take: -l, -ül, -el .

17 E.16 

a. fey mew wüla küme monge -ke -ø -ø -iñ                                                                               

> dp.that inst av.until aj.good iv.live +hab +ind +1 +pl
> ‘then we really came back to life’; literal: ‘until that, we [didn’t] live well’ b. monge -ke -fi -ñ fill lawen mew
> iv.live +hab +3p +ind1sg aj.complete nn.medicine inst
> ‘I administer various medications to them’; literal: ‘I revive them with all kinds of medicine’ c. monge -l -ke -fi -ø -ø -iñ kutran -chi che
> iv.heal +ca +hab +3p +ind +1 +pl nn.illness +adj nn.person
> ‘we heal the sick’; literal: ‘we make heal sick people’ d. la -ya -lu ka, monge -ke -fi -ø -ø -iñ
> aj.dead +fut +svn cj.and (also) tv.revive +hab +3p +ind +1 +pl
> ‘even if they are already dying, we bring them back to life’; literal: ‘[those who are] dying, we also bring back to life’ e. yewe -y -ø küpa -ya -el
> iv.be-ashamed +ind +3 iv.come +fut +ovn
> ‘he is embarrassed to come in’; literal: ‘he feels ashamed of coming in’ f. küme may poye -w -a -i -y -u ka yewe -w -a -i -y -u
> aj.good cj.yes tv.appreciate +ref +fut +ind +1 +dl cj.and tv.respect +ref +fut +ind +1 +dl
> ‘we will esteem and respect each other’; literal: ‘yes indeed, we will esteem and respect each other’ g. yewe -l -ka -ntüku -ke -e -l -i -ø -ø
> iv.be-ashamed +ca +fac +tv.put +neg +inv +sji +1 +sg +1t2a
> ‘don’t make me feel ashamed’; literal: ‘If (truly) you did not put me in a situation that causes me embarrassment’

In E.16b, where the verb conveys a transitive meaning, the morpheme -fi is used. This suffix refers to a third-person patient, which may or may not be explicitly mentioned in the phrase where the transitive direct form is used ( Mapudüngun also includes a transitive inverse form 33 which uses the morpheme -e instead). The suffix -fi does not indicate number or gender, aspects that can sometimes be inferred from the sentence context —the act of speech itself— although communicative references are always available. Smeets (2008) refers to it as an ‘External Direct Object’, while other scholars identify it as the morpheme of the ‘direct verb form’, based on the analysis of Mapuche verbal forms that define a system of direct and inverse transition of the action in a transitive form (see footnote 33). Linguistic research has moved away from Smeets (2008)’s terminology; “ EDO ” has been replaced by “ DOM ”, ‘Differential Object Marker’ (3 rd person Patient); and the ‘Internal Direct Object’ marker corresponds to the ‘Inversion’ ( INV ) marker in the transition of the verb action. Conversely, in E.16a, neither the suffix -fi nor -e , which indicate the direct and inverse directionality of transitive verbs, can be used, as an intransitive verbal form is being generated in this case 34 .In E.16c and E.16d, note that the only difference between the verbs formed from the root monge- ‘live, revive, heal’ is the presence of the causative suffix -(ü)l in E.16c. These two verb forms are found in the same paragraph of the longko ’s memoirs (Wilhelm et al., 1930), in fact, in two consecutive sentences. In this work, the verb corresponding to ‘heal’ always appears with the causative, meaning that the root, in its intransitive use ‘heal’, is transitivised by the causative suffix; ‘make heal’ would be a more accurate translation. On the other hand, when the translation leans more towards the sense of ‘revive (someone)’, the causative suffix does not appear in the verb form, indicating that the verb is being used transitively:     

> 33 Most linguistic researchers of Mapudüngun define the verbal system in this way (direct, inverse, and passive). This system is explored in detail by Golluscio (2010), Salas (1992) and Zúñiga (2006).
> 34 In an initial misinterpretation, it was thought that the directionality morphemes also had the property of transitivizing intransitive verbal roots. Thanks are due to Fernando Zúñiga, who pointed out this error and highlighted the labile nature of these verbal roots.

18 Fentenchi pu konamachi küdawtupelu, fey mew monge-l-ke-fi-iñ kutranchi che. Layalu ka, 

monge-ke-fi-iñ ; taiñ adkünoetew taiñ chaw, fey mew femmekeiñ .‘Since many machi assistants work alongside us, we heal the sick; even those who are already near death, we bring them back to life, with the empowerment given to us by our father god’. 

literal: ‘Many are the machi -servants who work close [to us], so we make them heal sick people. [Those who are] dying we also revive; [This is] our custom given [by] our father, so this is what we are doing’. In E.16e and E.16f, the verb yewe- is translated as ‘be embarrassed’ when used in intransitive forms, and as ‘respect’ when used transitively. However, in Mapudüngun , it is a single verb. In this and many other cases, we think that the semantics of this language should be studied from the Mapuche world-view to understand, if not fully, at least more accurately what a Mapuche means in their own language. It seems there may be a connection between the verb ye- ‘carry’, the morpheme indicating interpersonal relation -we-n , and the verb 

yewe- ‘respect’. Note that to express a relationship with someone in Mapudüngun , a compound is formed with the verb ye-. For example, to say ‘he is my grandfather’, the expression laku-ye-fi-ñ is used, which literally means ‘I carry him as grandfather’ (Becerra, 2011: 115). Also note that in the “Chapter XI, Domestic Life” of the longko ’s memoirs (Wilhelm et al., 1930), when discussing family relationships, the verb yewe-

‘respect’ and the relational suffix -wen are frequently used. Among other forms, you find yewe-w-ün ‘they respect each other’, llalla-we-n ‘mother-in-law and son-in-law’, ewküll-we-n ‘co-fathers-in-law’, and yewe-n wentru ‘respectful men’. For instance, co-fathers-in-law refer to each other as ewküll-we-n and/or yewe-n wentru .Regarding the combinability of the verbal root yewe- with the causative -(ü)l , only the form found in E.16g was discovered in Koña ’s memoirs (Wilhelm et al., 1930). This example also shows that the causative combines with intransitive roots or with the intransitive sense of labile roots. However, since this is only one example, it cannot be conclusively stated that this rule is confirmed. 

3.4.2 Considerations on Certain Verbal Roots 

This section examines three cases in which roots or suffixes give rise to certain observations concerning the element emphasised in the respective explanations. All three cases present the causative morpheme -(ü)l or one of its various forms, and their intricacies require a thorough examination to elucidate their implications for the verb form, the meaning, and ultimately, the valency value. 

3.4.2.1 troki- ‘separate, set apart’ Among the verbal roots in Paskwal Koña ’s records (Wilhelm et al., 1930) that combine with an allomorph of the -l morpheme is the transitive root troki-. The term is defined in a variety of sources as signifying ‘consider, think that, believe that’ (Smeets, 2008: 564); ‘indicate’ (de Augusta and Febrés in Chandía, 2014); and ‘division, portion, part’ (de Augusta in Chandía, 2014). While this isn’t the place for a detailed explanation of the proposed definition, examples and definitions suggest that 

troki- can mean ‘setting something aside for consideration’. The verbal form prompting the examination of 

troki- is shown in the following example: 19 E.17                

> ñuke -ye -l troki -l -ke -e -y -ø -ew ñi pu yall
> nn.mother +tv.carry +ovn tv.split +ben +hab +inv +ind +3 +3a sp.their coll nn.son
> ‘receives treatment from them as a stepmother’;
> literal: ‘she’s treated as a mother; they consider [like] that, their children (father’s)’

The morphological analysis system yielded the result shown in E.17, where it makes considerable sense for the morpheme -l to correspond to a benefactive, as indicated by the literal translation of the example (see also footnote 27). No conclusion is presented here regarding the morpheme and the semantic-grammatical value it contributes to the verbal form, but these details are noted and may be relevant for any research requiring such data. 

3.4.2.2 pi- ‘say’ Moving on to another verbal root, according to some analyses with Düngupeyüm 

(Chandía, 2021), the verb pi-, when combined with the determiner fa-, could potentially combine with the causative -(ü)l . For instance, the verb pifaleymün could be analysed in three possible ways: 

E.18 

a. pi -fa -le -y -m -ün                

> tv.say +dp.this -cr.tv +st +ind +2 +pl
> b. pi -fal -e -y -m -ün -ø
> tv.say +force +inv +ind +2 +pl +1t2a
> c. pi -fa -l -e -y -m -ün -ø
> tv.say +dp.this -cr.tv +ca +inv +ind +2 +pl +1t2a

In the context where the phrase pifaleymün Elewterio is translated as ‘Eleuterio sends me to tell you’ (Wilhelm et al., 1930), the analysis including the stative suffix ( +ST ) (E.18a) is dismissed because it loses the sense of ‘send to’; with this morpheme ( +ST ), the translation would correspond to ‘he is telling you’ or ‘he tells you’. According to Smeets (2008: 169), the stative function indicates a state that may or may not imply agentivity of the subject, providing examples like amu-le-n ‘I am going’ – ‘voy/estoy yendo’ and ellka-le-y ‘it is hidden’ – ‘está escondido/oculto’. Additionally, with some verbs, -(kü)le can denote an ongoing event or a resultant state, as in la-le-y (die+ST+IND+3 ), ‘he is dead’ – ‘está muerto’, or ‘he is dying’ – ‘está muriendo’, or ‘he has died’ – ‘ha muerto / murió’. In the subsequent analyses, the sense of ‘sending to’ is present. E.18b shows pi- and fal- +FORCE combined; and E.18c, where pi- would co-occur with the demonstrative fa- followed by the causative -(ü)l (see §3.2). Smeets (2008: 272) notes that the suffix fal- can indicate either that the subject of the sentence is required or obligated to perform an action, or that the subject is commanding someone else to perform the action. Regarding fal-, denoted as DP.this_here+CA.l , this bimorphemic 35 construction can be interpreted as ‘cause this’, in reference to the verb. See the following examples from Smeets (2008); the analyses of E.19a and E.19c are by the author, while those of E.19b and E.19d are the alternative proposed analyses: 

> 35 Following Zúñiga (2009b), the term ‘bimorpheme’ is used here to refer to a morpheme formed by the combination of two morphemes.

20 E.19 

a. ellka -künu -lel -fal -ye -nge -y -ø (Smeets, 2008: 273; 3)                                     

> tv.hide +pfps +ben +force +plr +pass +ind +3
> ‘various [things] have to remain hidden from him’ – ‘varias cosas deben permanecer ocultas a él’;
> literal: ‘they must be kept hidden from him’ b. ellka -künu -lel -fa -l -ye -nge -y -ø
> tv.hide +pfps +ben +dp.this +ca +plr +pass +ind +3
> ‘they must be left hidden from him’ c. lang 36 -üm -fal -ma -e -n -ew (Smeets, 2008: 273; 6)
> aj.dead +ca +force +io +inv +ind1sg +3a
> ‘he had it killed’, ‘he has to kill it’ – ‘él lo mató’, ‘él debe matarlo’; literal: ‘he must kill it for me’ d. lang -üm -fa -l -ma -e -n -ew
> aj.dead +ca +dp.this +ca +io +inv +ind1sg +3a
> ‘he has to kill it for me’

In E.19d, by maintaining the analysis as fa-l , that is, the bimorphemic DP+CA , there is a double causativ-isation in the form, which is not unusual in Mapudüngun . The second causativisation acts upon a verb that has been transitivised by the first causative. This leads to two possible interpretations: firstly, the causative 

-(ü)l can indeed combine with transitivised (or transitively derived) roots, as reported by Smeets (2008) (see quote, p. 15). Secondly, the causative -(ü)l appears because the main verbal root in the form is intransitive 37 .By extrapolating these interpretations to the analysis in E.18c of pifaleymün , all possibilities for the valency of the verb pi- are conceivable. That is, it can be transitive, intransitive, or ambitransitive, presenting two senses, one transitive and one intransitive. This phenomenon is also observed in the verb nge-, which is examined in greater detail in §3.4.2.3. Now, considering E.19b, it is evident that the analysis involving the co-occurrence of DP+CA (demonstrative + causative), equivalent to -fa-l , presents some challenges. In Mapudüngun , the mobility of suffixes 38 and the incorporation of roots (both nominal and non-nominal), even after a few suffixes following the initial root of the verb form, is not uncommon. However, it is less likely that this is the case here due to the position the affix would need to move to, which is away from its primary place of realisation. Therefore, it seems more plausible to think that the conjunction of the demonstrative and the causative, -fa-l , has generated the (bi)morpheme 

-fal , as Smeets (2008: 274) herself speculates: “the suffix fal- may have derived from fa- ‘become like this’ and contain the causative -(ü)l (-fa-l ‘cause to become like this’)”. This hypothesis would imply the transitive valency of the verb pi-, while also dissociating the co-occurrence of the causative with transitive roots, at least in this instance. Moreover, as previously mentioned, the meaning of both the bimorphemic -fa-l and the syncretic -fal coincide. Smeets (2008: 272) has noted that -fal can imply that the subject orders someone to perform the action. In the analysis presented, the causative applies to the demonstrative that accounts for the action of the verb and is interpreted as ‘cause what the verb indicates’, for example, in pifaleymün , ‘say + this ( fa-) + to cause ( -l )’, translated as ‘send (somebody) to say (something to somebody else)’.          

> 36 In Smeets (2008)’s analysis, the form la-corresponds to the verb ‘die’, meaning that depending on its context, she recognises it as a verb, noun, or adjective. In Chandía (2025), it has been determined that its basic form is adjectival. It could be argued that when la-is followed by ng , it is undeniably a verb, but it should be noted that ng is merely a phonological adjustment.
> 37 As indicated by the analysis in E.19d, in reality, la-is an adjectival root that, when verbalised, becomes the intransitive verb, ‘die’.
> 38 The mobility of suffixes refers to the relative positioning of the morpheme within the verbal form. This position is determined in relation to other suffixes and their proximity or distance from the root. Suffixes indicating mood, number, and person always appear after all other affixes that have been applied to the verb, meaning they are positioned furthest from the root, and their order among themselves does not change. However, with other semantically or grammatically related suffixes, the order can be interchangeable, as some suffixes are quite volatile or mobile.

21 3.4.2.3 nge- -IV ‘be’, -TV ‘have’ While verifying the combination of verbal roots with the causative suffix -(ü)l in the memoirs of the longko Paskwal Koña (Wilhelm et al., 1930), the valency behaviour of these roots was also examined. Specifically, it was determined whether the roots were used only transitively or intransitively, or if they were ambivalent in their usage. The root nge- exhibits bivalence due to its capacity to bear distinct interpretations, namely ‘have’ in its transitive sense and ‘be’ in its intransitive sense when it can combine with the causative suffix (E.20a). It is noteworthy that this root employs suffixes that are characteristic of transitive verbs when displaying its transitive sense, in the same way for its intransitive sense. 

E.20 

a. nge -l -me -fi -ñ (Smeets, 2008: 126; 28)        

> iv.be +ca +th +3p +ind1sg
> ‘I have taken them there’ – ‘las he llevado allá’; literal: ‘I made them be there’ b. iv.be +mio +th +3p +ind1sg

In E.20b, an alternative analysis is offered where the form -l is interpreted as ‘More Involved Object’ ( +MIO )rather than causative ( +CA ). This interpretation is proposed because only this example is found in Smeets (2008) where there is insufficient evidence to support the causative analysis. Additionally, no examples combining nge- with -l were found in the longko Paskwal Koña ’s memoirs (Wilhelm et al., 1930), making it unlikely that the anthropologist’s proposed analysis is correct. Golluscio (2007: 216) categorises the verb nge-

among prototypical existence verbs that ‘do not allow causativisation’, though this restriction is confirmed only with the causative -(ü)m , without mentioning if it extends to the causative -(ü)l .The analysis presented in E.20b is plausible and does not contradict the interpretation of the verbal form. According to Smeets (2008: 287), the morpheme +MIO (More Involved Object) indicates a more direct, intense, or complete involvement of the patient in the event denoted by the verb (or the situation). Thus, the interpretation that could be derived from this suffix is something along the lines of ‘I have taken them [specifically these and no others] there’. 

## 3.5 Labile Roots and Directional Suffixes in Verbal Action 

In seeking to determine the valency of base verbal forms through morphology —that is, based on the com-binations of roots and suffixes, specifically those that increase valency— it has been observed that some intransitive roots are also used transitively with the addition of suffixes that indicate either the direct applic-ation of the action of the verb or the inverse, without the need for other valency modifiers. This observation could confirm that the roots generating these forms are, in fact, labile 39 as they behave intransitively when not co-occurring with these morphemes, or transitively with them —to prove lability no other valency increasing suffixes should appear in the verb form—; see examples E.16a and E.16b; also see the following examples:                  

> 39 Regarding the morpheme -fi , Zúñiga suggests the following references: (1) Salas, 1992, Chap. VI: -fi and -e are described as markers of focal and satellite person (a kind of obviative person, as known in Algonquian languages and others); both are person markers ( -fi for 3 rd person definite patient and -e for other persons). Salas (1992) considers -e...-(m)ew as a discontinuous suffix for 3 rd person focal. (2) de Augusta, 1903: This study considers this verbal morphology in terms of “transitions“. According to the author: “Transitions refer to the changes the verb undergoes in its ending depending on the person from whom the action originates and to whom it is directed... The four particles used for this purpose are u, mo (mu), fi, e ” (p. 66). (3) Zúñiga, 2006, Chap. III, Sect. 2.2 and Chap. IV, Sect. 2.2; 2010, 2015: These texts explicitly analyse -fi as a Differential Object Marker (3 rd
> Person marker) and -e as an Inverse Marker. They also clarify that these are inflectional rather than derivational suffixes.

22 E.21 

a. aye -ka -fi -ñ (Smeets, 2008: 298; 9) 

iv.laugh +cont +3p +ind1sg 

‘I joked with him’ – ‘bromeé con él’; literal: ‘I was laughing it’ b. kewa -e -y -ø -ew (Smeets, 2008: 156; 11) 

iv.fight +inv +ind +3 +3a 

‘he beat him’ – ‘él lo golpeó’ c. kewa -ya -fi -ñ (Wilhelm et al., 1930) 

iv.fight +fut +3p +ind1sg 

‘lo derrotaré’; literal: ‘I will combat him’ d. llüka -ya -e -y -ø -u -ø (Smeets, 2008: 194; 57) 

iv.fear +fut +inv +ind +1 +dl +1t2a 

‘I’m afraid of you’ – ‘tengo miedo de ti’; literal: ‘you will scare me / I will fear you’ e. llüka -fi -ø 40 -ø (Wilhelm et al., 1930) 

iv.fear +3p +ind +3 

‘I was afraid of him’; literal: ‘I feared him/it’ – ‘temíalo’ f. maychü -fi -ñ (Smeets, 2008: 288; 8) 

iv.rise-hands +3p +ind1sg 

‘I waved at him’ – ‘Lo saludé’ g. meke -a -e -n -ew (Smeets, 2008: 484; 6) 

iv.get-busy +fut +inv +ind1sg +3a 

‘I will be busy at/on it’ – ‘estaré ocupado en/con eso’; literal: ‘I will take care of it’ – ‘*me le ocuparé’ (see footnote 18) h. meke -fi -ø -ø (Wilhelm et al., 1930) 

iv.get-busy +3p +ind +3 

‘hacerlo’; literal: ‘get busy on/with 41 ’i. yewe -ke -fwi -n (Smeets, 2008: 431; 53) 

iv.be-ashamed +hab +ri +3p +ind1sg 

‘I was ashamed before them’ – ‘estaba avergonzado ante ellos’; literal: ‘if they embarrass me 42 ’

3.5.1 Labile Roots Incorporated into Düngupeyüm 

Regarding the Düngupeyüm morphological analysis system, from now on, labile roots will be included in both lists of verbal roots, transitive and intransitive, with the appropriate sense to the root valency. This will respectively increase the ambiguity in the analysis of forms containing these roots. However, failing to include these roots in both lists would mean missing out on potential analyses. At the same time, the morphological analyser system has been adjusted so that the causatives, either of them, -(ü)m (§3.3) or -(ü)l (§3.4), do not co-occur with transitive roots. In other words, for labile roots, the causatives will only co-occur when these roots are expressing their intransitive sense. The following labile roots were collected in the system during the course of this study: 1. aye- ‘to laugh’ ( IV )

aye- ‘to laugh at; to laugh with’ ( TV )

> 40

This case does not involve a null morpheme, as it might appear, but rather the fusion of the -i from the indicative with the 

-i from the Differential Object Marker -fi .

> 41

Do what is being mentioned, be occupied with doing it. 

> 42

Although this translation is not semantically accurate, it is grammatically correct. 

23 2. kewa- ‘to fight, to quarrel, to struggle, to combat’ ( IV )

kewa- ‘to hit, to strike, to defeat, to overcome’ ( TV )3. llüka- ‘to get frightened, to be scared, to fear, to be afraid’ ( IV )

llüka- ‘to scare, to frighten’ ( TV )4. meke- ‘to take care of, to deal with, to be busy, to last, to endure’ ( IV )

meke- ‘to make’ ( TV )5. monge- ‘to get life, to heal, to recover’ ( IV )

monge- ‘to revive, to bring back to life, to heal’ ( TV )6. nge- ‘to be’ ( IV )

nge- ‘to have’ ( TV ) (see §3.4.2.3) 7. püna- ‘to stick, to glue, to adhere’ ( IV )

püna- ‘to glue, to paste’ ( TV )8. waychüf- ‘to fall, to get turned over, to roll, to spin’ ( IV )

waychüf- ‘to discard, to flip, to roll, to spin’ ( TV )9. yewe- ‘to feel embarrassed, to be ashamed’ ( IV )

yewe- ‘to respect’ ( TV )

## 3.6 Labile Roots and Other Suffixes 

One observation that has drawn our attention is that some labile roots, when presenting their transitive sense, always or very frequently appear with a suffix that, in principle, does not affect the valency of the verbal root. For instance, kewa-, whose intransitive meaning is ‘fight, struggle, combat’ (E.22a and E.22b), occurs in its transitive sense, ‘hit, strike’, with the suffix indicating ‘Habitual Aspect’, -ke (E.22c and E.22d): 

E.22 

a. epe kewa -fu -ø -ø -iñ                         

> av.almost iv.fight_combat +ri +ind +1 +pl
> ‘we almost would have fought’ – ‘casi hubiéramos peleado’ b. ka kewa -i -ng -ün
> aj.(an)other iv.fight_combat +ind +3 +pl
> ‘they fought again’ – ‘pelearon otra vez’ c. kewa -ke -fu -y -ø ñi kure
> iv.fight_combat +hab +ri +ind +3 sp.his nn.wife
> ‘[he used to] hit his wife’ – ‘[le] pegaba a su mujer’ d. welu kewa -nge -ke -la -y -ø
> cj.on-the-contrary_but iv.fight_combat +pass +hab +neg +ind +3
> ‘but they don’t usually hit her’ – ‘pero no suelen pegarle’;
> literal: ‘but [she] is not constantly hit’ – ‘pero no es constantemente golpeada’

The habitual aspect morpheme -ke signifies the ongoing nature of the action expressed by the verb. Depending on the entity to which it is applied, it can denote a characteristic or a habit of the referent. While researchers of the Mapuche language have not focused extensively on this suffix, they agree that a verb containing it 24 takes on an imperfective form that indicates habituality, and that this affix is quite common (Zúñiga, 2006: 160). Another root where this co-occurrence of the transitive sense of the verbal root and the suffix -ke is observed is kon- ‘enter’, whose corresponding transitive sense is ‘begin, start’ (E.23). 

E.23               

> kon -ke -fu -y -ng -ün ñi kekaw -a -l (Smeets, 2008: 203; 121)
> iv.enter +hab +ri +ind +3 +pl sp.his iv.complain +fut +ovn
> ‘they usually started to complain’ – ‘ellos generalmente comenzaban a quejarse’; literal: ‘they began their complaint’

The root kon- ‘enter’ is not generally considered labile, though it can exhibit a transitive sense in specific contexts, as seen in E.23. Here, the verb’s complement is an inanimate object formed by a nominalised or non-finite verb 43 . Often, the transitive interpretation in translations aligns the Mapudüngun expression with Spanish idiomatic usage (’they started...’); but E.23 could be more literally translated as ‘they entered into their complaint’, which highlights its intransitive sense. Additionally, many instances of kon- with the marker 

-ke do not allow a transitive interpretation unless combined with suffixes typically used for transitive forms (E.24). However, when a transitive sense is possible, the morpheme -ke is present. 

E.24            

> kon -ke -fu -y -ø epu wentru (Wilhelm et al., 1930)
> iv.enter +hab +ri +ind +3 nu.two nn.man
> ‘two men would enter’; literal: ‘enter used to two men’

## 3.7 Transitiviser Suffix -tu 

Smeets (2008: 297) places the transitiviser in slot 33, which shares with the ‘Factitive’ -ka . These two suffixes are mutually exclusive. Given the name of the morpheme -tu , one might think that it applies to something intransitive (root, compound, or complex verbal theme) in order to transitivise it. However, the author herself states the following: The suffix -tu can be added to both intransitive and transitive verbs. The suffix -tu adds an object. When the suffix -tu is combined with an intransitive verb, the resulting -tu form has one object. When the suffix -tu is combined with a transitive verb, the resulting -tu form has two objects (Smeets, 2008: 297). The name assigned to this suffix can be misleading, as it also occurs with transitive roots, where it does not cause transitivisation 44 but rather another process that the anthropologist describes as the ‘incorporation of an (additional) object.’ However, this function is not specific to this morpheme; there are other affixes that can trigger a change in the valence of verbs due to the incorporation of an object, and they are not named ‘transitivisers’. Among the valency-increasing affixes are, for example, causatives (§3.3 and §3.4), applicatives 45 (§3.7.1), benefactives, and other morphemes.    

> 43 This is another clarification for which we owe thanks to Fernando Zúñiga and his deep knowledge of Mapudüngun .
> 44 For the purposes of this article, we adopt the transitive/intransitive opposition as explained by Tubino, 2017: 20, “transitive verbs are those that select objects, while intransitive verbs do not take objects”.
> 45 Applicative affixes, in a Mapuche verb, include an additional participant in the argument structure by modifying its form (Zúñiga, 2006: 123).

25 The description in the Smeets’ citation is debatable, as shown by examples from the same author: 

E.25 

a. anel- ‘(Vt) threaten, menace’ – ‘amenazar, intimidar’ (Smeets, 2008: 496)             

> anel-tu ‘(Vt) threaten someone with something’ – ‘amenazar a alguien con algo’ b. anel -tu -la -e -y -ø -u -ø (Smeets, 2008: 157; 21)
> tv.threaten +tr +neg +inv +ind +1 +dl +1t2a
> ‘I did not threaten you’ – ‘no te amenacé’

In the verbal form represented in E.25b, there are only two arguments: agent and patient (direct object). There is no other (indirect) object explicitly present, as would be expected according to the explanation in the previous citation and the definition of anel-tu provided in E.25a. It is possible that the example is incomplete and that the verbal form of the sentence was only used to explain the ‘dative subject’ (agent) morpheme occurring within it. Therefore, it is necessary to examine another case: 

E.26 

a. are- ‘(Vt) lend to’ – ‘prestar a’; (Smeets, 2008: 498)                                 

> are-l ‘lend to’ – ‘prestar a’ it is more frequent; arelenew kiñe mansun ‘he lent me one ox’ – ‘me prestó un buey’;
> are-tu ‘(Vt) borrow from’ – ‘pedir prestado a’;
> aretuenew ketran ∼aretuketranenew ‘he borrowed wheat from me’ – ‘me pidió prestado trigo’ b. are -tu -n -mew monge -li -y -ø (Smeets, 2008: 62; 7)
> tv.lend +tr +pvn +inst iv.live +st +ind +3
> ‘he lives of borrowing’ – ‘él vive de pedir prestado’; literal: ‘he’s living off the borrowed’ – ‘de lo prestado está viviendo’ c. fey re are -tu -n ropa nie -y -ø (Smeets, 2008: 198; 90)
> dp.that av.only tv.lend +tr +pvn nn.clothing tv.have +ind +3
> ‘he has only borrowed clothes’ – ‘él solamente ropa prestada tiene’

In E.26, both forms, are- ‘lend’ and are-tu ‘borrow,’ imply “someone VERB something to/from someone”; however, in each example, E.26b and E.26c, the expected objects are retained, and no additional object is introduced. Returning to the description of the suffix functions, despite the name chosen to identify the form -tu , one might think that a base verb occurring with -tu and presenting a single object is formed from an originally intransitive verbal root, with -tu adding that object and thereby transforming it into a transitive verb. However, as demonstrated by E.25 and E.26, the addition of an object does not always occur. 

3.7.1 Applicative Suffix -tu 

Moreover, there are additional aspects to consider for the suffix -tu . For instance, Salas (1992: 150) notes that it is a ‘repetitive-inversive’ suffix (E.27a), although at times it merely indicates ‘inversion’ (E.27b) or ‘repetition’ (E.27c), and occasionally suggests that the action originates as a consequence of a previous one (E.27d). He also explains that it functions as a non-causative transitiviser (E.27e, E.27f) (ibid: 187) or is added to verbal stems formed by reduplicated roots 46 (ibid: 189) (E.27g). Additionally, it attaches to verbal stems formed from nominal roots, where it acts as a verbaliser, adding a somewhat non-specific semantic nuance but conveying the sense of ‘performing the action appropriate to such a noun’ (E.27h to E.27k). Smeets 

> 46 The specific function of the suffix in this context is not detailed in the cited text.

26 (2008) reports similar functions for this suffix, though she places it differently across the slots occupied by verb-forming suffixes, suggesting it could either be homophonous suffixes or a single suffix fulfilling various functions depending on its position. 

E.27 (All these examples have been drawn from Salas, 1992. Only the source page is indicated for each example.) 

a. küpa-y ‘he came’ (p. 150)                                         

> küpa -tu -y ‘he came (back)’ b. kansa 47 -n ‘get tired’ (p. 150)
> kansa -tu -n ‘I rested’ c. wew-nge-y-m-i ‘you were beaten’ (p. 150)
> wew-nge -tu -y-m-i ‘you were beaten again’ d. wikürü-y ‘it tore’ (p. 150)
> wikürü -tu -y ‘It tore (after that, as a consequence of that)’ e. tripa-n ‘go out’ (p. 187)
> tripa -tu -n ‘intercept (someone)’ – ‘salirle al paso (a alguien)’ f. rüngkü-n ‘jump’ (p. 187)
> rüngkü -tu -n ‘pounce on (someone)’ – ‘saltarle (a alguien) encima’ g. rüngkü-rüngkü -tu -y ‘he bounced’ – ‘dio saltos’ (p. 189) h. kofke ‘bread’ (p. 194)
> kofke -tu -n ‘eat bread’ i. koyla ‘lie (noun)’ (p. 194)
> koyla -tu -n ‘lie (verb)’ j. kawello ‘horse’ (p. 194)
> kawello -tu -n ‘ride (on horseback)’ k. kütral ‘fire’ (p. 194)
> kütral -tu -n ‘set fire, light a fire’

Golluscio (2010) and Zúñiga (2009a, 2009b, 2011, 2024) describe the suffix -tu as ‘Applicative’, noting its multiple functions. While a detailed discussion is beyond this article’s scope, it is worth summarising that -tu 

can increase, have a neutral effect on, or decrease valency, depending on various factors. Thus, examining forms with the morpheme -tu to determine the valency of base verbs is not particularly effective. To conclude the exploration of the valency behaviour of verbs where the suffix -tu occurs, it is important to note the multiple functions of this suffix, a point on which the cited linguists agree. In Zúñiga’s words (2009b: 10): Note that -tu exhibits a broad range of possible meanings as a non-applicative formative: it functions as a denominal verbaliser (e.g., mamüll-tu ‘gather firewood’, from mamüll ‘firewood’), but it is also used to form the iterative (e.g., rüngkü-y ‘he/she jumped’ vs. rüngkü-rüngkü-tu-y or 

rüngkü-rüngkü-nge-y ‘he/she bounced, jumped repeatedly’), and frequently simply means ‘return’ (e.g., aku-y ‘he/she arrived here’ vs. aku-tu-y ‘he/she returned here’; note also the pair amu-y 

‘he/she went’ vs. amu-tu-y ‘he/she left/returned’). 

> 47 From the Spanish ‘ cansar(se) ’.

27 It may be that the suffixes in question are not the same 48 , despite sharing a common origin. For instance, one suffix might have specialised in certain meanings when close to the root, while in its position towards the end of the verbal form, near the inflectional suffixes, it could have taken on an iterative/restorative meaning. This specialisation might have led, through its evolution, to the development of distinct suffixes. Alternatively, the suffix -tu in its more distal position, further from the root, might have a different origin 49 , possibly deriving from tuw- ‘come from, originate in, begin’, which would lend it a meaning such as ‘originate again, start anew’, or a similar interpretation. A couple of examples in Smeets (2008) might also suggest a different origin for the pair of -tu suffixes. 

E.28 

a. pelo 50 -tu -tu -y -ø -iñ (Smeets, 2008: 476; 62)                

> tv.light.up +tr +re +ind +1 +pl
> ‘we have seen the light again’ – ‘hemos vuelto a ver la luz’; literal: ‘it lit up for us again’ b. ina -tu -tu -fi -y -ø -iñ (Smeets, 2008: 476; 63)
> av.close +tr +re +3p +ind +1 +pl
> ‘we have also been close to our own [matter]’ – ‘también hemos estado cerca de lo nuestro’;
> literal: ‘we approached again to it’

In the two previous examples, the homophonous suffixes +TR (transitiviser) and +RE (repetitive/restorative) co-occur according to the analysis provided by the author, suggesting the presence of two distinct suffixes. However, this source only provides these two examples. There are also two other instances where the morpheme 

-tu appears twice within the same verb form, but they were analysed differently: 

E.29 

a. wiño -tu -tu -fu -y -ø (Smeets, 2008: 410; 43)            

> iv.return +re +re +ri +ind +3
> ‘they kept coming back’ – ‘seguían volviendo’ b. kona -kona -tu -tu -y -m -ün ? (Smeets, 2008: 468; 27)
> nn.warrior -rnnr +sfr +re +ind +2 +pl
> ‘did you get courage again?’ – ‘tuvieron coraje nuevamente?’

In the analysis presented for E.29a, Smeets (2008: 410) interprets the reduplication of the Repetitive/Restorative suffix as a plausible explanation, though other interpretations are also possible. The same could apply to E.29b, where the initial occurrence of -tu is interpreted as a verbal theme marker for reduplicated roots, in this case, nominal ones ( -RNNR ). According to Smeets (2008)’s analysis, the suffix -tu in this verb might initially appear to lack semantic content. However, it may actually share the iterative sense with the reduplicated root, thus reinforcing the notion of repetition. Zúñiga (2024: 206) seems to concur with this interpretation, at least as presented in this paragraph. The non-applicative marker -tu is common and can, depending on the lexical base, function to antipassivise, telicise, or form a reversive/repetitive action; the latter is possibly related to one of the iterative formations of the root. In some verbs, the suffix -tu indicates increased intensity or greater impact on the patient.          

> 48 From this paragraph until the end of section §3.7.1, the discussion shifts away from the main focus of this article to address the functional and semantic aspects of the morpheme(s) -tu . These aspects would require a dedicated study from these perspectives.
> 49 Zúñiga (2009b: 7) relates the affix form -tu to the verb tu-‘take’.
> 50 For the etymology of pelo and similar lexicalised forms, see footnote 18 in Chandía, 2025. For the classification of pelo as a lexicalised nominalised verb, see footnote f in Table 4 of the same work.

28 Finally, regarding the denominal verbaliser function of the suffix -tu , it seems that the actions it forms involve a certain duration, rather than occurring instantly, they occur in repeated instances. For example, kofke 

‘bread’ – kofke-tu ‘eat bread’: bread is eaten bite by bite; or pulku ‘wine’ – pulku-tu ‘drink wine’: wine is drunk sip by sip, etc. (see E.27). Therefore, it would not be a semantically empty suffix, and the meaning it conveys is also related to the repetitive/restorative aspect. 

# 4 Transitivising Properties of Various Suffixes 

Apart from the causatives -(ü)m (§3.3) and -(ü)l (§3.4), and the applicative -tu (§3.7), other suffixes are reported to have transitivising properties in Mapudüngun verb forms. The researchers cited in this work also include the suffixes -ma ∼ -(ü)ñma and -ye among those that can transitivise intransitive verbal roots or increase the valency of transitive ones, similar to the suffix -(l)el 51 . This is illustrated in the following examples: 

E.30 

a. lladkü- ‘become sad’ (Zúñiga, 2009a: 10)          

> lladkü -ñma ‘offer condolences’ b. ngüma-‘cry’ (Zúñiga, 2009a: 3)
> ngüma -ye ‘mourn, grieve for, cry for [someone]’ c. ngilla-‘buy’ (Zúñiga, 2009a: 7)
> ngilla -lel ‘buy [something] on behalf of [somebody else]’

## 4.1 Transitivity Induced by the Aspectual Suffixes -nie and -künu 

In Mapudüngun , several suffixes can confer a transitive sense onto intransitive roots. For instance, aspectual modifiers such as -nie and -künu , identified by Smeets (2008: 293) as ‘Progressive Persistent’ and ‘Perfective Persistent’, respectively, occupy the same slot, according to the author’s description, thereby implying mutual exclusivity. Section §3.1 outlines the durative effect of these suffixes on verbs. Smeets (2008: 294) also notes that these suffixes introduce meaning variations depending on whether they combine with telic or atelic verbs, and that verbs with these modifiers are transitive. The relationship between the verb nie- ‘have’ and the morpheme -nie is evident (E.03, p. 8) ngülüm nie y plata 

‘he saves money’ could be paraphrased as ‘he has money accumulating’, as evident is the connection between the verb künu- ‘leave’ and the suffix -künu (E.19b, p. 21) ellka künu lelfalyengey ‘they should be left hidden’. Note that both verbs are transitive. For this reason, Zúñiga (2009b: 8) proposes the plausible hypothesis that some lexical items have produced grammaticalised variants without losing their function and value as base verbs 52 . Indeed, it is often challenging to determine whether the verbal theme in forms containing these suffixes (and others with similar conditions) consists of verbal compounds where the second element, also a     

> 51 For details regarding this form, see the last paragraph of §3.4.
> 52 Fernández and Malvestitti (2012) and Fernández (2015) regard these forms as serial verb constructions, assigning verb status to the second component rather than treating it as a suffix. Their research focuses on certain variants of Mapudüngun spoken in Argentina, so there may be a perceptual difference between academic approaches to the Mapuche language or the elements may be at different stages of evolution in the various dialects of this language.

29 verb, modulates the action of the main verb 53 , or, from another perspective, if the verbal theme is formed solely by a verbal root that is subsequently modulated by the aspectual suffix. In the examples provided in E.31, the section labelled ‘C’ (from compound) illustrates how each form would appear by replacing the suffix 

-nie with the verb nie- ‘have’, and the suffix -künu with the verb künu- ‘let’. Regarding transitivisation, and in line with Smeets (2008: 294) observations, the following examples are presented: 

E.31 

a. angid -nie -fi -n (Smeets, 2008: 294; 5) 

iv.blaze +prps +3p +ind1sg 

‘I keep it scorching’ – ‘Lo mantengo ardiendo’; literal: ‘I have it blazing’ 

(C: iv.blaze +tv.have +3p +ind1sg → ‘I have it blazing’) 

b. aye -nie -a -fe -y -ø -u -ø (Smeets, 2008: 252; 7) 

iv.laugh +prps +fut +ri+inv +ind +1 +dl +1t2a 

‘I laughed at you’ – ‘me reí de ti’: literal: ‘I would have laugh/laughed [at] you’ 

(C: iv.laugh +tv.have +fut +ri+inv +ind +1 +dl +1t2a → ‘I would have laugh/laughed [at] you’) 

c. weyel -künu -fi -n (Smeets, 2008: 168; 57) 

iv.swim +pfps +3p +ind1sg 

‘I let him swim’ – ‘lo dejé nadar’ 

(C: iv.swim +tv.let +3p +ind1sg → ‘I let him swim’) 

d. weyel -nie -fi -n (Smeets, 2008: 168; 56) 

iv.swim +prps +3p +ind1sg 

‘I kept him swimming’ – ‘lo tuve/mantuve nadando’ 

(C: iv.swim +tv.have +3p +ind1sg → ‘I had/kept him swimming’) 

e. wirar -nie -e -n -ew (Smeets, 2008: 295; 7) 

iv.shout +prps +inv +ind1sg +3a 

‘he is shouting at me’ – ‘él me está gritando’; literal: ‘it has/keeps [me] shouting at me’ 

(c: iv.shout +tv.have +inv +ind1sg +3a → ‘it has/keeps [me] shouting at me’) 

Nevertheless, of all the intransitive verbs that were found interacting with one of these suffixes in the consulted works (see §2.1), none produce a transitive form in the complete verbal construction in which they participate. This is likely because these forms also include the reflexive suffix -(u)w , which reduces the valency. Indeed, Smeets (2008) herself classifies these verbal themes as intransitive —no intransitive verbal roots (base verbs) were found combining solely with the applicative -nie ; the reflexive -(u)w is always present in the examples of her work: 

E.32 (From Smeets (2008)’s dictionary. pp. 489–580) 

a. külü-künu-w ‘(Vi) lie to one side’ – ‘recostarse de lado’ b. llikosh-künu-w ‘(Vi) squat down, crouch down’ – ‘ponerse en cuclillas, agacharse’ c. payla-künu-w ‘(Vi) lie down on one’s back’ – ‘recostarse de espaldas’ d. reka-künu-w ‘(Vi) adopt a position with the legs apart’ – ‘ponerse con las piernas separadas’ 

> 53

Smeets (2008: 325) mentions that in compounds, posture verbs appear without the suffixes -künu , -nie or -(kü)le , giving the example külü-nag- ‘lean on the elbow’; literal: ‘lean, tilt-down’. This may indicate that the verbs künu- ‘let’ and nie- ‘have’ are forming verbal compounds with the base verb, thereby modifying it, rather than functioning as aspectual suffixes. 

30 e. rekül 54 -künu-w ‘(Vi) sit/lay down leaning (upon one’s elbow/on one’s arm/against a wall)’ – ‘sentarse o recostarse apoyándose (sobre el codo, sobre el brazo o contra la pared)’ f. trana-künu-w ‘(Vi) fall on the floor’ – ‘caer(se) al suelo’ g. treka-künu-w ‘(Vi) set off, set out for’ – ‘partir, echarse a andar’ h. ünif-künu-w ‘(Vi) lie down all stretched out’ – ‘recostarse totalmente estirado’ i. wille/wüllü-künu- ‘(Vi) urinate’ – ‘orinar 55 ’j. wira-künu-w ‘(Vi) adopt a position with the legs apart’ – ‘ponerse con las piernas separadas’ k. witra-künu-w ‘(Vi) get up and stay put, come to a stand still’; witrakünuwnge! ‘get up and stand still!’; iñche trekalefun, perumen fentren che, fey witrakünuwün ‘[while] I was walking, I suddenly saw a lot of people [and] then I stopped’ – ‘levantarse y quedarse quieto, quedarse parado; witrakünuwnge! ‘levántate y quédate quieto!’; iñche trekalefun, perumen fentren che, fey witrakünuwün ‘[mientras] caminaba, de pronto vi mucha gente [y] entonces paré’ – literal: ‘yo caminaba rápido, repentinamente vi mucha gente, entonces me quedé quieto’ 

Only two instances were found of verb forms generated from an intransitive root and exclusively transitivised by one of the applicatives -nie or -künu ; however, as previously mentioned, it is also possible that these are verbal compounds (verbal themes formed by two verb roots): 

E.33 

a. maychi -nie -y -ø ñi kug (Wilhelm et al., 1930) 

iv.rise-hands +prps +ind +3 sp.his nn.hand 

‘he extended his hands’; literal: ‘he had his hand raised’ b. trongo -künu -y -ø tol (Smeets, 2008: 296; 18) 

iv.frown +pfps +ind +3 nn.forehead 

‘he frowned, thereby causing wrinkles to appear on his forehead’ – ‘él frunció el ceño, provocando la aparición de arrugas en su frente’ 

Besides the possibility mentioned in the previous paragraph, a few points need to be addressed regarding these last two examples. In both instances, an object that is already implicit in the base verbal form is presented explicitly; in the first example, ‘hands’ and ‘raise hands’, and in the second, ‘forehead’ and ‘frown’. In E.33a, it is likely that maychi- is a compound formed by may ‘yes, assent’ and the element chi , which in this context could be interpreted as a determiner ‘the assent’ or an adjectiviser ‘assenting’. CORLEXIM (Chandía, 2014) lists maychi- or maychü- as ‘signal with hands’. Regarding trongo from E.33b, it does not appear in Smeets (2008)’s dictionary, nor was a definition found for this word in CORLEXIM (Chandía, 2014). In a couple of entries the following examples were found: trongongkün ‘hit continuously’ under the entry for ‘hit’; 

trongo yüw ‘aquiline nose’ under the entry for ‘nose’ (maybe ‘dense nose’); and trongongün ‘produce hitting sounds, a sound of a hit’, trongongtrongongngen ‘continuous hitting noises’ under the entry for ‘noise’, all from de Augusta. Additionally, the entries trong ‘dense, thick, solid thing’ and ‘frown, make a frown, look with a frown’ (maybe ‘dense forehead’) lolin, lolikan were found in Febrés. Ultimately, -künu and -nie do not contribute to the valency discrimination of verbal roots. Both are applied to verbs of either valency, and the final forms where they are applied are not always transitive, despite both suffixes originating from transitive verbs, as demonstrated by the following example: 

> 54

The verb rekül- could be a lexical loan; it indeed resembles the Catalan verb recolzar-se (lean or support oneself), both in form and meaning. 

> 55

It is possible that wüllü-künu- means ‘urinate (on oneself)’, considering that the form künu conveys the sense of ‘let’, and that in the CORLEXIM (Chandía, 2014) dictionaries wüllü-tu and wüllü-n are reported as meaning ‘urinate’. 

31 E.34             

> doy küme monge -nie -tu -a -fu -m (Smeets, 2008: 472; 36)
> av.more aj.good iv.live +prps +re +fut +ri +ivn
> ‘have a better life again’ – ‘tener una mejor vida denuevo’; literal: ‘better living [one] will have again’

## 4.2 Transitivity with -(ñ)ma (Experimentative) 

The final case of suffixes inducing transitivisation in intransitive verbs, reviewed to assess whether these suffixes reveal the valency of root verbs, is -(ñ)ma , the Experimentative suffix as named by Smeets (2008). Smeets (2008: 301) states that the morpheme -(ñ)ma , in slot 35 next to the root, denotes a subject experi-encing the process of the intransitive verb it accompanies. This suggests that if -(ñ)ma is present, the root is intransitive. However, Zúñiga (2009b: 12) argues that -(ñ)ma alternates with the suffix -(ü)ñmu —labelled as ‘Satisfactive’ and placed in slot 25 by Smeets (2008: 272). The alternation involves aloaffectation, -(ñ)ma ,versus autoaffectation, -(ü)ñmu . It remains unclear whether -(ñ)ma is a single morpheme with different func-tions or if there are distinct morphemes with similar forms. For example, Smeets (2008) includes -(ü)ñmu 

as a satisfactive indicator, -(ñ)ma as an indirect object marker, and another -(ñ)ma as experimentative in different slots, while Düngupeyüm (Chandía, 2021: 46) labels -ñma as an adverbializer, indicating possible overlap. In the longko ’s memoirs (Wilhelm et al., 1930), forms with the sequence ñma (one variant of the listed suffixes) were examined. A total of 270 words from 108 roots were analysed using Düngupeyüm . The analysis showed that 34 forms have only the indirect object suffix, 43 only the experimental suffix, and 167 can be interpreted with either morpheme, leading to at least two analyses: one with +IO and another with +EXP .Additionally, one form includes both suffixes, and four contain the adverbial suffix. Due to the uncertainty surrounding the morpheme -(ñ)ma and the resulting ambiguity in analyses, determining valency based on its occurrence has been avoided. Additionally, the count mentioned earlier used only one allomorph of the suffixes. Nonetheless, it seems that intransitive roots are rarely transitivised with the experimentative suffix. For instance, in E.35a, transitivisation occurs, while in E.35b, it does not: 

E.35 

a. chew püra -ñma -w -ø -ø -iñ kawell (Wilhelm et al., 1930)               

> ip.where iv.climb +exp +ref +ind +1 +pl nn.horse
> ‘where do we send your horse?’
> literal: ‘where do we make go up your horse?’ b. fey mew anü -ñma -y -ø ñi witral (Wilhelm et al., 1930)
> dp.that inst iv.sit +exp +ind +3 sp.her nn.loom
> ‘there sat in front of her loom’

# 5 Conclusions 

This study investigates using various suffixes to determine the valency of Mapudüngun verb roots. A reliable computational morphological analyser requires clear, non-redundant data, ideally listing roots under a single classification to minimise ambiguity. However, labile roots are listed under both intransitive and transitive 32 categories, which may introduce some ambiguity but also allows for potential analyses that might otherwise be excluded. After establishing methods to verify root categories (Chandía, 2025), we examined suffixes that could indicate verb valency. We assessed the reliability of these suffixes and used the most effective ones to set morphological criteria for recognising verb valency. We reviewed the following morphemes: aspectual suffixes -nie , -künu , -(kü)le (§3.1 and §4.1); adjectiviser -fal 

(§3.2); causative suffixes -(ü)m (§3.3) and -(ü)l (§3.4); transitiviser/applicative -tu (§3.7); verbal direction indicators -fi (direct) and -e (inverse) (§3.5); and experimental marker -(ñ)ma (§4.2). It was found that forms ending in -fal involve a transitive root but are rarely used, limiting their effectiveness for identifying root valency (§3.2). The suffix -tu affects valency in various ways, making it unsuitable for determining root valency (§3.7). The transitive direction suffixes -fi and -e can facilitate the identification of transitive roots. However, these suffixes also occur with intransitive forms that have been transitivised by other affixes, and with labile verbs, thereby complicating the distinction of valency (§3.5). The causatives -(ü)m and -(ü)l have been identified as the most effective tools for determining intransitivity, nonetheless, this relies on the confirmation that the roots in question are indeed verbal. Roots transitivised with -(ü)m are listed in Table 4 of Chandía, 2025, while transitivised roots with -(ü)l are illustrated in Chandía, 2025: §2.3, based on data from the memoirs of the longko Paskwal Koña (Wilhelm et al., 1930). The use of 

-(ü)m seems to be decreasing in favour of -(ü)l among current Mapudüngun speakers. This study not only addressed the main objective but also explored related topics and proposed alternative analyses, such as reconsidering the morpheme -fal and examining the possibility of labile verbs (§3.4.1). It suggested a diverse origin for homophonous suffixes of the form -tu ; and proposed that verbal themes occurring with küno- and nie- might be verbal roots forming compounds rather than aspectual suffixes following a main root (§4.1). Further investigation into the habituative suffix -ke (§3.6) is encouraged to uncover potential data on verbal forms. In conclusion, this article establishes a reliable method for determining intransitive valency on verb roots (causatives -(ü)m and -(ü)l ), which benefits the computational analyser and enhances the understanding of the Mapuche language. 

# Acknowledgements 

As was the case in the preceding article, which formed part of the same research work as the present article, I would like to express my gratitude to my thesis supervisors, Irene Castellón and Elizabeth Comelles, for their invaluable guidance in shaping the structure and content of these articles. I would also like to express my sincere appreciation to Fernando Zúñiga, who provided me with invaluable feedback on my claims regarding the Mapuche language, ensuring that they were both comprehensible and firmly rooted in concrete and substantiated facts. 33 References 

Becerra, R. (2011). Una propuesta funcional y tipológica de descriptores sintácticos para el mapudun-gun. Alpha (Osorno) , 111–125. Retrieved from http://www.scielo.cl/scielo.php?script=sci _arttext&pid=S0718-22012011000100010&nrm=iso (PDF) Chandía, A. (2012). Düngupeyem_alfa_v0.1: un prototipo de analizador morfológico para el mapudüngun a través de transductores de estados finitos (Máster en Ciencia Cognitiva y Lingüística). Universidad de Barcelona. (PDF) Chandía, A. (2014). CORLEXIM Corpus lexicográfico del mapudüngun. Online resource http://www.chandia.net/corlexim. (Available dictionaries: 1. Valdivia, L. de (1606): mapudüngun-castellano. 2. Febrés, A. (1765): castellano-mapudüngun. 3. Febrés, A. ([1765] 1882): mapudüngun-castellano. 4. Febrés, A. (1846a): mapudüngun-castellano. 5. Febrés, A. (1846b): castellano-mapudüngun. 6. Augusta, F. de (1916b): castellano-mapudüngun. 7. Augusta, F. de (1916a): mapudüngun-castellano. 8. Smeets, I. (2008): mapudüngun-inglés) Chandía, A. (2021). FST Morphological Analyser and Generator for Mapudüngun. arXiv. Retrieved from 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2109.09176 (PDF) DOI: 10.48550/ARXIV.2109.09176 Chandía, A. (2022). A Mapudüngun FST Morphological Analyser and its Web Interface. In Proceedings of the language resources and evaluation conference (pp. 6540–6547). Marseille, France: European Language Resources Association. Retrieved from https://aclanthology.org/2022.lrec-1.702/ 

(PDF) Chandía, A. (2025). Lexical categories of stem-forming roots in mapudüngun verb forms. Retrieved from 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.07623 DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.2502.07623 de Augusta, F. (1903). Gramática araucana . Valdivia: Imprenta Central, J. Lampert. (PDF) de Dios, T. (2013). Exploring transitivity alternations across dialects: A preliminary approach. Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences , 95 , 425-430. Retrieved from https://www.sciencedirect.com/ science/article/pii/S1877042813041852 (Corpus Resources for Descriptive and Applied Studies. Current Challenges and Future Directions: Selected Papers from the 5th International Conference on Corpus Linguistics (CILC2013)) DOI: 10.1016/j.sbspro.2013.10.665 Fernández, A. (2015). Las construcciones multiverbales en mapudungun. UniverSos , 12 , 83–98. (PDF) Fernández, A. & Malvestitti, M. (2012). Las construcciones verbales seriales en mapuche. Lexis , 33 . (PDF) DOI: 10.18800/lexis.200901.002 Fiktorius, T. (2019). The relationship between transitive and intransitive verbs in english language. NOTION: Journal of Linguistics, Literature, and Culture , 1 , 62. DOI: 10.12928/notion.v1i2.972 Golluscio, L. (2007). Morphological causatives and split intransitivity in mapudungun. International Journal of American Linguistics , 73 (2), 209–238. Retrieved 2023-11-29, from http://www.jstor.org/stable/ 10.1086/519058 

Golluscio, L. (2010). Ditransitives in mapudungun. In A. Malchukov, M. Haspelmath & B. Comrie (Eds.), 

Studies in ditransitive constructions: A comparative handbook (p. 678-709). Berlin: De Gruyter Mouton. Longkon, E. (2011a). Morfología y aspectos del mapudüngun . México: Universidad Autónoma Metropolitana. Malchukov, A. & Comrie, B. (Eds.). (2015). Set valency classes in the world’s languages (Vol. 1 & 2). De Gruyter Mouton. Moreno, J. (2000). Curso universitario de lingüística general (2nd ed., Vols. II. Semántica, pragmática, morfología y fonología). Madrid: Editorial Síntesis, S. A. Salas, A. (1992). El mapuche o araucano : fonología, gramática y antología de cuentos . Editorial MAPFRE, S. A. Retrieved from http://www.larramendi.es/es/consulta/registro.do?id=9901 

Salas, A. (2006). El mapuche o araucano: Fonología, gramática y antología de cuentos (F. Zúñiga, Ed.). 34 Santiago, Chile: Centro de Estudios Públicos. Smeets, I. (2008). A Grammar of Mapuche . Berlin, Boston: De Gruyter Mouton. (PDF) DOI: 10.1515/9783110211795 Tubino, M. (2017). Sufijos de transitividad en la lengua yaqui: un estudio de interfaz entre la morfología y la sintaxis. Cuadernos de Lingüística de El Colegio de México , 4 (2), 1–41. Retrieved 2024-02-18, from 

http://www.scielo.org.mx/scielo.php 

Wilhelm, A., Koña, P. & Lenz, R. (1930). Vida y costumbres de los indígenas araucanos en la segunda mitad del siglo XIX . Santiago, Chile: Imprenta Universitaria. (PDF) Zúñiga, F. (2006). Mapudüngun. el habla mapuche . Santiago, Chile: Centro de Estudios Públicos. (PDF) Zúñiga, F. (2009a). The applicatives of mapudungun. In Annual meeting of the society for the study of the indigenous languages of the americas. San Francisco, CA. Paper reading. Zúñiga, F. (2009b). An exploration of the diachrony of Mapudüngun valency-changing operations. Paper written for an article collection on the diachronic typology of voice and valence-changing categories edited by Leonid Kulikov and Seppo Kittilä .Zúñiga, F. (2010). La marca diferencial del objeto en mapudungún. Revista Lingüística , 24 , 141–164. Zúñiga, F. (2011). 36. valency classes in mapudungun. In M. P. I. for Evolutionary Anthropology (Ed.), 

Conference on valency classes in the world’s languages. Leipzig. Zúñiga, F. (2015). 36. valency classes in mapudungun. In A. Malchukov & B. Comrie (Eds.), Volume 2 case studies from austronesia, the pacific, the americas, and theoretical outlook (pp. 1515–1544). Berlin, München, Boston: De Gruyter Mouton. Retrieved 2024-05-26, from https://doi.org/10.1515/ 9783110429343-016 DOI: 10.1515/9783110429343-016 Zúñiga, F. (2024). 7 the applicative constructions of mapudungun. In F. Zúñiga & D. Creissels (Eds.), Applicative constructions in the world’s languages (pp. 179–210). Berlin, Boston: De Gruyter Mouton. Retrieved 2024-03-04, from https://doi .org/10 .1515/9783110730951 -007 

DOI: 10.1515/9783110730951-007 35