Title: Controllable Lung Nodule Synthesis via Histogram-Regularized Latent Diffusion Models

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.30631v1

Published Time: Mon, 01 Jun 2026 00:30:23 GMT

Number of Pages: 16

Markdown Content:
# Controllable Lung Nodule Synthesis via Histogram-Regularized Latent Di ff usion Models 

Arunkumar Kannan a,b, ∗, Yanbo Zhang a, ∗, Han Liu a, Michael Baumgartner c, Jianing Wang a, Alexander Hertel a,d , Bogdan Georgescu a, Sasa Grbic a

> aDigital Technology and Innovation, Siemens Healthineers, Princeton, NJ, USA
> bJohns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA
> cDigital Technology and Innovation, Siemens Healthineers, Erlangen, Germany
> dDepartment of Radiology and Nuclear Medicine, University Medical Center Mannheim, Heidelberg University, Mannheim, Germany

Abstract 

While automated diagnosis systems have achieved remarkable success in computed tomography (CT)-based lung cancer screening, their development remains limited by the scarcity of diverse, annotated pulmonary nodule datasets. Di ff usion-based generative models o ff er a promising strategy for data synthesis; however, many existing conditional approaches primarily optimize spatial reconstruction losses, which encourage voxel-wise similarity but may inadequately constrain lesion-level intensity distributions. As a result, these methods may produce over-smoothed texture profiles and underrepresent the distinct attenuation characteristics of di ff erent nodule subtypes, including solid, part-solid, and ground-glass nodules. To address this challenge, we propose a controllable latent di ff usion model that synthesizes pulmonary nodules within full 3D CT volumes while accurately modeling nodule-specific intensity distributions. Specifically, rather than relying solely on spatial losses, we introduce a histogram-based regularization term that constrains voxel intensity distributions during the generative process. The model combines subtype, spatial mask, and Hounsfield unit (HU) histogram conditioning with the di ff erentiable feature-space histogram regularization term to better align lesion-level intensity distributions, improving the visual plausibility and subtype consistency of synthesized nodules. Extensive experiments on lung CT data demonstrate that our framework achieves strong visual realism, validated through both quantitative metrics and a visual Turing test. Furthermore, when used for data augmentation, the generated nodules improve performance in downstream clinical tasks, particularly for underrepresented nodule subtypes, and show a potential benefit for subtype-informed malignancy classification. 

Keywords: Lung nodule synthesis, Di ff usion models, Histogram regularization, Computed tomography, Data augmentation 

1. Introduction 

Lung cancer remains the leading cause of cancer-related mortality worldwide, accounting for approximately 1.8 mil-lion deaths and nearly 2.5 million new cases annually (Bray et al., 2024). The early detection of pulmonary nodules through low-dose computed tomography (CT) screening is widely recognized as the most e ff ective strategy for improv-ing patient prognosis (Team, 2011b). Major randomized con-trolled trials, such as the national lung screening trial (NLST) (Team, 2011b) and the Dutch-Belgian lung cancer screening trial (Nederlands-Leuvens Longkanker Screenings Onderzoek [NELSON]) (de Koning et al., 2020), have demonstrated that CT screening significantly reduces lung cancer mortality. Con-sequently, screening programs have been expanded to high-risk populations, with a 2021 study estimating that the eligi-ble screening population in the United States alone exceeds 14 million individuals (Landy et al., 2021). However, the clini-cal management of detected lung nodules is highly dependent on accurate subtyping. Specifically, pulmonary nodules in CT    

> ∗Corresponding authors
> Email addresses: akannan7@jhu.edu (Arunkumar Kannan),
> yanbo.zhang@siemens-healthineers.com (Yanbo Zhang)

imaging are categorized based on their attenuation character-istics into three subtypes: (i) solid nodules, characterized by homogeneous soft-tissue attenuation; (ii) ground-glass nodules, non-uniform in appearance with a hazy increase in local atten-uation; and (iii) part-solid nodules, comprising both solid and ground-glass attenuation components. This distinction is clin-ically critical, as subsolid nodules, especially part-solid, fre-quently exhibit a higher probability of malignancy compared to solid nodules of similar size and often require distinct follow-up protocols or surgical interventions (Henschke et al., 2002; Hammer et al., 2019). While computer-aided diagnosis, driven by recent advances in deep learning, has emerged as a promising solution to man-age expanding screening volumes and support visual subtyp-ing (Mortani Barbosa Jr et al., 2026; Liu et al., 2020; Hendrix et al., 2023), accurate automated detection and classification of these diverse nodule subtypes remain significant challenges. One primary obstacle is the pronounced “long-tail” distribution observed in real-world lung nodule datasets, where the preva-lence of biopsy-proven malignant nodules in large screening co-horts is exceedingly low at approximately 3.6% (Team, 2011a). A similar imbalance exists at the subtype level, where solid nodules substantially outnumber sub-solid nodules in clinical 

> arXiv:2605.30631v1 [cs.CV] 28 May 2026

datasets. Because these high-risk subtypes often exhibit faint, low-contrast textures that are easily overwhelmed by surround-ing normal lung tissues and the predominance of benign solid nodules, standard deep learning models trained on such imbal-anced data tend to bias toward the majority class. Consequently, these models fail to generalize to the subtle features character-istic of the rare but clinically significant sub-solid nodules. This data scarcity is further exacerbated by high inter-observer vari-ability in radiological interpretation. For example, in the lung image database consortium and image database resource initia-tive (LIDC-IDRI) study, only 928 out of 2,669 suspected find-ings achieved consensus among four radiologists (Armato III et al., 2011), making it di ffi cult to curate the large-scale, high-quality annotated datasets required for robust model training. To mitigate the scarcity of annotated pathological data, gen-erative modeling has emerged as a promising paradigm for synthetic data augmentation. Early approaches (Yang et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2021) utilized generative adversarial net-works (GAN) to synthesize regions of interest (ROI) containing pulmonary nodules, but these often su ff ered from mode col-lapse and lacked high-fidelity 3D consistency. More recently, denoising di ff usion probabilistic models (DDPM) have demon-strated superior capability in synthesizing realistic pathological features and overcoming these spatial limitations. Foundational frameworks like medical AI for synthetic imaging (MAISI) (Guo et al., 2025) have employed latent di ff usion models (LDM) to generate diverse anatomical structures alongside pathological variations, while models like Di ff Tumor (Chen et al., 2024) shifted the focus specifically toward generalizable lesion synthesis across abdominal organs. Within the specific domain of pulmonary nodule synthesis, recent frameworks tar-get localized generation. Lesion Di ff usion (Lei et al., 2025), for instance, introduces a text-driven approach to synthesize le-sion ROIs and masks from structured reports, whereas LeFu-sion (Zhang et al., 2025) applies di ff usion models directly to voxel space, inpainting synthetic nodules into healthy lung CTs. However, a trade-o ff remains between computational scala-bility and textural fidelity. Methods such as LeFusion achieve state-of-the-art lesion synthesis by incorporating histogram conditioning within a voxel-space di ff usion framework, but op-erating directly in 3D is computationally expensive and restricts these approaches to generating nodules in small, localized re-gions (e.g., 64 × 64 × 32 crops) rather than full CT volumes. In contrast, LDMs are more e ffi cient, as they operate in a com-pressed feature space. However, this e ffi ciency comes at the cost of reduced control at the voxel level, often leading to gen-erating over-smoothed textures that fail to capture the subtle characteristics of ground-glass and part-solid lesions. To address these limitations, we propose a histogram-regularized latent di ff usion model (HR-LDM) for 3D pul-monary nodule synthesis. Our approach operates in the com-pressed latent space, allowing e ffi cient synthesis within full 3D CT volumes rather than isolated local crops. To enforce the ex-plicit voxel-level regularization missing from standard LDMs, we introduce a novel histogram-based regularization term di-rectly into the di ff usion objective. This constraint guides the model to learn subtype-specific attenuation distributions, al-lowing it to better di ff erentiate between solid, part-solid, and ground-glass nodules. As a result, our method combines the scalability of LDMs with the fine-grained textural fidelity of voxel-space approaches. In addition, our framework enables controlled inpainting of diverse nodule subtypes into healthy lung scans, helping mitigate the long-tail distribution present in clinical datasets. To validate our framework, we assess the e ffi -cacy of the synthetic data across two clinically relevant down-stream tasks: lung nodule subtype and malignancy classifica-tion, utilizing both a large-scale internal and a public dataset. Furthermore, we conduct comprehensive quantitative and qual-itative evaluations, comparing our generated nodules against state-of-the-art generative frameworks. The manuscript is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews related work and discusses the limitations of existing nod-ule synthesis approaches. Section 3 presents our histogram-regularized latent di ff usion framework. Section 4 describes the datasets, and Section 5 provides implementation details. Sec-tion 6 presents quantitative and qualitative results, including comparisons with state-of-the-art methods. Finally, Section 7 summarizes our contributions and discusses the future outlook of this work. 

2. Related Work 

2.1. Generative Adversarial Networks for Lesion Synthesis 

GANs (Goodfellow et al., 2020) established a foundational framework for synthetic data augmentation in medical imag-ing, addressing the limited availability of pathological training samples. These approaches have since been adapted to gener-ate a variety of pathological structures, including colon polyps in endoscopy (Shin et al., 2018), liver tumors in CT (Frid-Adar et al., 2018), and brain tumors in magnetic resonance imag-ing (Han et al., 2018). In the specific domain of pulmonary imaging, early works such as Yang et al. (2019) and Han et al. (2019) employed conditional GANs to generate ROIs contain-ing nodules, while Jin et al. (2021) explored free-form synthesis to better model irregular lesion shapes. However, despite their initial success, GAN-based meth-ods frequently su ff er from training instability and mode col-lapse, often yielding outputs with limited diversity that fail to capture the full distribution of real-world pathology. Further-more, ensuring high-fidelity 3D consistency remains challeng-ing, as standard GAN architectures struggle to reproduce the subtle attenuation profiles required for accurate nodule subtyp-ing. These limitations have motivated the exploration of more stable probabilistic generative models, such as di ff usion-based approaches. 

2.2. Denoising Di ff usion Probabilistic Models for Lesion Syn-thesis 

The emergence of DDPM (Ho et al., 2020) has shifted the paradigm of medical image synthesis. Unlike GANs, which rely on adversarial training, di ff usion models learn to recon-struct data from Gaussian noise via an iterative Markov chain, 2Input Volume ( x)              

> 1×𝐻 ×𝑊 ×𝐷
> Encoder
> ℰ
> Latent (𝐳 0)
> Mask (𝐌 )
> 𝑐 ×ℎ×𝑤 ×𝑑
> Noise
> Scheduler

×       

> !~$(&,()
> Den oising U-net
> (!!)
> Solid
> 0
> Part -solid
> 1
> Ground -glass
> 2
> Nodule subtype (𝑦 )Histogram (𝒉 )

𝑡      

> Cross
> Attention
> Latent + Mask
> [𝐳 ̃t,M]
> Lesion -focused
> Noising (𝐳 ̃t)
> Predicted N oise
> (!̂)
> Class embed ding
> (𝐜 𝑡𝑦𝑝𝑒 )
> Hist ogram embed ding
> (𝐜 ℎ𝑖𝑠𝑡 )

×Main flow                   

> (data)
> Conditioning
> (context)
> Element -wise
> pro duct Concatenation Volumetric
> data
> Learnab le
> modules
> Frozen
> Down -
> sample
> Mask (m)
> 𝐶 ×ℎ×𝑤 ×𝑑
> 𝐶 ×𝐻 ×𝑊 ×𝐷
> ℒ𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 =
> ℒ𝑖𝑛𝑝𝑎𝑖𝑛𝑡 +𝜆 ℎ𝑖𝑠𝑡 ℒℎ𝑖𝑠𝑡

Figure 1: Overview of the proposed framework. The input CT volume is first encoded into a latent representation, where lesion regions are identified using a mask. Noise is added in a lesion-focused manner and the resulting latent is passed, along with the mask, to a denoising U-Net. The model is conditioned on nodule subtype and intensity histogram information through cross-attention. Training is guided by a combination of inpainting and histogram-based losses, allowing realistic reconstruction within lesion regions while preserving overall intensity characteristics. 

providing improved training stability and better coverage of the data distribution. Recent work has explored the use of di ff usion models for both large-scale anatomical synthesis and pathology-specific generation. In the context of anatomical synthesis, MAISI (Guo et al., 2025) represents a significant advancement in scalable 3D medical image generation. MAISI utilizes a high-compression VAE-GAN (Esser et al., 2021; Rombach et al., 2022) together with an LDM integrated with ControlNet (Zhang et al., 2023) to generate diverse, high-resolution CT volumes with over 100 controllable anatomical classes. For pathology synthesis, several specialized frameworks have been proposed. Di ff Tumor (Chen et al., 2024) intro-duced a dual-branch architecture to disentangle tumor tex-ture from background context, enabling generalizable synthe-sis across abdominal organs. More recently, LesionDi ff usion (Lei et al., 2025) proposed a text-controllable framework that synthesizes lesion ROIs conditioned on structured radiological reports. These methods typically adopt latent di ff usion back-bones to manage the computational demands of 3D medical imaging. In contrast, voxel-space approaches such as LeFu-sion (Zhang et al., 2025) generate lesions directly in the im-age space and achieve highly detailed outputs by incorporating histogram-based guidance into the di ff usion process. Despite these advances, important trade-o ff s remain between textural fidelity and computational scalability. Voxel-space methods such as LeFusion provide highly detailed intensity patterns but incur substantial computational cost, limiting syn-thesis to small localized crops. Latent di ff usion approaches, including MAISI and LesionDi ff usion, o ff er substantially im-proved scalability and enable synthesis over larger volumetric contexts, but they typically rely on coarse semantic condition-ing. As a result, they often lack mechanisms to control the intensity patterns that di ff erentiate pulmonary nodule subtypes such as part-solid and ground-glass nodules. These limitations highlight the need for generative frameworks that combine the scalability of latent di ff usion with explicit control over lesion intensity characteristics. 

3. Methods 

We propose HR-LDM, a histogram-regularized latent di ff u-sion model for controllable lung nodule generation. Given a healthy CT volume and a set of conditioning signals specify-ing the desired nodule characteristics, our goal is to synthesize anatomically plausible nodules within the lung parenchyma. Figure 1 provides an overview of the proposed approach, which follows a two-stage generative process. First, a pre-trained volume compression network maps the high-resolution 3D CT volume into a low-dimensional latent space. Next, a DDPM operates in this latent space to inpaint a lung nodule within the CT volume corresponding to the specified subtype. The generation process is guided by three conditioning signals: (i) a semantic label that defines the nodule subtype (e.g., solid, ground-glass, or part-solid), (ii) an intensity histogram vector that constrains the desired texture profile, and (iii) a spatial seg-mentation mask that defines the nodule location and morphol-ogy. 3The remainder of this section describes the architectural components of the framework, including the volume compres-sion network and the lesion-conditioned di ff usion training pro-cedure. 

3.1. Stage I: Latent Compression via VAE-GAN 

We employ a pre-trained VAE-GAN model adapted from the MAISI (Guo et al., 2025), which was trained on a large dataset comprising 39,206 3D CT volumes and 18,827 3D MRI vol-umes. This model maps high-dimensional volumetric data into a compact latent representation. Specifically, an asymmetric VAE encoder maps the input CT volume x ∈ R1×H×W×D into a latent feature map z0 = E(x) ∈ Rc×h×w×d. This transformation preserves semantic and textural information while significantly reducing the spatial dimensionality, providing a computation-ally e ffi cient representation for the subsequent di ff usion pro-cess. The VAE-GAN is trained using a composite objective de-signed to preserve structural fidelity and local realism. The loss function combines a voxel-wise L1 reconstruction loss, a per-ceptual loss (Zhang et al., 2018) to maintain perceptual consis-tency, and a patch-based adversarial loss (Yu et al., 2022) to en-hance texture sharpness. Additionally, a Kullback-Leibler (KL) regularization term constrains the latent distribution toward a standard normal prior, ensuring a well-structured latent space suitable for di ff usion modeling. 

3.2. Stage II: Training the Latent Di ff usion Model 

Our framework employs a DDPM operating in the com-pressed latent space produced by the VAE. In this latent space, the di ff usion process progressively perturbs the data with Gaus-sian noise and then learns to reverse this process to generate re-alistic samples. Formally, let z0 ∈ Rc×h×w×d denote the latent representation of a CT volume. The forward di ff usion process is defined as a Markov chain that generates a sequence of noisy latents z1, . . . , zT by progressively adding Gaussian noise ac-cording to a fixed variance schedule β1, . . . , β T . At timestep t,the noisy latent zt can be sampled directly as: 

zt = √ ¯αtz0 + p1 − ¯αtϵ (1) where αt = 1 − βt, ¯ αt = Qts=1 αs, and ϵ ∼ N (0, I). The objec-tive is to learn the reverse di ff usion process that progressively denoises zt to recover z0. This reverse process is parameterized by a time-conditional neural network ϵθ(zt, t, c), implemented as a 3D U-net (Ronneberger et al., 2015; Çiçek et al., 2016), where c denotes conditioning inputs. The network is trained to predict the added noise ϵ by minimizing the simplified objec-tive: 

Lsimple = Ez0,ϵ,t,c [∥ϵ − ϵθ(zt, t, c)∥1] (2) Upon convergence, new samples can be generated by iteratively denoising a random Gaussian latent zT ∼ N (0, I), conditioned on c.A core contribution of our framework is the integration of a histogram-based regularization term into the di ff usion training objective. This regularization ensures that the voxel intensities of the synthesized lesion match with its target subtype, which is essential for generating clinically realistic nodules. The subsequent sections detail the conditioning mechanisms used by the di ff usion model, the lesion-conditional inpainting formulation, and the proposed histogram-based regularization strategy. 

3.2.1. Multi-Modal Conditioning Inputs 

We employ a multi-modal conditioning strategy in our frame-work, where each signal provides complementary information about the nodule to be generated, capturing di ff erent aspects of its appearance and structure. Specifically, we condition the noise prediction network ϵθ on three signals: (i) a semantic sub-type label, (ii) an intensity histogram, and (iii) a spatial segmen-tation mask. 1. Semantic Label Condition (c type ). We define a discrete nodule subtype label y ∈ { 0, . . . , K − 1} corresponding to K

categories such as solid, part-solid, and ground-glass nod-ules. Each label is mapped to a dedicated embedding layer, rather than a shared embedding, allowing the model to learn subtype-specific feature representations. Formally, for a given label y, its conditioning vector is defined as 

ctype = Embed( y) ∈ Rdemb . This vector is added to the timestep embedding temb within the U-Net, guiding the de-noising process toward the target nodule subtype (Nichol and Dhariwal, 2021). 2. Histogram Texture Condition (c hist ). We condition the model on Hounsfield unit (HU) intensity histograms (Zhang et al., 2025) to guide subtype-specific texture gen-eration. Specifically, we represent the intensity distribu-tion of a nodule using a normalized histogram h ∈ RB,where B denotes the number of bins. Unlike scalar inputs, such as the subtype label, this vector describes the distribu-tion of voxel intensities within the lesion. We project this histogram using a learnable MLP with SiLU activation: 

chist = MLP( h) = W2 · σ(W1 · h + b1) + b2 (3) where chist ∈ Rdctx . This embedding ( dctx ) is incorporated with the U-Net via cross-attention layers, where it modu-lates the feature representations based on the target inten-sity distribution (Rombach et al., 2022). 3. Spatial Mask Condition (M). We further condition the network using a multi-channel binary segmentation mask of the nodule to constrain its spatial extent and morphol-ogy, denoted as m ∈ {0, 1}C×H×W×D, where C repre-sents distinct morphological components (e.g., solid core, ground-glass region, and spiculations). The mask is down-sampled via interpolation to match the latent spatial di-mensions ( h, w, d), resulting in M ∈ RC×h×w×d. This down-sampled mask is concatenated channel-wise with the noisy latent input zt, providing an explicit spatial constraint that restricts generation to the nodule region (Saharia et al., 2022; Ronneberger et al., 2015). 4Den oising U-net                                                

> (!!)
> Predicted noise
> (!̂)
> Clean latent
> (𝐳 ̂0)
> Decoder
> (trunc ated)
> Decoder
> (trunc ated)
> Differentiabl e
> Histogram
> (soft binning)
> 01
> q
> (target distribution)
> B bins
> 0B bins 1
> p
> (predicted distribution)
> Histogram regularization
> loss
> ℒℎ𝑖𝑠𝑡 =1
> 2!𝐾𝐿 (𝐩 ∥𝐚 )+1
> 2!𝐾𝐿 (𝐪 ∥𝐚 )
> 𝐚 =1
> 2(𝐩 +𝐪 )Ground truth
> latent (𝐳 0)
> Lesion
> ROI
> Lesion
> ROI
> Feature map
> (𝐅 ̂)
> Feature map
> (𝐅 )
> 𝑐 ×ℎ×𝑤 ×𝑑
> 𝑐 ×ℎ×𝑤 ×𝑑
> 𝑐 ′×ℎ′×𝑤 ′×𝑑 ′
> 𝑐 ′×ℎ′×𝑤 ′×𝑑 ′
> Mask
> (𝐌 )
> Mask
> (𝐌 )
> Lesion intensit ies
> (𝒮 𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑 )
> Lesion intensit ies
> (𝒮 𝑔𝑡 )

Figure 2: Overview of the proposed histogram-based regularization framework. At each di ff usion timestep, the denoising U-Net predicts the noise estimate ˆ ϵ,which is used to recover the clean latent estimate ˆ z0. Instead of decoding to full voxel space, a truncated frozen decoder projects the latent representation into a high-resolution feature space for e ffi cient histogram computation. Feature values inside the lesion region are extracted using the lesion mask and converted into di ff erentiable soft-binned histograms. The predicted histogram distribution p is then aligned with the corresponding ground-truth distribution q using a Jensen-Shannon divergence regularization loss. 

3.2.2. Lesion-Conditional Inpainting Strategy 

We formulate the training process as a masked inpainting task (Chen et al., 2024) in the latent space to synthesize lung nodules while preserving the surrounding anatomical context. Unlike standard di ff usion approaches where noise is applied globally to the input latent, we construct a composite latent ˜zt that combines a clean background with a noisy lesion tar-get. Given a latent volume z0 and a downsampled binary lesion mask M (where 0 denotes background and 1 denotes the lesion region), we form ˜ zt by selectively applying the forward di ff u-sion process within the masked region: ˜zt = (1 − M) ⊙ z0

| {z }

> Clean Background

+ M ⊙ zt

| {z }

> Noisy Lesion

(4) where zt is obtained from the forward di ff usion process defined in Eq. (1), and ⊙ denotes the element-wise Hadamard prod-uct. In this formulation, the first term preserves the clean latent representation outside the lesion region, while the second term applies noise according to the di ff usion process only within the masked lesion area. Consequently, the model focuses on syn-thesizing the lesion texture and boundary within the masked region. To enforce this constraint during optimization, we modify the standard di ff usion objective to calculate the reconstruction er-ror exclusively within the lesion region. Specifically, the noise prediction network ϵθ, which takes as input the concatenated latent and mask [˜ zt, M] along with semantic label ctype and his-togram conditioning chist , is trained using a spatially weighted 

L1 loss between the predicted noise ˆ ϵ (output of ϵθ) and the ground-truth noise ϵ:

Linpaint =

P ∥M ⊙ (ϵ − ˆϵ)∥1

P M + δ (5) where the summation is over all latent voxels restricted to the lesion region defined by M, and δ is a small smoothing constant to prevent division by zero. This region-specific loss prevents the model from trivially minimizing the objective by predict-ing zeros in the background, ensuring that gradients are driven primarily by the nodule synthesis task. 

3.2.3. Histogram-Based Regularization 

We introduce a histogram-based regularization term to op-timize the intensity distributions of generated pulmonary nod-ules. Standard reconstruction losses in di ff usion models, such as L1 and L2, capture global structure but tend to produce aver-aged intensity values, leading to over-smoothed or blurry out-puts (Kingma and Welling, 2013). This limits their ability to represent the distinct attenuation patterns of sub-solid nod-ules. To address this, we incorporate an intensity-aware con-straint into the di ff usion training objective. Here, the goal is to align the histogram of the reconstructed lesion with that of the ground-truth lesion during training. However, implementing histogram regularization within LDMs presents two key chal-lenges. (i) Latent space lacks meaningful intensity information. 

While histograms are naturally defined in voxel space, latent representations do not retain su ffi cient intensity information for reliable histogram computation. A direct solution would require projecting the latent representations back into image space at every di ff usion timestep, which results in significant computational overhead. (ii) Histogram computation must be di ff erentiable. Since we propose to use this histogram objective as a part of the opti-mization process, all operations involved in histogram construc-tion must be di ff erentiable in order to support gradient propa-gation. However, computing a naive hard-binned histogram is a non-di ff erentiable operation, which prevents gradients from flowing back to the denoising network during training. 5Feature map                                   

> (𝐅 ̂)
> 𝑐 ′×ℎ′×𝑤 ′×𝑑 ′
> Lesion intensit ies
> (𝒮 𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑 )
> 𝑣 𝑚𝑖𝑛 𝑣 𝑚𝑎𝑥
> 𝑓 𝑖
> One feature value 𝑓 𝑖
> inside the lesion 𝜇 𝑘
> 𝜇 𝑘 −𝑤 𝜇 𝑘 +𝑤
> 𝑓 𝑖
> 𝜙 𝑖𝑘
> 0
> 1
> 𝜇 𝑘
> 𝜇 𝑘 −1𝜇 𝑘 +1
> 𝑓 𝑖
> 𝜙 𝑖𝑘 =ReLU (1−∣𝑓 𝑖 −!𝑘 ∣
> 𝑤 )
> =max (0,1−∣𝑓 𝑖 −!𝑘 ∣
> 𝑤 )
> 𝜇 𝑘 +1𝜇 𝑘 −1𝜇 𝑘
> contribution to bins
> (before normalization)
> 0
> 1
> 𝑣 𝑚𝑖𝑛 𝑣 𝑚𝑎𝑥

∑ 𝑝 𝑘 𝑘 = 1 

> Feature value
> (inside le sion region)

1 Triangular kernel      

> (centered at 𝜇 𝑘 )Soft assignment to
> neighboring bins
> Resulting normalized
> distribution (𝐩 )

2 3 4

> Non -zero
> contribution
> Zero contr ibution
> (outside kernel support)

# Differentiable Histogram Figure 3: Illustration of the di ff erentiable histogram construction used for histogram regularization. Feature values extracted from the lesion region are softly assigned to neighboring histogram bins using a triangular kernel centered at each bin location μk. Unlike standard hard-binned histograms, the proposed soft-binning formulation remains di ff erentiable, enabling gradients to propagate back through the histogram computation during di ff usion training. The resulting normalized histogram forms the predicted intensity distribution p used for optimization. 

Therefore, to address these challenges, we design a his-togram regularization framework with two key components: (i) a feature-space approximation strategy that enables e ffi cient histogram computation without repeated full-volume decoding, and (ii) a di ff erentiable soft-binning formulation that preserves end-to-end gradient flow during optimization. The overall histogram regularization pipeline is illustrated in Figure 2. 

Feature-Space Approximation. To avoid the computational overhead of decoding latent representations ( Rc×h×w×d) into full voxel space ( R1×H×W×D) at every di ff usion timestep, we com-pute histogram statistics in an intermediate high-resolution fea-ture representation that retains intensity-related characteristics. Specifically, following (Berrada et al., 2025), we use a trun-cated decoder Dtrunc that maps the latent to a high-resolution feature space, which serves as a proxy for voxel intensities. Formally, at timestep t of the di ff usion training process, the denoising network predicts the noise ˆ ϵ. We then recover an estimate of the clean latent volume ˆ z0 from the predicted noise using the reverse di ff usion formulation (Ho et al., 2020): ˆz0 = zt − √1 − ¯αt ˆϵ

√ ¯αt

(6) This estimated latent is subsequently passed through a frozen copy of the VAE decoder. Here, instead of using the full de-coder pipeline, we truncate the forward pass at the penultimate residual block. At this stage, the feature maps have su ffi cient spatial resolution to reflect intensity variations while avoiding the significant computational overhead of the final convolution and upsampling layers. We then compute the histogram on the resulting feature map ˆ F = Dtrunc (ˆ z0) for supervision. 

Di ff erentiable Histogram. We implement a di ff erentiable soft-binning operation (Ustinova and Lempitsky, 2016) on the extracted feature map ˆ F, making it suitable for gradient-based optimization. Instead of standard histogram computation, which relies on non-di ff erentiable hard assignments, we use a continuous approximation to histogram binning. Specifically, we adopt a kernel-based formulation with a triangular kernel to softly assign intensity values to histogram bins. An overview of the di ff erentiable soft-binning process is shown in Figure 3. The process is as follows. We first isolate feature values cor-responding to the lesion region using the mask M, resulting in the set S = { fi | Mi = 1}. We then construct B histogram bins spanning the range of feature values, with uniformly spaced bin centers μk and a fixed bin width w. The contribution of each feature value fi to the k-th bin is computed using a triangular kernel function: 

hk = 1

|S| 

X

> fi∈S

ReLU 1 − | fi − μk|

w

!

(7) This produces a histogram vector h = [h1, . . . , hB], which we normalize such that P hk = 1, to obtain the predicted distribu-tion p. A corresponding target distribution q is computed in the same manner using features extracted from the ground-truth volume within the lesion region. 

Optimization Objective. We measure the discrepancy be-tween the predicted distribution p and the target distribution q

using the Jensen-Shannon divergence (JSD) (Lin, 2002). Com-pared to the KL divergence, JSD is symmetric and bounded, and remains numerically stable even when the two-distributions have non-overlapping support. The histogram regularization term is defined as: 6Algorithm 1 Training Histogram-Regularized Latent Di ff usion Model                                                                                                 

> Input: CT volume x, nodule subtype label y, intensity histogram h,and lesion mask Mwhile not converged do
> 1: Encode input: z0← E (x)
> 2: Sample t∼Uniform(1 ,T), ϵ∼ N (0,I)
> 3: Forward di ff usion process: zt=√¯αtz0+√1−¯αtϵ
> 4: Noisy latent (lesion only): ˜ zt=(1 −M)⊙z0+M⊙zt
> 5: Conditioning signals: ctype ←Embed( y),chist ←MLP( h)
> 6: Noise prediction: ˆ ϵ←ϵθ([˜ zt,M],t,ctype ,chist )
> 7: Clean latent: ˆ z0=zt− √1−¯αtˆϵ
> √¯αt
> 8: p=Hist( Dtrunc (ˆ z0),M),q=Hist( Dtrunc (z0),M),a=12(p+q)
> 9: Inpainting loss: Linpaint =P∥M⊙(ϵ−ˆϵ)∥1PM+δ
> 10: Histogram loss: Lhist =12DKL (p∥a)+12DKL (q∥a)
> 11: Ltotal =Linpaint +λhist Lhist
> 12: θ←θ−η∇θLtotal

Lhist = 12 DKL (p ∥ a) + 12 DKL (q ∥ a) (8) where a = 12 (p + q) is the average distribution. The final op-timization objective for our framework is a weighted combina-tion of the spatial reconstruction loss defined previously in Eq. (5) and the proposed histogram regularization term: 

Ltotal = Linpaint + λhist Lhist (9) where λhist is a hyperparameter that balances the trade-o ff be-tween spatial fidelity and intensity distribution alignment. By minimizing this objective, the model is encouraged to repro-duce the specific attenuation profiles of pulmonary nodules (e.g., solid, part-solid, and ground-glass nodules), mitigating the over-smoothing e ff ects commonly observed with purely spatial losses. The overall training procedure is summarized in Algorithm 1. 

3.3. Inference and Controllable Synthesis 

Once trained, our HR-LDM framework can be used to gen-erate synthetic lung nodules in healthy CT scans. At inference time, the model takes a healthy CT scan along with the condi-tioning signals defined earlier to guide the generation process. Here, we detail the inference process by first describing how anatomically valid locations are identified within the target vol-ume for nodule placement, followed by the construction of con-ditioning signals (e.g., segmentation masks and attributes), and finally how the generated lesion is seamlessly integrated into the background anatomy. 1. Candidate Location Selection. We first identify anatom-ically valid locations for nodule placement within the tar-get volume using a pre-computed lung lobe segmentation mask obtained with TotalSegmentator (Wasserthal et al., 2023; Isensee et al., 2021), which localizes the pulmonary parenchyma where nodules can realistically occur. To avoid boundary artifacts (e.g., when part of the nodule lies on the chest wall and appears visually artificial), we define an inner region by applying iterative binary erosion to the lung mask. Centroid locations cpos for standard parenchy-mal nodules are then sampled exclusively from this region. To additionally model sub-pleural nodules, we consider the outer region near the lung boundary, defined as the dif-ference between the full lung mask and the eroded inner region. This approach ensures that the synthesized nod-ules remain consistent with the underlying lung anatomy. 2. Mask and Attribute Conditioning. Following location selection, we construct conditioning signals that define the nodule morphology and texture. We begin by selecting a target lesion mask mtarget from a curated library of real nodule shapes and aligning it spatially with the sampled centroid cpos within the target volume. We then prepare the conditioning inputs required by the di ff usion model, including a semantic label ctype and a target intensity his-togram chist .3. Latent Inpainting and Reconstruction. Finally, we per-form generation by initializing the reverse di ff usion pro-cess from Gaussian noise, zT ∼ N (0, I), and iteratively de-noising to obtain the final latent ˆ z0. Here, at each timestep 

t, the denoising network predicts a latent estimate zt−1

from the current noisy input zt. Next, consistent with the training process, we condition the denoising network with a spatial mask M, obtained by downsampling the target lesion mask mtarget . This conditioning guides the model to synthesize content specifically within the lesion region while leaving the surrounding anatomy unchanged. In par-allel, to maintain background consistency throughout sam-pling, we introduce a fixed background latent representa-tion. This is obtained by encoding the input CT volume x

into latent space as zbg = E(x), followed by forward dif-fusion to match the noise level at timestep t − 1, yielding 

zbg t−1. The updated latent is then formed by combining the synthesized lesion content with the preserved background: 

zt−1 = M ⊙ zt−1 + (1 − M) ⊙ zbg t−1 (10) This formulation enforces that only the masked region is updated by the generative model, while the background is consistently anchored to the original anatomy at the appro-priate noise level. After completing all reverse di ff usion steps, the final latent ˆ z0 is decoded using the VAE decoder, ˆx = D(ˆ z0), producing a synthetic CT volume with realistic lesion appearance and well-preserved anatomical context. The overall generative process is outlined in Algorithm 2. 

4. Datasets 

In this work, we use a curated collection of 3D lung CT volumes consolidated from multiple sources, including public datasets such as the NLST (National Lung Screening Trial Re-search Team, 2013) and the Duke lung cancer screening dataset (DLCS) (Wang et al., 2025), along with internal datasets. For training the generative model, we utilize nodules from NLST and internal datasets within a clinically relevant size 7Algorithm 2 Inference Process                                                                    

> Input: Healthy CT volume x, nodule subtype label y, intensity his-togram h, and lesion mask mtarget
> 1: Sample centroid cpos from valid lung region
> 2: Spatially align mtarget with cpos
> 3: Conditioning signals: ctype ←Embed( y),chist ←MLP( h)
> 4: Encode input: zbg ← E (x)
> 5: Initialize latent: zT∼ N (0,I)
> 6: for t=T, . . . , 1do
> 7: Noise prediction: ˆ ϵ←ϵθ([ zt,M],t,ctype ,chist )
> 8: zt−1←DDPM-step( zt,ˆϵ,t)
> 9: Forward di ff usion to background: zbg t−1←q(zbg ,t−1)
> 10: Latent update: zt−1←M⊙zt−1+(1 −M)⊙zbg t−1
> 11: end for
> 12: return ˆx← D (ˆ z0) as generated output.

range of 6-30 mm, comprising three subtypes: solid, part-solid, and ground-glass nodules, with 1,838 solid, 365 part-solid, and 747 ground-glass nodules. A held-out set of 390 nodules (243 solid, 32 part-solid, and 115 ground-glass nodules) is used dur-ing inference for synthesis, which is subsequently used to aug-ment data for downstream tasks. For the lung nodule subtype classification task, the training data follows the same initial distribution of 1,838 solid, 365 part-solid, and 747 ground-glass nodules, where class imbal-ance is mitigated through augmentation using synthesized nod-ules generated by our model. The synthesis process randomizes nodule placement within the CT volume, increasing diversity and improving coverage of underrepresented classes. Evalua-tion for this subtype classification task is performed on a held-out multi-source dataset aggregated from NLST and internal datasets, consisting of 243 solid, 65 part-solid, and 222 ground-glass nodules. Finally, for malignancy classification, we use the DLCS dataset, which includes 2,487 nodules with 2,223 benign and 264 malignant cases. The malignancy labels in DLCS are biopsy-confirmed diagnoses. 

5. Implementation Details 

All models are implemented using PyTorch 2.6.0 and MONAI 1.5.0 (Cardoso et al., 2022), and trained on NVIDIA V100 and H100 GPUs using CUDA 11.8. The VAE-GAN and LDM components are adopted from the MAISI framework. For di ff usion model training, CT volumes are preprocessed by standardizing channel dimensions, aligning orientations to the RAS coordinate system, and normalizing intensities by clip-ping to [ −1000 , 1000] HU and scaling to [0 , 1]. Spatial dimen-sions are adjusted to the nearest multiple of 128 to ensure com-patibility with the U-Net architecture. The VAE-GAN com-presses the input by a factor of 4 to obtain latent representa-tions. The di ff usion model is conditioned on nodule subtype, seg-mentation masks, and intensity histograms. Subtype labels are encoded as 0 (solid), 1 (part-solid), and 2 (ground-glass). Seg-mentation masks, annotated at a fine-grained level by radiolo-gists, capture di ff erent nodule components (e.g., solid, ground-glass, and spiculations) and are downsampled by a factor of 4 to match the latent resolution before being concatenated with the latent input. Intensity histograms are computed by clipping values to [ −1000 , 400] HU, discretizing into 40 bins, and nor-malized to form a probability distribution. The di ff usion model is trained for 200 epochs with a batch size of 1 and an initial learning rate of 1 × 10 −5. A U-Net is used for noise prediction, with optimization performed us-ing Adam and a polynomial learning rate scheduler. Noise is added through a predefined DDPM scheduler with 1000 train-ing timesteps using a scaled linear beta schedule, where the noise variance parameters increase from βstart = 0.0015 to 

βend = 0.0195, and the model is trained using an L1 loss with histogram regularization (weight = 10.0). Mixed precision training and gradient scaling are used to improve computational effi ciency. For lung nodule subtype classification, we use a 3D DenseNet-121 model (Huang et al., 2017). Input volumes are cropped to 90 × 90 × 90, resampled to 1 × 1 × 1 mm resolution, and intensity-normalized in the same manner as the di ff usion model. The model is trained for 100 epochs with a batch size of 2 and a learning rate of 1 ×10 −4, using an 80 /20 train–validation split with early stopping. Cross-entropy loss is used for opti-mization. When synthetic samples are included during training, the validation set contains only real samples. For malignancy classification, we train three variants of 3D DenseNet-121 with a modified binary output layer. The first is trained from scratch on the DLCS dataset. The second and third are model weights initialized from subtype classification models trained on imbalanced and balanced data, respectively, and fine-tuned for malignancy prediction. This initialization is motivated by the relationship between nodule subtype and malignancy, as malignant nodules often present as part-solid or ground-glass lesions, allowing subtype pretraining to provide useful feature representations. 

6. Results 

We evaluate the proposed framework in terms of both the quality of synthesized nodules and their impact on downstream tasks. We first assess the realism of the generated lesions using quantitative metrics and visual inspection. We then examine their e ff ect on lung nodule subtype classification, followed by an analysis under limited training data, and finally evaluate per-formance on malignancy classification. 

6.1. Quantitative Evaluation of Synthetic Lesions 

We evaluate the quality of synthesized lung nodules by com-paring our method against several recent approaches, includ-ing LesionDi ff usion (Lei et al., 2025), Di ff -Tumor (Chen et al., 2024), and variants of MAISI (Guo et al., 2025), including the rectified-flow formulation (Zhao et al., 2026) and a DDPM-based variant without histogram regularization. We quantify distributional similarity between real and synthetic samples us-ing three complementary metrics: Fréchet inception distance 8Table 1: Quantitative evaluation of lung nodule synthesis across di ff erent generative methods. Our proposed histogram-regularized latent di ff usion model achieves the lowest distribution distances across all anatomical planes. Lower ( ↓) is better for all metrics. Best results are highlighted in bold. FID: Fréchet Inception Distance; KID: Kernel Inception Distance; MMD: Maximum Mean Discrepancy. 

FID (↓) KID (↓) × 10 −3 MMD (↓) × 10 −2

Method Axial Sagittal Coronal Avg Axial Sagittal Coronal Avg Axial Sagittal Coronal Avg Di ff -Tumor 8.4120 8.7503 9.1055 8.7559 6.8431 7.2147 7.9562 7.3380 2.6418 2.8126 3.0574 2.8373 LesionDi ff usion 5.6214 5.8033 6.2104 5.8784 3.6125 4.0381 4.5637 4.0714 1.5832 1.6679 1.8295 1.6935 MAISI (Rectified flow) 3.8401 3.9115 4.1560 3.9692 1.9348 2.1186 2.3472 2.1335 0.9587 1.0284 1.1469 1.0447 MAISI-DDPM (no Lhist ) 3.1054 3.2201 3.4588 3.2614 1.3129 1.4287 1.6473 1.4630 0.7264 0.7895 0.8462 0.7807 

Ours 2.8192 2.8400 3.0308 2.8967 1.0423 1.1189 1.1365 1.0992 0.5568 0.6671 0.7284 0.6507 

(FID), kernel inception distance (KID), and maximum mean discrepancy (MMD). We compute these metrics on a subset of 500 real and 500 synthetic nodule volumes, with approximately uniform repre-sentation across di ff erent nodule subtypes. For this evalua-tion, we extract feature representations from the nodules us-ing a ResNet-50 model pretrained on RadImageNet (Mei et al., 2022), which is designed for radiological data. Each 3D CT volume is decomposed into axial, sagittal, and coronal views, and multiple slices around the lesion center are sampled. These slices are passed through the network, and deep feature embed-dings are obtained via global average pooling. The resulting feature distributions for real and synthesized nodules are used to compute FID, KID, and MMD. Since lung nodules occupy only a small portion of the full CT volume, metrics computed over the entire image would be dominated by background anatomy and fail to capture di ff erences in nodule quality. Therefore, we perform all evaluations on cropped regions centered around the lesions, so that the metrics reflect the fidelity of the synthesized nodules. The quantitative results are summarized in Table 1. Our method achieves lower FID, KID, and MMD scores across all anatomical planes, as well as on average, compared to the com-peting methods. This consistent improvement indicates that the distribution of synthesized nodules from our model more closely matches that of real nodules, suggesting better realism and fidelity. We also include qualitative comparisons between clinical and synthetic nodules across di ff erent sizes and sub-types in Figure 4. 

6.2. Visual Turing Test 

To qualitatively assess the realism of the synthetic nodules generated by our framework, we conducted a Visual Turing test with an expert radiologist. The evaluation comprised a blind dataset of 100 cases (50 real clinical and 50 synthetic nodules, comprising a mixture of solid, part-solid and ground-glass). This test was conducted in two phases to assess both the intrinsic appearance of the nodules and their consistency with surrounding anatomy: first, by evaluating cropped nodules, and second, by assessing full-context lung volumes. 

> Table 2: Visual Turing test results assessing the visual fidelity of synthetic lung nodules. An expert radiologist evaluated 50 real and 50 synthetic nodules to classify them as ‘Real’ or ‘Synthetic’. The evaluation was performed under two conditions: ‘Cropped’ (assessing isolated nodule morphology) and ‘Full Con-text’ (assessing anatomical consistency within the surrounding lung volume). Rows denote the ground truth and columns denote the radiologist’s predictions.

Radiologist Evaluation Cropped Full Context Ground Truth Real Synth. Real Synth. 

Real 36 14 28 22 

Synth. 20 30 22 28 In the first phase, the radiologist evaluated tightly cropped nodules, isolated from their surrounding anatomical context, to assess morphological and textural realism; we show in Table 2 that this resulted in an overall accuracy of 66.0% (66 /100). Specifically, real nodules were correctly identified with 72.0% accuracy (36 /50), while synthetic nodules were identified with 60.0% accuracy (30 /50). Notably, the synthetic nodules suc-cessfully deceived the expert in 40.0% of the cases (20 /50 la-beled as real), indicating a high degree of visual fidelity. In addition, the radiologist misclassified 28.0% (14 /50) of the real nodules as synthetic, highlighting the di ffi culty of distinguish-ing true clinical data when local contextual cues are removed. In the second phase, the radiologist evaluated nodules within full-context lung volumes to determine if anatomical placement or boundary inconsistencies revealed their synthetic nature. In-terestingly, the addition of contextual information decreased the radiologist’s overall accuracy to 56.0% (56 /100), approaching random chance. Under these full-volume conditions, the ac-curacy for identifying real nodules dropped to 56.0% (28 /50), while the accuracy for synthetic nodules was 56.0% (28 /50). Consequently, the synthetic fooling rate increased to 44.0% (22 /50), while the misclassification of real data as synthetic rose to 44.0% (22 /50). These results demonstrate that our proposed method gener-ates synthetic nodules that are often di ffi cult to distinguish from real lesions to an expert observer. The drop in performance 9Nodule Size 

> Nodule subtype

6-10 mm 10 -20 mm 20 -30 mm 

> Solid Part -solid Ground -glass

Clinical Synthetic Synthetic Clinical Synthetic Synthetic Clinical Synthetic Synthetic Figure 4: Qualitative comparison of clinical and synthetic pulmonary nodules across varying sizes and nodule types. Each row corresponds to a nodule type (solid, part-solid, and ground-glass), and each column denotes a size range (6-10 mm, 10-20 mm, and 20-30 mm). For each setting, one clinical example and two synthetic samples are shown, along with corresponding zoomed-in views highlighting local morphological details (yellow arrows). 

from the cropped to the full-context evaluation is particularly notable. This indicates that the model is not only capturing re-alistic nodule appearance at the local level, but is also placing them in anatomically plausible locations. As a result, the gener-ated nodules remain consistent with the surrounding structures, making them harder to identify even when full context is avail-able. Representative examples from the subjective evaluation are shown in Figure 5, where both correctly classified and mis-classified cases are presented. The observed confusion between clinical and synthetic nodules further highlights the perceptual similarity between generated and real lesions. 

6.3. Nodule Subtype Classification 

In this section, we evaluate the performance of our approach for lung nodule subtype classification task. The evaluation compares a baseline model, particularly 3D DenseNet-121, trained exclusively on real, imbalanced data, against the model trained using real data augmented with synthetic cases gener-ated by our method. Here, we balance the minority classes (part-solid and ground-glass nodules) in the training dataset 

> Figure 5: Subjective radiologist evaluation of clinical and synthetic images. Example patches are arranged in a confusion-matrix layout, where rows corre-spond to the ground-truth label (clinical or synthetic) and columns indicate the radiologist’s assessment. Diagonal entries show correctly identified samples, while o ff -diagonal entries highlight cases where synthetic images are evaluated as clinical ones (and vice versa). These examples provide a qualitative view of the perceptual similarity between the generated and real images.

10 Table 3: Lung nodule subtype classification performance demonstrating the effi cacy of di ff usion-based data augmentation. The table compares a base-line classifier trained exclusively on the imbalanced real dataset (‘Real only’) against our method, which leverages synthetic nodules to balance the training distribution (‘Real + Synth’), with performance stratified by nodule size and morphological subtype. Metrics evaluated are area under the receiver oper-ating characteristic curve (AUROC) and area under the precision-recall curve (AUPRC), where higher values ( ↑) indicate better performance; subscript val-ues in gray represent standard deviations, bold text denotes superior perfor-mance by the augmented model, and markers indicate statistical significance of the improvement over the baseline (underline: p < 0.05; ∗: p < 0.01)                                                                                                                                      

> Size Nodule Type Baseline Ours p-value
> Real only Real +Synth
> AUROC ( ↑)
> 6-10mm
> Solid 0.977 ±0.01 0.971 ±0.01 0.910 Part-solid 0.792 ±0.03 0.773 ±0.04 0.705 Ground-glass 0.964 ±0.01 0.965 ±0.01 0.590
> 10-20mm
> Solid 0.974 ±0.01 0.985 ±0.01 0.595 Part-solid 0.753 ±0.04 0.802 ±0.03 0.047 Ground-glass 0.942 ±0.01 0.953 ±0.01 0.046
> 20-30mm
> Solid 0.979 ±0.02 0.986 ±0.01 0.373 Part-solid 0.750 ±0.03 0.831 ±0.03 0.006 ∗
> Ground-glass 0.887 ±0.02 0.933 ±0.02 0.004 ∗
> AUPRC ( ↑)
> 6-10mm
> Solid 0.961 ±0.01 0.955 ±0.03 0.953 Part-solid 0.332 ±0.06 0.373 ±0.05 0.049 Ground-glass 0.955 ±0.01 0.956 ±0.01 0.590
> 10-20mm
> Solid 0.894 ±0.03 0.901 ±0.04 0.590 Part-solid 0.493 ±0.07 0.570 ±0.03 0.032 Ground-glass 0.952 ±0.02 0.962 ±0.01 0.046
> 20-30mm
> Solid 0.960 ±0.03 0.974 ±0.01 0.343 Part-solid 0.532 ±0.04 0.657 ±0.05 0.002 ∗
> Ground-glass 0.848 ±0.03 0.910 ±0.03 0.013 ∗

with synthetic cases to match the solid nodule counts. We quan-tify classification performance using both the area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUROC) and the area under the precision-recall curve (AUPRC) on a held-out test set consisting only of real cases. To assess statistical signifi-cance, we perform a two-sided Mann-Whitney U test compar-ing metric distributions across multiple independent runs. We use five-fold cross-validation on the training /validation set for model selection, and evaluate the selected models on the test set. Table 3 shows the performance of the model stratified by nodule size (6-10mm, 10-20mm, and 20-30mm) and subtype (solid, part-solid, and ground-glass). The baseline model achieved robust performance for the ma-jority solid nodule class across all size categories. After aug-menting with the synthetic data, the model maintained this high performance, with AUROC remaining above 0.97 and AUPRC above 0.90 across all sizes. Furthermore, we also note that the di ff erences in model performance for solid nodules were not statistically significant ( p > 0.05), indicating that our augmen-tation strategy did not degrade the representation or classifica-tion accuracy of the well-represented majority class. Next, for smaller minority nodules (6-10mm in part-solid and ground-glass), we see that the AUROC di ff erences between the baseline and the proposed method were statistically insignifi-cant across all subtypes. However, we note that the AUPRC for the highly imbalanced part-solid class in the 6-10mm range showed a statistically significant early improvement, increasing from 0 .332 ± 0.06 to 0 .373 ± 0.05 ( p = 0.049, Figures 6a and 6b). This highlights that metrics such as AUPRC have a benefit               

> (a) Part-solid: Real only (Baseline) (b) Part-solid: Real +Synth (Ours)
> (c) Ground-glass: Real (Baseline) (d) Ground-glass: Real +Synth (Ours)

Figure 6: Precision-Recall curves (AUPRC) comparing baseline against syn-thetically augmented model. The top row illustrates performance for part-solid nodules, and the bottom row displays ground-glass nodules. 

in quantifying performance for small, challenging lesions that AUROC alone fails to capture. More importantly, we observe the most substantial benefits of synthetic augmentation in the 10-20mm and 20-30mm ranges for both part-solid and ground-glass nodules. Specifically, in the 10-20mm category, part-solid AUROC improved signifi-cantly from 0 .753 ± 0.04 to 0 .802 ± 0.03 ( p = 0.047), and AUPRC rose from 0 .493 ± 0.07 to 0 .570 ± 0.03 ( p = 0.032). Also, ground-glass nodules in this same size range show signif-icant, consistent gains in both metrics with a p = 0.046 (Figures 6c and 6d). Finally, we see that the performance gap widened most for the largest nodules (20-30mm), where our method yielded highly significant improvements. Part-solid AUROC increased from 0 .750 ± 0.03 to 0 .831 ± 0.03 ( p = 0.006), while AUPRC increased from 0 .532 ± 0.04 to 0 .657 ± 0.05 ( p = 0.002, visu-ally evident in the widened gap between the orange curves in Figures 6a and 6b). Similarly, ground-glass performance im-proved, with AUROC reaching 0 .933 ± 0.02 ( p = 0.004) and AUPRC reaching 0 .910 ± 0.03 ( p = 0.013). These results confirm that when we perform a targeted data augmentation using the synthetic samples generated by our pro-posed approach, it e ff ectively addresses class imbalance, pro-viding statistically significant classification improvements for minority subtypes and larger nodule sizes without compromis-ing majority class accuracy. 11 Figure 7: Ablation study evaluating classification robustness under severe data scarcity. Performance metrics (AUROC and AUPRC) are shown across nodule subtypes as the proportion of retained clinical training data is systematically reduced from 100% to 0%. The baseline model (gray) is compared against two augmentation strategies: proportional addition of synthetic data (Clinical (n%) + Synth (n%), teal) and full addition of synthetic data (Clinical (n%) + Synth (100%), orange). While well-represented subtypes (solid, ground-glass) are generally resilient to data reduction, the minority part-solid subtype su ff ers severe baseline degradation. Here, full synthetic augmentation stabilizes part-solid performance even at extreme scarcity levels (10% and 0% clinical retention), demonstrating the utility of generated data’s features. 

6.4. Ablation Study: Robustness to Data Scarcity 

In this section, we investigate the robustness of our frame-work under conditions of severe data scarcity, where we sys-tematically reduce the amount of available clinical training data and substitute it proportionally with synthetic data for lung nod-ule subtype classification task. Here, our goal is to assess if the generated data can provide meaningful feature representations to the model in situations of severe real data scarcity. We do so by training 3D DenseNet-121 model across five data reten-tion levels where 100%, 50%, 20%, 10%, and 0% of the orig-inal clinical dataset is retained as training dataset proportions. Subsequently, we substitute it with generated data in two di ff er-ent augmentation settings: proportional synthetic augmentation (Clinical (n%) + Synth (n%)) and full synthetic augmentation (Clinical (n%) + Synth (100%)). In proportional synthetic aug-mentation setting, when we remove a certain proportion of the real clinical data, we add only the same proportion of generated data. For example, in 20% mark, we use 20% of clinical data and only use 20% of generated data; whereas, in full synthetic augmentation setting, when we remove a certain proportion of the real clinical data, we add full synthetic data to the training dataset to make sure that the synthetic samples are dispropor-tionately higher than the real clinical data. The latter setting evaluates whether adding a larger proportion of synthetic sam-ples adversely a ff ects model performance. Figure 7 shows the performance of the model across dif-ferent retention levels quantified using AUROC and AUPRC. For the well-represented solid and the second well represented ground-glass nodule subtypes, we see that the baseline model exhibits high resilience to data reduction. For example, as we reduce the clinical data to 10%, we see that the baseline AU-ROC and AUPRC remained relatively stable, only degrading slightly. The addition of synthetic data in these categories main-tained consistent results with the baseline, showing that the syn-thetic samples do not introduce detrimental noise into already easily learnable classes. Conversely, the minority part-solid subtype demonstrated ex-treme sensitivity to data reduction. The baseline model’s per-formance deteriorated rapidly as clinical data was removed, with AUROC dropping from approximately 0.80 at 100% re-tention to 0.64 at 10% retention. The AUPRC baseline su ff ered a similarly steep decline, falling from roughly 0.38 to below 0.20. The introduction of synthetic data substantially mitigated this degradation. Supplementing the reduced datasets with a pro-portional amount of synthetic data (Synth (n%)) delayed the performance drop, maintaining higher accuracy down to the 50% retention mark before declining. More importantly, sup-plementing the scarce clinical data with a full complement of synthetic data (Synth (100%)) completely stabilized the model. For the part-solid class, the Synth (100%) strategy maintained a consistent AUROC near 0.80 and an AUPRC above 0.40 across all data retention levels, even when utilizing only 10% or 0% of the original clinical data. These ablation results demonstrate that the proposed method generates highly informative features capable of replacing 12 Figure 8: AUROC curves evaluating downstream lung nodule malignancy clas-sification (malignant vs. benign). The plot compares the predictive perfor-mance of a 3D DenseNet-121 classifier across three training configurations: trained from scratch on DLCS dataset (red), model weights initialized with the subtype classification model trained using imbalanced data and fine-tuned on DLCS (blue), and model weights initialized with the subtype classification model trained using imbalanced and synthetic data balanced using our proposed generative framework and fine-tuned (green). The synthetically balanced model achieves the highest discrimination showing that correcting dataset imbalance with generated data measurably improves diagnostic classification over stan-dard baselines. 

missing clinical data. The synthetic augmentation acts as a counterbalance for minority classes, preserving diagnostic per-formance in extreme data-scarce regimes. 

6.5. Malignancy Classification 

In this section, we evaluate the performance of our approach for the lung nodule malignancy classification task. We employ a 3D DenseNet-121 architecture adapted for binary classification (malignant versus benign) and assess performance on a held-out test set using the AUROC metric. We compare three train-ing configurations of this network: (i) a model trained from scratch on the original DLCS dataset, (ii) a model initialized from subtype classification weights trained on the imbalanced dataset and subsequently fine-tuned for malignancy prediction, and (iii) a model initialized from subtype classification weights trained on the synthetically balanced dataset and fine-tuned in the same manner. The model trained from scratch yielded the lowest discrimi-nation, achieving an AUROC of 0 .569 ±0.017, performing only marginally better than random chance (Figure 8). Initializing the network with subtype classification weights trained on the imbalanced dataset improves predictive performance, resulting in an AUROC of 0 .627 ± 0.031. The highest performance is achieved by the model initial-ized from subtype classification weights learned on the synthet-ically balanced dataset. This configuration attains an AUROC of 0 .671 ± 0.051, demonstrating a clear improvement over both the scratch and imbalanced baselines. These results indicate that subtype-informed pretraining pro-vides a strong initialization for malignancy classification, and that incorporating synthetic nodules to balance the training dis-tribution further enhances the quality of learned representa-tions, leading to improved discrimination between benign and malignant lesions. 

7. Discussion 

The development of robust computer-aided diagnosis sys-tems for lung cancer screening is fundamentally constrained by the scarcity and imbalance of annotated data, particularly for clinically important but underrepresented nodule subtypes. In this work, we address this limitation by introducing a control-lable generative framework that not only produces realistic pul-monary nodules but also generates samples that are functionally useful for downstream learning tasks. A key insight of this study is that realism in medical image synthesis is not solely a structural problem, but also a distri-butional one. While prior generative approaches primarily op-timize for visual fidelity through reconstruction or adversarial objectives, they often fail to capture the subtle intensity dis-tributions that distinguish clinically relevant subtypes such as part-solid and ground-glass nodules. The proposed histogram-based regularization explicitly addresses this gap by enforcing alignment in intensity distributions, thereby guiding the model toward subtype-consistent attenuation patterns. This provides a more clinically meaningful notion of realism, beyond visual plausibility alone. In addition, the use of multi-modal conditioning enables a more disentangled and controllable generative process. By separating semantic subtype, spatial morphology, and intensity characteristics into distinct conditioning signals, the model is able to independently control di ff erent attributes of the synthe-sized nodules. This structured conditioning, combined with lesion-focused latent inpainting, allows the model to generate localized pathological changes while preserving the surround-ing anatomical context. Such locality is important in medi-cal imaging, where global image synthesis can easily introduce anatomically inconsistent artifacts. Another important implication of this work is that synthetic data can serve not only as a means of augmentation, but as a mechanism for representation learning. The observed improve-ments in downstream classification tasks suggest that the gener-ated samples capture meaningful feature variations that are un-derrepresented in real datasets. In particular, the combination of subtype-informed pretraining and synthetic balancing indicates that generative models can help reshape the training distribu-tion in a way that improves feature transferability across related clinical tasks, such as malignancy prediction. These findings are especially relevant in the context of data scarcity, where ac-quiring large, well-balanced annotated datasets is often imprac-tical. The ability of the proposed framework to stabilize model performance under reduced data availability suggests that gen-erative augmentation can act as a substitute for missing clin-ical diversity, rather than merely a supplement. This has im-13 portant implications for developing robust learning systems in low-resource settings or rare disease scenarios. From a clinical perspective, the ability to generate anatom-ically consistent and subtype-specific nodules o ff ers a path-way toward improving the robustness and fairness of diagnos-tic models. By augmenting underrepresented classes without degrading performance on majority classes, the proposed ap-proach may help reduce bias in computer-aided diagnosis sys-tems and improve sensitivity to clinically subtle lesion types. Despite these contributions, several limitations remain. The evaluation of synthetic realism, while supported by quantita-tive metrics and expert assessment, would benefit from larger multi-reader studies to establish clinical reliability. Further-more, the dependence on segmentation masks and subtype an-notations introduces an additional requirement for labeled data, which may limit scalability in certain settings. In addition, the current framework employs a downsampled segmentation mask as a spatial conditioning signal, which may not fully cap-ture fine-grained lesion boundary information; incorporating higher-resolution spatial conditioning strategies remains an im-portant direction for future work. Finally, the computational complexity of 3D di ff usion models remains a practical chal-lenge for widespread deployment. Future work will focus on addressing these limitations by ex-ploring annotation e ffi cient training strategies, expanding vali-dation across diverse multi-center datasets, and integrating the framework into end-to-end clinical pipelines. Extending the ap-proach to other thoracic abnormalities or multi-lesion scenarios may further enhance its clinical applicability. 

8. Conclusion 

In this work, we presented HR-LDM, a histogram-regularized latent di ff usion framework for controllable lung nodule synthesis. By integrating multi-modal conditioning with a novel histogram-based regularization strategy and lesion-focused inpainting, the proposed method generates anatomi-cally consistent and visually realistic nodules that closely match the distribution of real clinical data. Extensive experiments demonstrate that the generated samples not only achieve supe-rior fidelity compared to existing methods but also provide tan-gible benefits for downstream tasks, including improved sub-type classification, enhanced robustness under data scarcity, and improved malignancy prediction through subtype-informed pretraining. Overall, this work highlights the potential of di ff usion-based generative models as a powerful tool for ad-dressing data limitations in medical imaging, o ff ering a path-way toward more robust and generalizable computer-aided di-agnosis systems. 

9. Disclaimer 

The concepts and information presented in this paper are based on research results that are not commercially available. Future commercial availability cannot be guaranteed. 

References 

Armato III, S.G., McLennan, G., Bidaut, L., McNitt-Gray, M.F., Meyer, C.R., Reeves, A.P., Zhao, B., Aberle, D.R., Henschke, C.I., Ho ff man, E.A., et al., 2011. The lung im-age database consortium (lidc) and image database resource initiative (idri): a completed reference database of lung nod-ules on ct scans. Medical physics 38, 915–931. Berrada, T., Astolfi, P., Hall, M., Havasi, M., Benchetrit, Y., Romero-Soriano, A., Alahari, K., Drozdzal, M., Verbeek, J., 2025. Boosting latent di ff usion with perceptual objec-tives, in: The Thirteenth International Conference on Learn-ing Representations. URL: https://openreview.net/ forum?id=y4DtzADzd1 .Bray, F., Laversanne, M., Sung, H., Ferlay, J., Siegel, R.L., So-erjomataram, I., Jemal, A., 2024. Global cancer statistics 2022: Globocan estimates of incidence and mortality world-wide for 36 cancers in 185 countries. CA: a cancer journal for clinicians 74, 229–263. Cardoso, M.J., Li, W., Brown, R., Ma, N., Kerfoot, E., Wang, Y., Murrey, B., Myronenko, A., Zhao, C., Yang, D., et al., 2022. Monai: An open-source framework for deep learning in healthcare. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.02701 . Chen, Q., Chen, X., Song, H., Xiong, Z., Yuille, A., Wei, C., Zhou, Z., 2024. Towards generalizable tumor synthesis, in: Proceedings of the IEEE /CVF conference on computer vi-sion and pattern recognition, pp. 11147–11158. Çiçek, Ö., Abdulkadir, A., Lienkamp, S.S., Brox, T., Ron-neberger, O., 2016. 3d u-net: learning dense volumetric segmentation from sparse annotation, in: International con-ference on medical image computing and computer-assisted intervention, Springer. pp. 424–432. Esser, P., Rombach, R., Ommer, B., 2021. Taming transform-ers for high-resolution image synthesis, in: Proceedings of the IEEE /CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 12873–12883. Frid-Adar, M., Klang, E., Amitai, M., Goldberger, J., Greenspan, H., 2018. Synthetic data augmentation using gan for improved liver lesion classification, in: 2018 IEEE 15th international symposium on biomedical imaging (ISBI 2018), IEEE. pp. 289–293. Goodfellow, I., Pouget-Abadie, J., Mirza, M., Xu, B., Warde-Farley, D., Ozair, S., Courville, A., Bengio, Y., 2020. Gener-ative adversarial networks. Communications of the ACM 63, 139–144. Guo, P., Zhao, C., Yang, D., Xu, Z., Nath, V., Tang, Y., Simon, B., Belue, M., Harmon, S., Turkbey, B., et al., 2025. Maisi: Medical ai for synthetic imaging, in: 2025 IEEE /CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV), IEEE. pp. 4430–4441. 14 Hammer, M.M., Palazzo, L.L., Kong, C.Y., Hunsaker, A.R., 2019. Cancer risk in subsolid nodules in the national lung screening trial. Radiology 293, 441–448. Han, C., Hayashi, H., Rundo, L., Araki, R., Shimoda, W., Mu-ramatsu, S., Furukawa, Y., Mauri, G., Nakayama, H., 2018. Gan-based synthetic brain mr image generation, in: 2018 IEEE 15th international symposium on biomedical imaging (ISBI 2018), IEEE. pp. 734–738. Han, C., Kitamura, Y., Kudo, A., Ichinose, A., Rundo, L., Furukawa, Y., Umemoto, K., Li, Y., Nakayama, H., 2019. Synthesizing diverse lung nodules wherever massively: 3d multi-conditional gan-based ct image augmentation for ob-ject detection, in: 2019 International Conference on 3D Vi-sion (3DV), IEEE. pp. 729–737. Hendrix, W., Hendrix, N., Scholten, E.T., Mourits, M., Trap-de Jong, J., Schalekamp, S., Korst, M., Van Leuken, M., Van Ginneken, B., Prokop, M., et al., 2023. Deep learning for the detection of benign and malignant pulmonary nodules in non-screening chest ct scans. Communications medicine 3, 156. Henschke, C.I., Yankelevitz, D.F., Mirtcheva, R., McGuinness, G., McCauley, D., Miettinen, O.S., 2002. Ct screening for lung cancer: frequency and significance of part-solid and nonsolid nodules. American Journal of Roentgenology 178, 1053–1057. Ho, J., Jain, A., Abbeel, P., 2020. Denoising di ff usion proba-bilistic models. Advances in neural information processing systems 33, 6840–6851. Huang, G., Liu, Z., Van Der Maaten, L., Weinberger, K.Q., 2017. Densely connected convolutional networks, in: Pro-ceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pat-tern recognition, pp. 4700–4708. Isensee, F., Jaeger, P.F., Kohl, S.A., Petersen, J., Maier-Hein, K.H., 2021. nnu-net: a self-configuring method for deep learning-based biomedical image segmentation. Nature methods 18, 203–211. Jin, Q., Cui, H., Sun, C., Meng, Z., Su, R., 2021. Free-form tumor synthesis in computed tomography images via richer generative adversarial network. Knowledge-Based Systems 218, 106753. Kingma, D.P., Welling, M., 2013. Auto-encoding variational bayes. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6114 . de Koning, H.J., van Der Aalst, C.M., de Jong, P.A., Scholten, E.T., Nackaerts, K., Heuvelmans, M.A., Lammers, J.W.J., Weenink, C., Yousaf-Khan, U., Horeweg, N., et al., 2020. Reduced lung-cancer mortality with volume ct screening in a randomized trial. New England journal of medicine 382, 503–513. Landy, R., Young, C.D., Skarzynski, M., Cheung, L.C., Berg, C.D., Rivera, M.P., Robbins, H.A., Chaturvedi, A.K., Katki, H.A., 2021. Using prediction models to reduce persistent racial and ethnic disparities in the draft 2020 uspstf lung can-cer screening guidelines. JNCI: Journal of the National Can-cer Institute 113, 1590–1594. Lei, W., Tian, H., Dai, L., Chen, H., Zhang, X., 2025. Lesion-di ff usion: Towards text-controlled general lesion synthesis, in: International Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention, Springer. pp. 327–336. Lin, J., 2002. Divergence measures based on the shannon en-tropy. IEEE Transactions on Information theory 37, 145– 151. Liu, S., Setio, A.A.A., Ghesu, F.C., Gibson, E., Grbic, S., Georgescu, B., Comaniciu, D., 2020. No surprises: Train-ing robust lung nodule detection for low-dose ct scans by augmenting with adversarial attacks. IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging 40, 335–345. Mei, X., Liu, Z., Robson, P.M., Marinelli, B., Huang, M., Doshi, A., Jacobi, A., Cao, C., Link, K.E., Yang, T., et al., 2022. Radimagenet: an open radiologic deep learning re-search dataset for e ff ective transfer learning. Radiology: Ar-tificial Intelligence 4, e210315. Mortani Barbosa Jr, E.J., Kim, Y., Zhang, Y., Setio, A.A., Mel-lot, F., Grenier, P.A., Zimmermann, M., Georgescu, B., Gr-bic, S., Gefter, W.B., 2026. Deep learning-based pulmonary nodule risk assessment outperforms established malignancy risk scores in lung cancer screening. Radiology Advances 3, umag003. National Lung Screening Trial Research Team, 2013. Data from the national lung screening trial (nlst) [data set]. The Cancer Imaging Archive. URL: https://doi.org/10. 7937/TCIA.HMQ8-J677 .Nichol, A.Q., Dhariwal, P., 2021. Improved denoising di ff u-sion probabilistic models, in: International conference on machine learning, PMLR. pp. 8162–8171. Rombach, R., Blattmann, A., Lorenz, D., Esser, P., Ommer, B., 2022. High-resolution image synthesis with latent di ff u-sion models, in: Proceedings of the IEEE /CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 10684–10695. Ronneberger, O., Fischer, P., Brox, T., 2015. U-net: Con-volutional networks for biomedical image segmentation, in: International Conference on Medical image computing and computer-assisted intervention, Springer. pp. 234–241. Saharia, C., Chan, W., Chang, H., Lee, C., Ho, J., Salimans, T., Fleet, D., Norouzi, M., 2022. Palette: Image-to-image dif-fusion models, in: ACM SIGGRAPH 2022 conference pro-ceedings, pp. 1–10. 15 Shin, Y., Qadir, H.A., Balasingham, I., 2018. Abnormal colon polyp image synthesis using conditional adversarial networks for improved detection performance. IEEE Access 6, 56007–56017. Team, N.L.S.T.R., 2011a. The national lung screening trial: overview and study design. Radiology 258, 243–253. Team, N.L.S.T.R., 2011b. Reduced lung-cancer mortality with low-dose computed tomographic screening. New England Journal of Medicine 365, 395–409. Ustinova, E., Lempitsky, V., 2016. Learning deep embeddings with histogram loss. Advances in neural information pro-cessing systems 29. Wang, A.J., Tushar, F.I., Harowicz, M.R., Tong, B.C., Lafata, K.J., Tailor, T.D., Lo, J.Y., 2025. The duke lung cancer screening (dlcs) dataset: a reference dataset of annotated low-dose screening thoracic ct. Radiology: Artificial Intelli-gence 7, e240248. Wang, Q., Zhang, X., Zhang, W., Gao, M., Huang, S., Wang, J., Zhang, J., Yang, D., Liu, C., 2021. Realistic lung nod-ule synthesis with multi-target co-guided adversarial mech-anism. IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging 40, 2343– 2353. Wasserthal, J., Breit, H.C., Meyer, M.T., Pradella, M., Hinck, D., Sauter, A.W., Heye, T., Boll, D.T., Cyriac, J., Yang, S., et al., 2023. Totalsegmentator: robust segmentation of 104 anatomic structures in ct images. Radiology: Artificial Intel-ligence 5, e230024. Yang, J., Liu, S., Grbic, S., Setio, A.A.A., Xu, Z., Gibson, E., Chabin, G., Georgescu, B., Laine, A.F., Comaniciu, D., 2019. Class-aware adversarial lung nodule synthesis in ct images, in: 2019 IEEE 16th International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging (ISBI 2019), IEEE. pp. 1348–1352. Yu, J., Li, X., Koh, J.Y., Zhang, H., Pang, R., Qin, J., Ku, A., Xu, Y., Baldridge, J., Wu, Y., 2022. Vector-quantized image modeling with improved VQGAN, in: International Conference on Learning Representations. URL: https: //openreview.net/forum?id=pfNyExj7z2 .Zhang, H., Liu, Y., Yang, J., Wan, S., Wang, X., Peng, W., Fua, P., 2025. Lefusion: Controllable pathology synthesis via lesion-focused di ff usion models, in: The Thirteenth In-ternational Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2025, Singapore, April 24-28, 2025. Zhang, L., Rao, A., Agrawala, M., 2023. Adding conditional control to text-to-image di ff usion models, in: Proceedings of the IEEE /CVF international conference on computer vision, pp. 3836–3847. Zhang, R., Isola, P., Efros, A.A., Shechtman, E., Wang, O., 2018. The unreasonable e ff ectiveness of deep features as a perceptual metric, in: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 586–595. Zhao, C., Guo, P., Yang, D., He, Y., Tang, Y., Simon, B., Belue, M., Harmon, S., Turkbey, B., Xu, D., 2026. Maisi-v2: Accel-erated 3d high-resolution medical image synthesis with rec-tified flow and region-specific contrastive loss, in: Proceed-ings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 13088–13098. 16