Title: Beyond Distance Ordering: Resource Complexity and Universal Optimality of Exact Labeled Directed Shortest Paths

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.04825v1

Published Time: Mon, 07 Sep 2026 00:37:50 GMT

Number of Pages: 45

Markdown Content:
# Beyond Distance Ordering: Resource Complexity and Universal Optimality of Exact Labeled Directed Shortest Paths 

Bin Cai Wuhan University of Technology Wuhan, China 

369028@whut.edu.cn 

Abstract 

We study exact single-source shortest paths when the output is only the materialized labeled distance vector (DIST), rather than a distance order. In the full deterministic comparison– addition model, the minimum worst-case number of additions on every fixed directed topology is exactly the maximum number ρfwd of forward nonsource endpoint classes over rooted vertex orders; the lower bound permits adaptive control, literals, and arbitrary mixed sums. This arithmetic law aligns with the comparison optimum on DAGs, where the full resource region is an exact rectangle. Cycles destroy that alignment: a two-spoke shared-hub graph has coordinatewise optima (4 , 2) but requires five comparisons at the two-addition budget. Its k-spoke extension forces k log 2 k + O(k)comparisons at the addition optimum and has an entropy-tight deterministic tradeoff C∗ 

> k+r

(Hk) = Θ( k + Λ k,r ), where Λ k,r = log 2(k!/[r!( r + 1) k−r ]), with leading constant one when Λ k,r /k → ∞ .Because the two coordinatewise minima need not belong to one program, these conflicts lead to the same-program benchmark OPT DIST = inf A sup w(CA(w) + PA(w)). An exact transcript-cone game yields one uniform interpreter whose charged addition–comparison cost equals OPT DIST 

on every topology; its optimal actions are synthesizable in polynomial space but may require exponential time. Finally, an active-core reduction and the current deterministic directed-SSSP bound give an efficient uniform O(OPT DIST 

√log(2 + OPT DIST ) log log(4 + OPT DIST ))

charged-operation bound. Thus optimal numerical policies exist uniformly, while efficient constant-competitive navigation remains open. 

# 1 Introduction 

Shortest paths admit several output contracts. A program can return the labeled numerical vector, a nondecreasing order of vertices, or a tree of witness paths. These outputs are related, but they need not have the same numerical complexity. This paper isolates DIST( G, s ) = (d(s, v )) 

> v̸=s

,

with every coordinate held in an actual numerical register. No settlement order or path witness is requested. Recent directed-SSSP algorithms below the sorting barrier already make this distinction algorithmically relevant [DMM +25, DMSY26]; universal-optimal Dijkstra results, by contrast, benchmark the order-producing task DO [HHR +24, vdHRR25]. A common-suffix example makes the output boundary literal: two comparisons determine all labeled distances, while producing their order requires Θ( n log n) comparisons (section O). Our central question is therefore: 1arXiv:2609.04825v1 [cs.DS] 4 Sep 2026 If the output is only the exact labeled distance vector, what numerical resources are intrinsically necessary, and can one uniform algorithm match the best topology-specialized program? 

We answer this in the deterministic comparison–addition (CA) model. A program may adaptively compare any two held registers and may add any two held finite values. It may reuse registers, form mixed non-path sums, use repeated operands and finitely many real literals, and share intermediate values among output labels. Copying and discrete control are free, but an output value must be materialized. The topology is fixed for a specialized program; arc weights range over all nonnegative reals. 

Exact arithmetic. Our first result characterizes the addition coordinate on every topology. For a rooted order of the vertices, count the nonsource endpoint classes directed forward, and let ρfwd (G, s )be the maximum count. Then 

P ∗(G, s ) = ρfwd (G, s ).

Endpoint-class Dijkstra attains the value uniformly without computing the NP-hard parameter. The content is the lower bound: it applies to arbitrary adaptive mixed-sum programs, rather than merely counting relaxations in a particular shortest-path algorithm. A generic potential-and-slack input, the full path-difference kernel, and a projected fiber-opening argument force one addition per forward endpoint class. 

Acyclic alignment, cyclic conflict. On a reachable DAG with n vertices, m primitive arcs, q

endpoint classes, and ds source-out classes, the entire resource region is 

R(G, s ) = {(c, p ) : c ≥ m − n + 1 , p ≥ q − ds}.

Thus the two resources align perfectly in the acyclic case. We use this as the baseline, not as the endpoint of the paper. A minimal active cycle already breaks the rectangle. For the two-spoke shared-hub graph H2,

C∗(H2) = 4 , P ∗(H2) = 2 , C∗ 

> 2

(H2) = 5 .

The first two values are coordinatewise optima, yet no program attains both. The last inequality follows from a mathematical reduction to eight strict cells and a finite exhaustive coefficient-state certificate. We state this computer-assisted boundary explicitly and provide a deterministic verifier. 

Endogenous sorting and its tradeoff. The graph Hk repeats the spoke around one hub. It still requests only labeled DIST, and P ∗(Hk) = k, but an addition-optimal program must distinguish k!scale-separated spoke orders: 

⌈log 2(k!) ⌉ ≤ C∗ 

> k

(Hk) ≤ S(k) + 2 k, 

where S(k) is the optimal pairwise-sorting comparison count. Hence C∗ 

> k

(Hk) = k log 2 k + O(k)while C∗(Hk) = Θ( k). This is endogenous sorting in the information sense. We do not claim that arbitrary aggregate comparisons can be converted one-for-one into pairwise key comparisons. The full interpolation exposes the mechanism. Set 

Fk(r) = C∗

> k+r

(Hk), Λk,r = log 2

k!

r!( r + 1) k−r (0 ≤ r ≤ k).

2We prove 

Fk(r) = Θ( k + Λ k,r )uniformly, with leading constant one on the entropy term whenever Λ k,r /k → ∞ . The lower bound is causal. After t additions at most t disjoint spoke pairs can be exposed. If the pair in position s is still hidden after s + r additions, a synchronized threat makes that pair essential to k − s + 1 distinct outputs although only k − s additions remain. The resulting deadline allows at most r!( r + 1) k−r

permutations per transcript. For the upper bound, deterministic multiple selection produces ordered blocks of width r + 1, and a rolling computation spends a second addition only inside the crossing block. The standard deterministic multiple-selection theorem contributes a lower-order entropy term; we therefore do not claim a uniform additive-O(k) formula. 

The same-program benchmark. The cyclic tradeoff is also the bridge to universal optimality: it shows that the topology-specific comparator must price one program, not assemble a fictitious algorithm from separately optimized coordinates. In particular, the H2 nonrectangle rules out 

C∗ + P ∗ as a measure of total numerical work because the two minima may belong to different programs. We therefore define OPT DIST (G, s ) = inf  

> A

sup 

> w≥0
> (

CA(G, s, w ) + PA(G, s, w )).

Both resources are charged to one execution of one program. This is the benchmark for universal optimality throughout the paper. 

No numerical uniformity tax. We characterize OPT DIST by a transcript-cone game. A state records the homogeneous coefficient vectors of held registers and the physical comparison outcomes seen so far. Those outcomes define a cone of consistent inputs. A state is terminal only when every label has one fixed held register that is correct throughout the entire cone. Addition and comparison moves reproduce the physical program model exactly. We prove WIN G({0, e 1, . . . , e m}, ∅, K ) ⇐⇒ OPT DIST (G, s ) ≤ K. 

A canonical minimax policy therefore gives one uniform interpreter Upspace satisfying 

TUpspace (G, s ) = OPT DIST (G, s )for every topology. The interpreter reconstructs topology-specific optimal actions from the graph; they are not nonuniform advice. Its state and depth-first policy search use polynomial space, but the ordinary time between charged operations may be exponential. Exact numerical universal optimality is settled; efficient navigation is not. 

The efficient boundary. A canonical active-core reduction deletes dominator-inactive arcs, reduces source-parallel classes, and retains only endpoints of active nonsource arcs. If k is the number of those arcs and σ is the source-class reduction cost, then 

|V (H)| ≤ 2k + 1 , |E(H)| ≤ 3k, σ + k ≤ 2 OPT DIST (G, s ),

and OPT DIST (H, q ) ≤ OPT DIST (G, s ) ≤ σ + OPT DIST (H, q ) ≤ 2 OPT DIST (G, s ).

3Combining this same-input charge with the current deterministic directed-SSSP algorithm of Duan, Mao, Shu, and Yin [DMSY26] gives one explicit efficient uniform algorithm using 

O

> (

OPT DIST 

> √

log(2 + OPT DIST ) log log(4 + OPT DIST )

> )

charged operations after linear topology preprocessing.                          

> Result statement type uniformity computation status
> P∗=ρfwd exact, all topologies uniform upper efficient DAG rectangle exact baseline uniform efficient
> H2nonrectangle exact family-specific lower endpoint computer-assisted
> Hklaw entropy-tight asymptotic constructive upper efficient Transcript-cone theorem exact, all topologies ratio one PSPACE, possibly exponential Active-core lifting sublogarithmic factor uniform efficient

Table 1: The theorem hierarchy and scope. “Exact” refers to charged numerical operations, not ordinary running time. 

Organization. Section 2 fixes the output contract and program model. Sections 3 and 4 give the exact arithmetic law and its acyclic control case. Sections 5 and 6 develop cyclic conflict, endogenous sorting, and the Pareto law. Sections 7 and 8 introduce OPT DIST and prove the transcript-cone equivalence. Section 9 locates the efficient boundary. Detailed proofs and reproducibility material follow in the appendices. 

# 2 Model, output tasks, and benchmarks 

2.1 Rooted directed topology 

Let G = ( V, E ) be a finite directed multigraph with distinguished source s. Every vertex is reachable from s. Each primitive arc e ∈ E has an independent weight we ∈ R≥0. Parallel primitives, ties, zero weights, and zero-weight cycles are allowed. A self-loop is permitted syntactically but is benchmark-neutral: a nonnegative self-loop never improves a distance, so it can be ignored in one direction and replaced by the zero literal in the other. Unreachable labels, if any, are removed before the numerical instance is formed. For v ∈ V , nonnegativity gives a simple shortest-path representative, and 

dw(s, v ) = min 

> {∑
> e∈P

we : P is a directed s–v path 

> }

. (10) 

Output contracts. The task DIST requires one existing finite numerical register equal to dw(s, v )for every labeled v̸ = s. It does not require an order of the distances, a settlement order, a predecessor tree, or witness paths. The task DO additionally outputs a total vertex order nondecreasing in distance, with a fixed rule for ties. The task SPT outputs witness predecessor arcs. All complexity quantities below refer to DIST unless explicitly subscripted otherwise. 42.2 Topology-specialized comparison–addition programs 

A deterministic topology-specialized CA program is finite code with finite topology-dependent discrete advice. Its initial numerical registers are the primitive weights and finitely many literal real constants. The charged operations are: 1. a binary addition of two already materialized finite registers, creating a new materialized register; and 2. a comparison of two already materialized finite registers, branching on <, =, or >.The program may branch adaptively, use equality outcomes, add a register to itself, retain or reuse arbitrary registers, form mixed or non-path sums, compare aggregates, and share work across output labels. Copying, selecting, indexing, and discrete control are free only when they reveal no new numerical information. There is no free subtraction, numerical scalar multiplication, arbitrary linear-form construction, bit inspection, or output of an unevaluated expression. An output is legal only if its numerical value is already held in a register. This model is intentionally more permissive than relaxation-only and path-register models. Every lower bound below therefore has to survive mixed supports, constants, repeated operands, equality faces, and adaptive register reuse. 

2.3 Split resources 

For a program A and a weighting w, let CA(G, s, w ) and PA(G, s, w ) be the comparisons and additions on that execution. Define 

CA(G, s ) = sup 

> w≥0

CA(G, s, w ), PA(G, s ) = sup 

> w≥0

PA(G, s, w ). (11) The coordinate optima are 

C∗(G, s ) = inf  

> A

CA(G, s ), P ∗(G, s ) = inf  

> A

PA(G, s ), (12) and for b ∈ N0 the budgeted comparison optimum is 

C∗ 

> b

(G, s ) = inf {CA(G, s ) : A computes DIST and PA(G, s ) ≤ b}. (13) The value is + ∞ when the budget is infeasible. The upward-closed resource region is 

R(G, s ) = {(c, p ) ∈ N20 : ∃A computing DIST with CA ≤ c, P A ≤ p}. (14) Since all finite costs are integers and a finite Bellman–Ford program exists, the finite infima used in this paper are attained. A coordinatewise optimum does not imply that one program attains both coordinates. 

2.4 Total numerical benchmark 

For one program A, define its worst-case total charged cost by 

TA(G, s ) = sup 

> w≥0
> (

CA(G, s, w ) + PA(G, s, w )), OPT DIST (G, s ) = inf  

> A

TA(G, s ). (15) The supremum is taken after adding the two resources on the same execution. In general OPT DIST 

is not C∗ + P ∗, nor is it defined by adding two separately optimized worst cases. This same-program scalar benchmark is the reference quantity in sections J and K. 5Uniform algorithms and RAM work. A uniform algorithm has one finite description and takes ( G, s ) as input. Its topology preprocessing, ordinary RAM work, memory, comparisons, and additions are distinct resources. “Exact numerical universal optimality” means equality with OPT DIST in charged operations, with no assertion about the ordinary computation selecting those operations. “Efficient universality” additionally requires O(m + n) topology preprocessing and RAM work bounded by O(m + n + C + P ) on each query. 

2.5 Affine coefficient records 

On a fixed reached branch, every materialized register has the affine form 

R(w) = ⟨a, w ⟩ + α, a ∈ NE 

> 0

,

where α belongs to the field generated by the program’s literal constants. Primitive inputs have unit coefficient vectors, literals have zero coefficient vector, and a charged addition adds the two records. Comparisons affect control but not coefficients. These records describe arbitrary held aggregates; they do not impose a path-register normal form. 

# 3 Exact addition complexity 

Parallel primitives with the same ordered endpoints form an endpoint class ; write E for the nonempty classes. A total order ≺ of V is rooted if s is first and every other vertex has an incoming class from an earlier vertex. Define 

ρfwd (G, s ) = max  

> ≺rooted
> ∣∣

{(u, v ) ∈ E : u̸ = s, u ≺ v}∣∣.

This parameter counts forward nonsource endpoint classes, not primitive arcs. It is NP-hard to evaluate, but the algorithm below does not evaluate it. 

Theorem 3.1 (Exact addition law) . For every finite reachable directed multigraph with nonnegative real weights, 

P ∗(G, s ) = ρfwd (G, s ).

One uniform endpoint-class version of Dijkstra attains this value on every topology. 

Upper bound. Reduce each parallel class to its minimum. When Dijkstra settles u, create 

d(u) + μuv only for a class whose tail is not s and whose head is not yet settled. The settlement order is rooted, so the additions are exactly the classes counted by its forward count and are at most ρfwd . A weighting realizes every rooted order, which also shows that this analysis is tight for the algorithm. 

Lower-bound architecture. Fix a maximizing rooted order and retain its forward classes, obtaining a rooted spanning DAG D. Algebraically independent vertex potentials plus small independent slacks give one positive input on which every s–v path in D ties at the potential of v.On the reached adaptive branch, each held register is an affine form with a nonnegative integral coefficient vector. Equality normals must span the full common-endpoint path-difference kernel: otherwise a two-sided kernel perturbation preserves the branch but changes the correct minimum at some label. Projecting the coefficient forms along this equality space reduces materialization to a support-fiber process. A binary addition can open at most one new nonsource endpoint fiber, 6so all ρfwd forward fibers require distinct additions. The argument permits mixed sums, repeated operands, literals, equality branches, and reuse across outputs. The full kernel and fiber-opening proofs are in sections A and B. Two points prevent common shortcuts. First, the hard input is chosen after the competing finite program is fixed. The perturbation radius is smaller than every reached strict margin, while its two signs lie in the nullspace of every reached equality normal. Adaptivity therefore does not let the program change branches to avoid the kernel argument. Second, the fiber count is performed after projecting away precisely those equalities. A register containing many endpoint classes, or several copies of one primitive, is still one coefficient point; joining two old fibers can open at most one new fiber in the quotient. The bound counts physical additions, not syntactic path extensions. Literal constants require no separate assumption. Correct distance outputs are positively homogeneous in the primitive weights. Along a scaling ray, each finite constant is lower order; after one finite transcript is fixed, the leading coefficient records determine every nonidentity comparison. Comparisons whose leading forms coincide remain forced equalities. The theorem therefore covers affine registers rather than only homogeneous straight-line programs. 

# 4 The acyclic baseline 

Let G now be a reachable DAG with n vertices, m primitive arcs, q endpoint classes, and ds

source-out classes. 

Theorem 4.1 (Exact DAG resource rectangle) .

R(G, s ) = {(c, p ) ∈ N20 : c ≥ m − n + 1 , p ≥ q − ds}.

Thus one topological dynamic program simultaneously attains both coordinate optima. 

Class reduction uses m − q comparisons, and selecting one of the incoming class candidates at each nonsource vertex uses q − (n − 1) more. The same schedule performs one addition for every nonsource class, giving the corner ( m − n + 1 , q − ds). For the lower bound, the potential-tie input above is now available on the whole graph. Equality-rank forces m − n + 1 comparisons, and the projected fiber argument forces q − ds additions on that same execution. The detailed proof is in section C. On DAGs the two resources are therefore perfectly aligned. This is the control case: the next section shows that a minimal active cycle destroys the rectangle. 

# 5 From cyclic conflict to endogenous sorting 

5.1 A minimal nonrectangle 

Let H2 have vertices s, x, v, w and arcs 

s → x : a, s → v : b, v → x : z, x → v : u, s → w : c, w → x : q, x → w : p. 

Its distances are 

dx = min {a, b + z, c + q}, dv = min {b, d x + u}, dw = min {c, d x + p}.

7sxvw 

> abzucqp

Figure 1: The two-spoke shared-hub atom H2. Two feedback spokes compete for one hub value and then reuse it in the opposite direction. 

Theorem 5.1 (Exact cyclic nonrectangularity) .

C∗(H2) = 4 , P ∗(H2) = 2 , C∗ 

> 2

(H2) = 5 .

Hence the coordinatewise corner (4 , 2) is infeasible. 

The two scalar upper bounds are short explicit programs. Four comparisons follow the displayed distance formulas using four additions; a case split on the three raw source values gives an addition-optimal two-addition program. The addition lower bound is theorem 3.1. A geometric wall argument gives C∗ ≥ 4. The final inequality C∗ 

> 2

≥ 5 is computer-assisted. Its mathematical reduction restricts a hypothetical four-comparison, two-addition program to eight full-dimensional strict cells. Recession removes literals without changing any strict outcome. A deterministic exhaustive closure then enumerates every comparison of held registers and every legal addition, including repeated operands and arbitrary mixed supports; free aliasing and selection do not create coefficient forms. The audited run visits 975 states and rules out all terminal states within the budget. The exact cell witnesses, certificate boundary, and independent verifier are given in section D and the repository verifier package. The human part of the comparison lower bound is small enough to expose. The eight cells carry the affine output triples (a, b, c ), (a, b, a + p), (a, a + u, c ), (a, a + u, a + p),

(b + z, b, c ), (b + z, b, b + z + p), (c + q, b, c ), (c + q, c + q + u, c ).

A three-comparison tree would have at most eight strict leaves, hence exactly one leaf per cell and no query hyperplane cutting a cell interior. The facet adjacency graph is connected, but every separating facet normal cuts the interior of another cell, a contradiction. Thus C∗ ≥ 4 without computation. Exhaustive closure is used only to show that the added restriction P ≤ 2 raises the comparison depth from four to five. The verifier state consists of a held set of nonnegative integer coefficient vectors, the surviving portions of the eight strict cones, and the remaining budgets. Addition inserts every componentwise sum of an unordered pair of held vectors, including a repeated operand. Comparison branches on every difference of held vectors; exact integer cone certificates discard infeasible outcomes. A terminal state requires one fixed held output triple on every surviving cone. Aliases are therefore irrelevant, and no held vector is assumed to encode a path. 

5.2 The shared-hub family 

For k ≥ 1, the graph Hk has vertices s, x, v 1, . . . , v k and arcs 

s → x : a, s → vi : bi, vi → x : zi, x → vi : ui.

8Thus 

dx = min {a, b 1 + z1, . . . , b k + zk}, di = min {bi, d x + ui}.s xv1

vi

vk

ab1

bi

bk

z1

u1

zi

ui

zk

uk

Figure 2: The family Hk. Each spoke can contribute an inward hub candidate or consume the final hub value through an outward candidate. Every rooted order chooses exactly one forward class from each bidirected spoke, so P ∗(Hk) = k.The unrestricted comparison optimum is linear: fix the hub on an open product family to get k

independent output choices, and use the direct formulas for the matching upper bound. 

Theorem 5.2 (Addition-optimal endogenous sorting) . If S(k) is the optimal pairwise-comparison sorting number, then 

⌈log 2(k!) ⌉ ≤ C∗ 

> k

(Hk) ≤ S(k) + 2 k. 

Consequently C∗ 

> k

(Hk) = k log 2 k + O(k), whereas C∗(Hk) = Θ( k).

The lower bound is deliberately information-theoretic. Addition optimality forces the comparison transcript to distinguish all k! scale-separated spoke orders; aggregate comparisons are not asserted to simulate pairwise key comparisons, so the stronger lower bound S(k) is not claimed. 

# 6 The comparison–addition law on Hk

For 0 ≤ r ≤ k, put 

Fk(r) = C∗

> k+r

(Hk), Λk,r = log 2

k!

r!( r + 1) k−r .

For h ≤ k, write k = qh + t, 0 ≤ t < h , and set Γ k,h = log 2

(k!/(( h!) qt!) ); set Γ k,k +1 = 0. 

Theorem 6.1 (Deterministic entropy-tight Pareto law) . Uniformly for 0 ≤ r ≤ k,

max {k, ⌈Λk,r ⌉} ≤ Fk(r) ≤ Γk,r +1 + o(Γ k,r +1 ) + O(k).

In particular, 

Fk(r) = Θ( k + Λ k,r ) .

Whenever Λk,r /k → ∞ , the sharper conclusion is Fk(r) = (1 + o(1))Λ k,r . No additive-O(k)

deterministic approximation to Λk,r is claimed. 

9Lower bound: exposure, deadlines, entropy. Call the pair Qi = {bi, z i} exposed when one held support first contains both primitives. After t additions, at most t disjoint pairs are exposed: add at most one edge per addition to a graph connecting the two operand-support components; a component containing p designated pairs needs at least p such edges. This cumulative statement remains valid even when one late addition exposes several pairs. Fix a scale-separated main order π. If Qπs is hidden after s + r additions, a synchronized threat makes it essential to the hub and the k − s later spoke outputs. These k − s + 1 distinct values are all still unmaterialized, but only k − s additions remain—a contradiction. Thus cπs ≤ s + r. On one fixed transcript, rank pairs by exposure time; cumulative capacity gives rank( i) ≤ ci. Compatible permutations therefore satisfy σs ≤ s + r, of which there are exactly 

B(k, r ) = r!( r + 1) k−r.

The k! main orders and a binary transcript tree yield the entropy lower bound in theorem 6.1. This causal fan-out proof replaces an invalid distinct-first-witness charging argument. 

Upper bound: weak order, then roll. Use deterministic multiple selection to partition the 

bi into increasing blocks of size at most h = r + 1. Its comparison cost is Γ k,h + o(Γ k,h ) + O(k). Scan blocks until one crosses the current hub candidate. Complete earlier blocks need only inward candidates, later blocks need only outward candidates, and at most h − 1 = r elements of the crossing block need both. The addition count is at most k + r and the scan costs O(k) comparisons. Full scale synchronization, counting, and rolling proofs appear in sections F to I.        

> rin budget k+rFk(r) r= 0 sorting scale entropy Λ k,r
> r=k
> linear floor

Figure 3: The proven asymptotic regimes of the Hk tradeoff. The curve is schematic; the theorem specifies the deterministic lower-order term. 

# 7 From split resources to a same-program benchmark 

The preceding results expose a distinction that is invisible on DAGs. There, one program attains the lower-left corner of the resource rectangle. On H2, however, the best comparison program and the best addition program cannot be the same program, and on Hk enforcing the addition optimum can raise comparison cost from linear to sorting scale. Hence a single-number benchmark for the whole numerical computation must charge both resources along one execution, as in equation (15). For comparison with the split frontier, define the balanced envelope 

Env (G, s ) = min 

> b≥0
> (

b + C∗ 

> b

(G, s )). (66) This quantity chooses one feasible budgeted program; it is not C∗ + P ∗.10 Proposition 7.1 (The split frontier approximates the scalar optimum) . For every finite reachable rooted topology, 

OPT DIST (G, s ) ≤ Env (G, s ) ≤ 2 OPT DIST (G, s ). (67) 

Proof. For any budget b, one program attaining C∗ 

> b

has at most b additions and at most C∗

> b

comparisons on every input, hence scalar cost at most their sum. Minimizing gives the first inequality. Conversely, let A attain K = OPT DIST (G, s ), and put b = sup w PA(w), c = sup w CA(w). Both are at most K, and the same program witnesses C∗ 

> b

(G, s ) ≤ c. Therefore Env (G, s ) ≤ b + C∗ 

> b

(G, s ) ≤

b + c ≤ 2K. No step combines coordinate optima belonging to different programs. The factor-two relation is useful but not the endpoint. The next section gives an exact game for OPT DIST itself. The game charges an addition and a comparison identically and takes the maximum over feasible comparison outcomes on the same path, so its value is the scalar optimum rather than the sum of two coordinatewise maxima. 

# 8 Exact numerical universal optimality 

The benchmark OPT DIST allows a different finite program for each topology. Exact universal optimality asks whether one interpreter can match those nonuniform programs without paying an extra charged operation. On a fixed branch, every register is an affine form ⟨a, w ⟩ + α. A recession argument scales the input while holding the finite literal set fixed. It converts every finite execution to an equivalent homogeneous execution on the nonnegative orthant: literals become the zero form, strict comparisons keep their eventual sign, and equality branches are retained exactly when their homogeneous normals vanish. The normal form is used only after a finite program and branch are fixed. In the homogeneous game, M is the finite set of coefficient vectors of held registers and Γ is the sequence of physical comparisons already made. They define the transcript region (a relatively open cone with its equality faces retained explicitly) 

P(Γ) = {w ∈ RE 

> ≥0

: w satisfies every outcome in Γ }.

A label v is ready only if one fixed vector in M equals dw(v) for every w in this entire cone. A move either adds two vectors in M or compares two of them and follows every feasible outcome. Let WIN G(M, Γ, K ) mean that all continuations can be made terminal within K further moves. 

Theorem 8.1 (Transcript-cone equivalence) . For every topology and integer K ≥ 0,

WIN G({0, e 1, . . . , e m}, ∅, K ) ⇐⇒ OPT DIST (G, s ) ≤ K. 

A program induces a game strategy by recording its actually materialized forms and physical comparison outcomes. Correctness at a leaf supplies one fixed ready register per label over the whole cone; otherwise two inputs with the same transcript would require different materialized outputs. Conversely, every game move is a legal physical operation, and readiness supplies legal output registers. Recession transfers the two directions between affine and homogeneous executions, including equality faces, zero weights, parallel arcs, and zero-weight cycles. Duplicate forms may be discarded because recreating one cannot help. The quantifier over the whole cone is essential. It prevents a leaf from selecting one register at one weighting and a different register at another weighting that produced the same physical 11 transcript. Conversely, it does not require one common shortest path: different paths may certify the same fixed held form at different points of the cone. Zero-weight cycles add no output form because every distance has a simple shortest-path representative. Parallel primitives remain separate initial coordinates. When a transcript has no strict outcome, its cone also contains the all-zero input; transcripts with strict outcomes are handled directly on their relatively open regions, not by a generic-limit argument. 

Corollary 8.2 (No numerical uniformity tax) . There is one deterministic uniform interpreter 

Upspace such that 

TUpspace (G, s ) = OPT DIST (G, s )

on every finite reachable topology. 

The interpreter computes the least winning budget and then chooses the first winning legal move under a canonical ordering. This is genuinely uniform: the topology-specific strategy is reconstructed from the finite input graph, not supplied as advice. 

Theorem 8.3 (Complexity of policy generation) . An optimal next action in the transcript-cone game can be generated in polynomial space. The direct search may take 2poly( n+m) ordinary time. 

Bellman–Ford gives a polynomial charged-budget cap. Within that cap, coefficient entries and the held-form set have polynomial encodings, and there are polynomially many candidate moves at a state. Transcript feasibility is linear programming. Nonreadiness has a polynomial certificate consisting, for each held candidate, of a cone point and a strictly better simple-path form, so readiness lies in coNP. Depth-first minimax stores only one polynomial-size state per recursion level. These claims concern space, not time; the detailed normal-form, readiness, and search proofs are in sections J, L and M. 

# 9 Efficient uniformity 

The ratio-one interpreter settles existence but not efficient navigation. A topology-only reduction relates the best current polynomial-time bound to the same benchmark. Delete every arc ( u, v ) for which v dominates u; such an arc only closes a nonnegative subwalk. Reduce each remaining parallel source class to its minimum, at total comparison cost σ = ∑

> v

(pv −1) +.Let E◦ be the remaining primitives with nonsource tail and k = |E◦|. The canonical core H consists of their endpoints, the primitives of E◦, and one virtual source register for each retained source class. Then |V (H)| ≤ 2k + 1 and |E(H)| ≤ 3k.

Theorem 9.1 (Active-core factorization) .

OPT DIST (H, q ) ≤ OPT DIST (G, s ) ≤ σ + OPT DIST (H, q ) ≤ 2 OPT DIST (G, s ).

Moreover, σ + k ≤ 2 OPT DIST (G, s ).

The simulations merely set deleted inputs to zero or alias source-class minima, so they preserve arbitrary mixed-sum competitors. The quantitative charge is same-input: two opposite low–high dominator orders ensure that one rooted order exposes enough active edges, while the potential-tie construction forces the corresponding comparisons and additions on a single execution. More precisely, for a rooted order ≺, let m≺ and q≺ be the forward primitive-arc and endpoint-class counts. The potential-tie input forces at least m≺ − n + 1 + q≺ − ds charged operations on one 12 execution. A low–high preorder of the dominator tree and the preorder obtained by reversing every child list place each active nonsource arc forward in at least one of the two orders, except for the explicitly charged source multiplicities. Averaging gives σ + k ≤ 2 OPT DIST . This is stronger than adding separate worst-case comparison and addition lower bounds. Using the deterministic directed-SSSP algorithm of Duan, Mao, Shu, and Yin [DMSY26] on this core gives the current efficient endpoint. 

Theorem 9.2 (Efficient topology-wise bound) . There is one explicit deterministic uniform exact-

DIST algorithm with O(m + n) topology preprocessing and 

TU (G, s ) = O

> (

OPT DIST (G, s )

> √

log +(2 + OPT DIST (G, s )) log log +(4 + OPT DIST (G, s )) 

> )

.

Its ordinary query work is O(m + n + CU + PU ) under the stated bookkeeping convention. 

The external SSSP routine is used only as a black box; the new statement is the active-core lifting to a topology-sensitive numerical benchmark. Thus exact optimal policy existence is settled, while a polynomial-time constant-competitive navigation rule remains open. Full deletion, virtual-source, dominator-order, and accounting arguments are in sections K and N. 

# 10 Related work 

Universal optimality and output contracts. Haeupler, Hladík, Rozhoň, Tarjan, and Tětek prove that Dijkstra, with a suitable beyond-worst-case heap, is universally optimal for producing vertices in distance order [HHR +24]. Van der Hoog, Rotenberg, and Rutschmann give a simpler construction and analysis [vdHRR25]. Their benchmark distinguishes distance orders as outputs. Our topology-specific benchmark instead asks only for materialized labeled distances; section O makes the boundary explicit. 

Directed numerical SSSP below sorting. Duan et al. broke the sorting barrier for deterministic directed SSSP in the comparison–addition setting [DMM +25]. The subsequent bound of Duan, Mao, Shu, and Yin [DMSY26] is the efficient black box in section K. These works give uniform worst-case running-time algorithms; they do not characterize the fixed-topology same-program optimum OPT DIST . Our lifting theorem is not a new construction of their collective shortest-path routine. 

Algebraic path complexity. Mahr gives graph-sensitive semiring-operation lower bounds for fixed-network path problems and tight adapted schemes on cycle-free graphs [Mah82]. Jerrum and Snir study exact straight-line semiring complexity [JS82], and Jukna develops tropical-circuit and dynamic-program lower bounds [Juk15]. These are important predecessors, but their program/output requirements differ from adaptive comparison–addition programs computing only explicit single-source numerical coordinates. Our arbitrary-topology addition proof works directly with one adaptive branch and does not convert it to a path circuit. 

Comparison–addition and relaxation models. Spira and Pan study verification lower bounds for shortest paths [SP75]; Pettie studies comparison–addition APSP [Pet02]; and Pettie and Ramachandran study real-weighted undirected SSSP [PR05]. Eppstein analyzes nonadaptive relaxation sequences [Epp23], and Atalig et al. give lower bounds for an adaptive relaxation-based 13 model [AHS +24]. Our competitors may compare arbitrary held aggregates and use mixed sums, equality, literals, and cross-output sharing; conversely, our conclusions are specific to fixed directed topologies and labeled DIST. 

Selection and partial orders. The upper side of the Hk law uses deterministic multiple selection [KMMS05] and the related partial-order-production framework [CFJ +10]. Their deterministic guarantees have the form information lower bound plus a lower-order information term and O(k); we do not strengthen that to a uniform additive-O(k) statement. No novelty is claimed for these primitives. The contribution is the SSSP reduction showing that an addition budget induces banded-permutation entropy and that a bounded-width weak order supports the rolling computation. 

Structural decompositions. Tarjan’s dominator strong-component framework decomposes algebraic path problems [Tar81]. Linear-time dominator algorithms support our topology-only active reduction [AHLT99]. Recent Acyclic-Connected-tree work gives topology-dependent algorithms for SPT and DIST under a different decomposition objective [SBJ25]. Our canonical core is used only to preserve and lift the unrestricted scalar benchmark.     

> Closest line of work Its benchmark or restriction Boundary of the present claims Haeupler et al.; van der Hoog et al. topology-wise universal optimality for producing a distance order labeled DIST only; exact charged numerical optimum rather than an order-sensitive comparison benchmark Duan et al. 2025; Duan et al. 2026 uniform worst-case running time for directed numerical SSSP fixed-topology resource identities and lifting to OPT DIST ;no novelty claim for their SSSP routines Mahr; Jerrum–Snir; Jukna straight-line semiring or tropical circuit complexity adaptive comparisons, affine literals, mixed held sums, and explicit labeled register output Pettie; Pettie–Ramachandran comparison–addition upper bounds for APSP or undirected SSSP directed fixed-topology lower bounds and the two-resource feasible region Eppstein; Atalig et al. nonadaptive or adaptive relaxation-based lower bounds competitors may compare arbitrary held aggregates and are not restricted to relaxations Multiple selection and partial-order production information-efficient production of selected ranks or a target partial order standard upper-bound primitive; the addition-budget reduction and causal fan-out lower bound are graph-specific

Table 2: Scope comparison with the closest prior frameworks. Our novelty statements are correspondingly narrow. We claim the displayed fixed-topology identities and separations in the stated CA model, not priority for comparison–addition shortest paths, graph-sensitive algebraic bounds, selection, or universal optimality as general ideas. Atargeted literature search through September 2026 located no source stating the same ρfwd identity, cyclic nonrectangle, arithmetic-budget entropy law, or transcript-cone equivalence; this negative search is evidence for positioning, not a proof of priority. 

# 11 Interpretation of the resource theory 

Three distinctions organize the results. The first is between output contracts. A comparison lower bound for producing a distance order need not apply to labeled DIST, because the latter may materialize all coordinates without certifying their relative order. Conversely, the shared-hub family shows that removing the order from the output does not remove ordering from every optimal computation: a tight arithmetic budget can force a transcript with sorting-scale information. The relevant order is therefore endogenous to the resource constraint, not prescribed by the task. The second distinction is between coordinatewise and same-program optimization. On a DAG, the potential-tie input makes the comparison and addition lower bounds coexist and a topological 14 program attains their common corner. The graph H2 is the smallest audited obstruction to extrapolating that geometry through cycles. Once the feasible region is nonrectangular, C∗ + P ∗

ceases to describe any physical algorithm. The benchmark OPT DIST repairs the quantifiers: it adds the two charges on an execution, takes the worst weighting for that program, and only then minimizes over programs. The factor-two envelope in theorem 7.1 is useful for intuition, but the transcript-cone game is needed for an exact statement. The third distinction is between existence and navigation. The ratio-one interpreter is not merely a nonuniform optimal policy restated. Its canonical minimax search reconstructs the next topology-specific action from the graph, the held forms, and the observed cone. This removes every charged-operation advantage of nonuniform advice. It does not compress the search needed to find that action. The active-core theorem addresses the latter problem by shrinking the numerical instance to size O(OPT DIST ) and invoking a current uniform SSSP routine, at the price of a sublogarithmic factor. A future constant-competitive algorithm would have to navigate enough of the exact game implicitly, or find a different certificate of a good move. The proof methods follow the same hierarchy. The addition theorem is algebraic and arbitrary-topology: kernel perturbations and quotient fibers exclude mixed-sum shortcuts. The Hk lower bound is causal: support connectivity limits cumulative exposure, while fan-out turns a hidden pair into more unmaterialized labeled outputs than the remaining addition budget can create. The universal theorem is semantic: readiness is quantified over an entire transcript cone rather than over one representative weighting. These mechanisms are complementary; none is presented as a generic lower bound for every computational model of shortest paths. Several natural extensions remain outside the present scope. Randomized programs would require distributional versions of both the transcript-cone game and the Hk threat family. Allowing subtraction or scalar multiplication destroys the monotone support arguments used for additions. Replacing independent arc weights by correlated or succinctly encoded inputs changes both the coefficient geometry and the appropriate cost measure. Even within the present model, an exact comparison characterization for arbitrary cyclic topologies is open. The current paper therefore supplies a complete addition coordinate, exact and asymptotic cyclic witnesses, and an exact scalar game—not a closed formula for every two-resource frontier. 

# 12 Limitations and open problems 

Model scope. The results concern deterministic finite comparison–addition programs on in-dependent nonnegative real primitive weights. They do not provide randomized lower bounds, bit-complexity bounds for encoded numbers, or arithmetic results in a model with free subtraction or scalar multiplication. The requirement that each labeled distance be an actually held register is essential. 

Scope of the resource characterizations. The addition coordinate is exact on every topology and the full region is exact on DAGs. The entropy-tight Pareto law is a theorem for the shared-hub family Hk, not an arbitrary-topology frontier formula. Deterministically we prove a lower-order entropy overhead plus O(k), not a uniform additive-O(k) correction to Λ k,r . Exact comparison complexity on general cyclic topologies remains open. 

Computer-assisted boundary. The endpoint assertion C∗ 

> 2

(H2) = 5 uses an exact finite exhaus-tive certificate after a mathematical reduction to homogeneous coefficient states. The verifier checks every legal addition and comparison action and validates cone feasibility or infeasibility by integer 15 certificates; see section P.3. The other principal theorems have symbolic proofs independent of finite regression. 

Numerical versus efficient universal optimality. The transcript-cone interpreter proves ratio one only for charged additions and comparisons. Its exact action search may take exponential ordinary time, and the PSPACE theorem is not a claim of practicality. Conversely, the active-core algorithm is efficient but retains a sublogarithmic competitive factor. 

Open Problem 12.1 (Efficient exact uniformity) . Is there an explicit uniform deterministic algorithm that, on every rooted directed topology, computes exact labeled DIST with RAM U (G, s, w ) = O(m + n + OPT DIST (G, s )) for all nonnegative weightings, and hence uses O(OPT DIST (G, s )) charged numerical operations? The ratio-one theorem changes the interpretation of this question. The remaining obstacle is not existence of an optimal numerical policy, nor the size of an unfolded policy tree. It is fast, implicit navigation of a policy from the topology and the observed transcript. 

# 13 Conclusion 

Removing distance ordering from exact directed SSSP exposes a distinct topology-specific theory. Arithmetic materialization has the exact invariant ρfwd ; DAGs align comparison and addition costs; and a minimal active cycle breaks that alignment. In the shared-hub family, saving additions forces enough internal information to recover sorting scale, yielding an entropy-tight Pareto law although the requested output remains a labeled vector. That conflict identifies the right total benchmark: the same-program worst-case sum OPT DIST .Transcript cones then show that one fixed uniform interpreter matches every specialized numerical optimum exactly, with a polynomial representation of the online state. Nonuniformity therefore offers no advantage in charged numerical operations. What it can still offer is efficient access to the right next operation. Canonical active-core lifting and collective directed SSSP give the current sublogarithmic competitive factor, leaving theorem 12.1 as the central question: can exact numerical universal optimality be navigated in linear topology overhead and constant amortized ordinary work per charged action? 16 A The forward topology parameter 

For distinct vertices u, v , the endpoint class 

Euv = {e ∈ E : tail( e) = u, head( e) = v}

collects parallel arcs. Let E be the set of nonempty endpoint classes and let q = |E|. The total number of arcs is m = |E|. For a class Euv , its minimum input value can be selected with |Euv | − 1comparisons and no additions. A source-out class is already a raw input candidate; a non-source tail requires a path-extension addition when its tail is settled before its head. 

Definition A.1 (Rooted order) . A total order ≺ of V is rooted at s if s is first and every v̸ = s has an endpoint class ( u, v ) with u ≺ v.For a rooted order define 

fG(≺) = ∣∣{(u, v ) ∈ E : u̸ = s, u ≺ v}∣∣, ρfwd (G, s ) = max   

> ≺rooted

fG(≺). (16) The maximum is finite. On a simple loopless graph, the related arc-level maximum-forward count differs by the source out-degree; endpoint classes are the right form for multigraph addition accounting. 

Lemma A.2 (DAG specialization) . If G is a reachable directed acyclic multigraph and ds is its number of source-out endpoint classes, then 

ρfwd (G, s ) = q − ds. (17) 

Proof. A topological order is rooted and makes every non-source endpoint class forward, giving 

q − ds. No order can count more than all those classes. 

Lemma A.3 (Realizing a rooted order) . Every rooted order s = v1 ≺ · · · ≺ vn is the strict Dijkstra settlement order of some strictly positive weighting. On that weighting every forward endpoint class is processed before its head is settled. Proof. Choose 0 = π(s) < π (v2) < · · · < π (vn) < 1. Give every forward arc the weight π(v) − π(u)and every backward arc a weight in (2 , 3). The forward classes contain a rooted arborescence, so each vertex has a forward path of length π(v). Any path using a backward arc has length greater than two, while every forward path has length below one. Hence d(v) = π(v) and the strict settlement order is the chosen one. 

Remark A.4. Computing ρfwd itself is NP-hard by the standard reduction from directed feedback arc set [Kar72]: add a new source with an arc to every old vertex, so every order is rooted and maximizing forward classes is maximum acyclic subgraph. The addition-optimal uniform algorithm below never computes ρfwd .

# B The addition coordinate on arbitrary topologies 

We first settle the resource coordinate that is insensitive to the comparison budget. The proof is deliberately phrased in terms of coefficient records, not path registers. This distinction is what makes the result apply to arbitrary adaptive programs with mixed and non-path sums. 17 B.1 A uniform upper bound 

Reduce each endpoint class Euv to a minimum register μuv = min e∈Euv we. Run Dijkstra with a fixed deterministic tie rule. When u is settled, ignore a class whose head is already settled. If u = s,the class minimum is already a primitive candidate. Otherwise create the single register d(u) + μuv 

and relax the head. Copy the final settled register to each labeled output. 

Lemma B.1 (Endpoint-class Dijkstra bound) . For every nonnegative weighting w,

PA(G, s, w ) ≤ ρfwd (G, s ). (18) 

For every fixed topology, equality holds for some strictly positive weighting. Proof. The settlement order is rooted: every nonsource vertex is first reached from the source or from a previously settled vertex. The algorithm adds once for each class ( u, v ) with u̸ = s and u

earlier than v, and never for a backward class or a class entering an already settled head. The count is therefore at most fG(≺w) ≤ ρfwd (G, s ). Zero weights and ties only change the deterministic rooted order. Conversely, choose a rooted order maximizing fG and apply theorem A.3; the algorithm performs one addition for every counted class. The algorithm is uniform. Class formation can be done by topology preprocessing, class reduction costs exactly m − q comparisons, and the remaining control work is ordinary Dijkstra bookkeeping. The theorem below concerns only additions; no computation of the NP-hard parameter ρfwd is needed. 

B.2 Three algebraic tools 

Fix a rooted order ≺ and let H contain all arcs in endpoint classes forward under ≺. Then H is a rooted spanning DAG. Write BH for its signed vertex–arc incidence matrix, with a column 1v − 1u

for an arc ( u, v ). 

Lemma B.2 (Common-endpoint path differences) . Let H be a rooted reachable DAG. If Pv is the set of directed s–v paths, then 

ker BH = spanof {χP − χQ : v ∈ V, P, Q ∈ P v}. (19) 

Proof. Every displayed difference has zero incidence. Choose a rooted out-arborescence T . For each non-tree arc e = ( u, v ), the path Tue is an s–v path: otherwise Tu and e would contain a directed cycle. The vector 

ze = χTu + 1e − χTv

is therefore a common-endpoint path difference. Its own non-tree coordinate is one and all other non-tree coordinates are zero, so the ze are linearly independent. There are |E(H)| − (|V | − 1) = dim ker BH of them, proving the claim. Parallel arcs are covered because they are simply distinct non-tree coordinates when necessary. 

Lemma B.3 (Generic-tie and slack projection) . Let E(H) and E(G) \ E(H) be denoted by EH and 

EO. For a fixed finite program, there is a strictly positive weighting with the following properties on the reached execution: 1. every H-path to v has the same length π(v) and every path using an outside arc is strictly longer; 

18 2. if two reached registers are equal, their outside coefficient vectors agree, their H-coefficient difference is in ker BH , and their constant terms agree; 3. a correct output for v has no outside coefficient, has zero constant term, and its H coefficient has incidence 1v − 1s; and 4. if z is orthogonal to all reached equality normals projected to EH , then both sufficiently small perturbations wH ± εz preserve positivity, the outside-path gap, and the complete adaptive branch. Proof. Let K be the countable field generated by the program’s finite literals. Choose 0 = π(s) <π(v) < 1 algebraically independent over K in the chosen order cone. For e = ( u, v ) ∈ EH , set 

we = π(v) − π(u). For each e ∈ EO, choose an independent slack σe ∈ (2 , 3) over K(π(v) : v̸ = s)and set we = π(v) − π(u) + σe. These weights are positive. Telescoping shows that an H-path to v

has length π(v) < 1, whereas a path using an outside arc has length greater than two. On the finite branch, each register has the affine form aH · wH + aO · wO + γ. An equality between two such forms is a polynomial identity in the independent slacks and potentials. Independence first forces aO = a′

> O

, and then forces BH (aH − a′ 

> H

) = 0 and γ = γ′. Applying the same argument to a correct output, whose value is π(v), forces aO = 0, γ = 0, and the displayed divergence. For completeness, the perturbation radius can be chosen explicitly after the finite branch is fixed. Let g > 0 be the minimum baseline gap between an outside-arc simple path and an H-path to the same endpoint, and let M be the maximum absolute change of a path difference in direction 

z. Take ε < g/ (2 max {1, M }) and also smaller than we/(2 |ze|) for every nonzero ze. For each strict comparison on the branch, let μj be its positive baseline margin and θj its slope in direction z;additionally take 

ε < min 

> j

μj

2 max {1, |θj |} . (20) Equality comparisons are unchanged because their projected normals are orthogonal to z, and strict comparisons retain their signs. Finiteness of the path and branch sets makes all minima positive whenever the corresponding constraint is nonvacuous. This proves all four claims for both signs. 

Lemma B.4 (Fiber opening) . Let L : RM → Rd be linear. Suppose a coefficient-vector execution starts with a finite set S0 and inserts one vector per charged binary addition. For a finite set S,write 

DL(S) = span {a − b : a, b ∈ S, La = Lb }. (21) 

If the required equality normals span an R-dimensional subspace of DL(S), and the required outputs occupy at least k L -fibers absent from S0, then an execution with P additions satisfies 

P ≥ R − dim DL(S0) + k. (22) 

Proof. Insert the vectors in execution order. An insertion into an already occupied fiber can increase the within-fiber difference space by at most one. The first insertion in a new fiber increases it by zero, because it has no mate in that fiber. If h new fibers are opened, then dim DL(S) ≤ dim DL(S0) + P − h. 

The hypotheses give dim DL(S) ≥ R and h ≥ k, which rearranges to the claimed inequality. The argument counts every inserted vector, including ones in registers later discarded. 19 Corollary B.5 (Shortest-path fiber bound) . In the setting of theorem B.3, suppose the projected equality normals span ker BH . If mH is the number of arcs of H, qH its number of endpoint classes, and ds its source-out class count, then the execution uses at least 

(mH − n + 1) − (mH − qH ) + ( n − 1 − ds) = qH − ds (23) 

additions. Proof. Project every coefficient vector to REH . The free initial vectors are zero and the units of the 

H arcs. Units in one endpoint class have the same divergence, so dim DBH (S0) = ∑ 

> Euv ⊆EH

(|Euv | − 1) = mH − qH .

The incidence rank is n − 1, hence dim ker BH = mH − n + 1. A nonsource vertex without a source-out class has output divergence 1v − 1s in a fiber absent from the free initial set. There are 

n − 1 − ds such distinct fibers. Apply theorem B.4 with R = mH − n + 1 and k = n − 1 − ds.This projection is essential. Outside primitive coordinates become the one zero vector rather than separate occupants of a zero-divergence fiber. Thus the argument permits outside-contaminated mixed sums and does not assume a path-register normal form. 

B.3 The exact theorem 

Theorem B.6 (Arbitrary-topology addition theorem) . For every finite reachable rooted directed multigraph in the model of section 2, 

P ∗(G, s ) = ρfwd (G, s ). (24) 

The statement remains true with unlimited additional comparisons and is unchanged by self-loops. Proof. The upper bound is theorem B.1. For the lower bound, fix any correct adaptive program and any rooted order. On its forward DAG H, use the algebraically independent potential/slack weighting of theorem B.3. If the projected equality normals failed to span ker BH , choose a nonzero direction z in the orthogonal complement. By theorem B.2, some common-endpoint path pair has different z-slopes. The two perturbations from theorem B.3 follow the same complete branch but require different minimum affine outputs at that endpoint, a contradiction. Hence the equality normals span the full kernel, and theorem B.5 gives at least qH − ds = fG(≺) additions on this program-dependent positive input. Maximize over rooted orders. The self-loop claim follows by ignoring loops in one direction and substituting zero loop weights in the other; nonnegative loops cannot improve a distance. 

Corollary B.7 (Uniform addition optimality) . Endpoint-class Dijkstra is one uniform algorithm satisfying, for every fixed topology, 

sup 

> w≥0

PA(G, s, w ) = P ∗(G, s ) = ρfwd (G, s ).

Proof. Combine theorem B.1 with theorem B.6. 20 C The exact frontier on directed acyclic graphs 

The arbitrary-topology addition theorem does not by itself determine a joint frontier. On a DAG, however, all shortest-path candidates can be exposed in one topological schedule, and the two resources align exactly. Let G be a reachable directed acyclic multigraph. Its n vertices and m arcs have q nonempty endpoint classes, of which ds leave the source. Every endpoint class enters a nonsource vertex, since an arc entering s would create a directed cycle with a source path to its tail. 

C.1 A simultaneous upper bound 

First reduce each endpoint class to its minimum primitive value. Process vertices in a fixed topological order. A source-out class contributes its primitive minimum directly. For every other class ( u, v ), materialize d(u) + μuv once. At v, compare the incoming class candidates and retain the first minimum under a fixed equality rule. The class reductions cost ∑

> Euv

(|Euv | − 1) = m − q (25) comparisons. After reduction, a nonsource vertex with rv incoming classes needs rv − 1 comparisons, and ∑ 

> v̸=s

(rv − 1) = q − (n − 1) . (26) The total is m − n + 1. The number of additions is exactly the number of non-source classes, q − ds.All choices remain valid for zero weights and ties. 

C.2 Why the lower bounds share an input 

For completeness, we spell out the comparison part of the generic-tie argument. Choose algebraically independent potentials 0 = π(s) < π (v) < 1 (27) and set wuv = π(v) − π(u) on every arc. Every source path to v has length π(v). On the finite execution of an arbitrary correct adaptive program, every register is an affine function with a nonnegative integral coefficient vector. Algebraic independence implies that each reached equality comparison has coefficient normal in ker BG, and that a correct output for v has divergence 1v − 1s

and zero constant. Let Z be the span of the equality normals on this execution. If Z ⊊ ker BG, choose 0 ̸ = z ∈

ker BG ∩ Z⊥. By theorem B.2, there are two source paths P, Q to one endpoint with different 

z-slopes. For both sufficiently small signs of w + εz , all strict comparisons retain their outcome and all equality comparisons remain equal. Thus the same affine output register is used on both sides. At the displayed endpoint, the minimum path slope is different on the two sides, so that register cannot be correct on both. This contradiction gives dim Z = dim ker BG = m − n + 1 . (28) One comparison supplies at most one normal, so the execution has at least m − n + 1 comparisons. Applying the projected fiber bound theorem B.5 to the same execution gives at least q − ds additions. The input is a single strictly positive potential-tie weighting for the chosen program, so the two lower bounds are simultaneous. 21 Theorem C.1 (Exact DAG comparison–addition frontier) . For every finite reachable directed acyclic multigraph, 

R(G, s ) = {(c, p ) ∈ N20 : c ≥ m − n + 1 , p ≥ q − ds}. (29) 

Consequently, 

C∗(G, s ) = m − n + 1 , P ∗(G, s ) = q − ds = ρfwd (G, s ), (30) 

and one program attains both scalar optima. Proof. The topological program above attains ( m − n + 1 , q − ds). The generic-tie argument gives the two coordinatewise lower bounds for every competing program, on one input for that program. Since the resource region is upward closed, it is exactly the displayed rectangle. The identity equation (17) identifies the addition coordinate with ρfwd .

Remark C.2 (A source-feedback corollary) . If every directed cycle contains the source, deleting self-loops and all arcs entering s leaves a reachable DAG with the same labeled distance vector. The resource region is therefore the rectangle in equation (29), with m, q, d s counted in that active DAG. Return arcs are genuine input coordinates but are distance-irrelevant under nonnegative weights. 

# D The first cyclic obstruction 

The DAG rectangle can fail as soon as a cycle makes two path extensions compete for the same hub. The smallest useful example has two spokes. 

D.1 The two-spoke shared hub 

Let H2 have vertices s, x, v, w and arcs 

s → x : a, s → v : b, v → x : z, x → v : u, s → w : c, w → x : q, x → w : p. (31) All seven weights are nonnegative. A shortest walk has a simple representative, so the distances are 

dx = min {a, b + z, c + q}, dv = min {b, d x + u}, dw = min {c, d x + p}. (32) 

sxvw 

> abzucqp

Figure 4: The two-spoke shared-hub atom H2. The hub distance dx is selected from the direct route and the two inward spoke routes; it is then reused by the two outward routes. The topology in figure 4 makes the shared hub and its two directed feedback spokes explicit. 

Theorem D.1 (Exact nonrectangularity of H2). In the model of section 2, 

C∗(H2) = 4 , P ∗(H2) = 2 , C∗ 

> 2

(H2) = 5 . (33) 

In particular, (4 , 2) /∈ R (H2, s ) although (4 , p ) is achievable for some p and (c, 2) is achievable for some c.

22 D.2 The two scalar upper bounds 

For C∗(H2) ≤ 4, materialize Bz = b + z and Cq = c + q. Two comparisons select X = min {a, B z , C q}.Materialize X + u and compare it with b; materialize X + p and compare it with c. The output is (X, min {b, X + u}, min {c, X + p}). This uses four comparisons and four additions in the worst case. For the addition coordinate, every order of x, v, w after s is rooted. Exactly one of x → v and 

v → x is forward, and exactly one of x → w and w → x is forward. Hence ρfwd (H2, s ) = 2, and theorem B.6 gives P ∗(H2) = 2. The following two-addition program also makes the upper endpoint explicit. Define pick( r, t ) to return r on r ≤ t and t on t < r ; it uses one comparison. The program is:               

> compare a with b if a <= b: compare a with c if a <= c: Au := a + u; V := pick(Au,b) Ap := a + p; W := pick(Ap,c) output (a,V,W) else: # c < a <= b Cq := c + q; X := pick(Cq,a) Xu := X + u; V := pick(Xu,b) output (X,V,c) else: # b < a compare b with c if b <= c: Bz := b + z; T := pick(Bz,a) compare T with c if T <= c: Tp := T + p; W := pick(Tp,c) output (T,b,W) else: # c < T Cq := c + q; X := pick(Cq,T) output (X,b,c) else: # c < b < a Cq := c + q; T := pick(Cq,a) compare T with b if T <= b: Tu := T + u; V := pick(Tu,b) output (T,V,c) else: Bz := b + z; X := pick(Bz,T) output (X,b,c)

On each branch, the direct source values determine which inward candidate can be relevant. For example, when b < a and b ≤ c, the value T = min {a, b + z} satisfies b ≤ T . If T ≤ c, then 

dx = T and dv = b, leaving only min {c, T + p}; if c < T , then dw = c and b ≤ c ≤ dx, so dv = b.The other branches are symmetric. Weak inequalities make the equality choices valid for all ties and zero weights. Every branch uses at most two additions and at most five comparisons. Thus 

C∗ 

> 2

(H2) ≤ 5. (34) 23 D.3 A human-readable comparison lower bound 

On strictly positive inputs, the eight full-dimensional output cells have the following distinct affine labels: R1 (a, b, c ) R2 (a, b, a + p)

R3 (a, a + u, c ) R4 (a, a + u, a + p)

R5 (b + z, b, c ) R6 (b + z, b, b + z + p)

R7 (c + q, b, c ) R8 (c + q, c + q + u, c ).

(35) Each cell is nonempty; for instance, its strict inequalities can be read by choosing the displayed winning expressions and making all unused edges large. Suppose a correct program used at most three comparisons. On the strict cell interiors its comparison tree has at most eight binary leaves. Since the eight cells require eight different affine output labels, there would be exactly one full-dimensional leaf per cell. Therefore no comparison hyperplane could cut the interior of any cell. The following facet adjacencies form a connected graph on the eight cells: 

R1−!R2 : c = a + p, R1−!R3 : b = a + u, R1−!R5 : a = b + z, R1−!R7 : a = c + q, R2−!R4 : b = a + u, R2−!R6 : a = b + z, R3−!R4 : c = a + p, R3−!R8 : a = c + q, R5−!R6 : c = b + z + p, R5−!R7 : b + z = c + q, R7−!R8 : b = c + q + u. 

(36) The root comparison must separate two adjacent cells, hence its homogeneous normal is one of the seven wall normals appearing here. In the order 

a = b + z, a = c + q, b = a + u, b = c + q + u, c = a + p, c = b + z + p, b + z = c + q, 

these walls cut the interiors of R7, R 5, R 8, R 3, R 6, R 2, R 1, respectively, as witnessed by strictly positive points on their two sides. Thus the root would split a cell, contradicting the one-leaf-per-cell conclusion. This proves C∗(H2) ≥ 4. For transparency, the exact integer witnesses used for the seven wall cuts are listed in table 3. The coordinate order is ( a, b, c, u, z, p, q ); the two points in each row lie in the indicated cell and give opposite signs for the wall.                                                                                                                                               

> wall cut cell negative point positive point
> a=b+zR7(3 ,1,1,1,3,1,1) (4 ,1,1,1,2,1,1)
> a=c+qR5(3 ,1,1,1,1,1,3) (4 ,1,1,1,1,1,2)
> b=a+uR8(4 ,4,1,1,1,1,1) (3 ,5,1,1,1,1,1)
> b=c+q+uR3(1 ,3,1,1,1,1,2) (1 ,4,1,1,1,1,1)
> c=a+pR6(4 ,1,4,1,1,1,1) (3 ,1,5,1,1,1,1)
> c=b+z+pR2(1 ,1,3,1,2,1,1) (1 ,1,4,1,1,1,1)
> b+z=c+qR1(1 ,1,1,1,1,1,2) (1 ,1,1,1,2,1,1)

Table 3: Integer witnesses for the wall-cut part of the H2 comparison lower bound. The argument is insensitive to arbitrary affine operands on a branch: on a strict open cell, each reached register is a fixed affine form, and a nonidentical comparison wall has empty interior in that cell. Equality branches cannot create an additional full-dimensional leaf. 

D.4 The two-addition obstruction 

It remains to exclude four comparisons together with only two additions. The obstruction is a finite coefficient-state statement, not a path-register assumption. 24 Lemma D.2 (Two-addition obstruction) . No deterministic program in the exact model computes labeled DIST on H2 with worst-case resources C ≤ 4 and P ≤ 2.Proof outline and finite verification boundary. Restrict to the strict positive cells in equation (35) and scale all inputs by a parameter tending to infinity. A finite literal contributes only a lower-order constant to every comparison; a comparison with zero leading coefficient normal has a fixed eventual outcome and can be deleted. Thus a hypothetical program induces a finite homogeneous coefficient-state program with at most two binary sum insertions and four comparisons, while allowing every sum of two available registers, repeated variables, and non-path supports. The state transition is exact: an addition inserts the componentwise sum of two current coefficient vectors, and a comparison queries the difference of two current vectors. For each state, the eight strict output cones are intersected with the two strict halfspaces of the query; a state is retained only if one fixed affine output label remains correct on every surviving cone. At an addition state all unordered pairs of currently available vectors are enumerated. The resulting finite case split has no surviving root state at depth four: every comparison root either leaves two incompatible labels in one leaf or every legal addition root spends one of the two insertions without opening the required remaining output cell. This is a finite proof by exhaustive closure of explicitly specified coefficient states; it does not assume that a register is a path sum. An independent exact certificate checks the same closure using integer cone certificates and is recorded as reproducibility evidence in the repository. The finite state argument is the only part of the present lemma that remains subject to independent human proof review. Combining equation (34) with theorem D.2 gives C∗ 

> 2

(H2) = 5, while the previous subsections give C∗(H2) = 4 and P ∗(H2) = 2. Hence the first cyclic example has a genuinely nonrectangular comparison–addition frontier. 

# E The shared-hub family and endogenous sorting 

The atom H2 scales to a family in which all cyclic choices share one hub distance. This family isolates the resource interaction without requiring a sorted output. 

E.1 Definition and addition optimum 

For k ≥ 1, let Hk have vertices 

s, x, v 1, . . . , v k

and arcs 

s → x : a, s → vi : bi, vi → x : zi, x → vi : ui (1 ≤ i ≤ k). (37) The exact labeled distances are 

dx = min {a, b 1 + z1, . . . , b k + zk} , (38) and 

di = min {bi, d x + ui} (1 ≤ i ≤ k). (39) The formulas follow by removing cycles from a shortest walk: a simple path to x uses at most one inward spoke, and a simple path to vi is either its direct source arc or a path to x followed by 

x → vi.25 s xv1

vi

vk

> ab1
> bi
> bk
> z1
> u1
> zi
> ui
> zk
> uk

Figure 5: The shared-hub family Hk. Each spoke offers one inward route to the hub and one outward route from it. The layout in figure 5 emphasizes that all spokes share the same hub candidate while retaining labeled spoke outputs. Every order of x, v 1, . . . , v k after s is rooted. For each i, exactly one of vi → x and x → vi is forward. Therefore ρfwd (Hk, s ) = k, and theorem B.6 gives 

P ∗(Hk) = k. (40) 

E.2 The scalar comparison coordinate 

The scalar comparison optimum is linear. A simple upper algorithm materializes all bi + zi, selects the minimum with a, then materializes and tests each dx + ui against bi. It uses at most 2 k

comparisons: k to select among k + 1 hub candidates and k for the spoke outputs. The safe scalar lower bound is the following weak form of the shared-hub comparison lemma. 

Proposition E.1 (Scalar comparison bounds) . For every k ≥ 1,

k ≤ C∗(Hk) ≤ 2k. (41) 

In particular, C∗(Hk) = Θ( k).Proof. The upper bound is the algorithm just described. For the lower bound, fix the hub distance at a raw source register and vary the k spoke pairs on an open product family so that each output is independently either its direct register or its translated register. At a terminal transcript the legal materialized register for each labeled output is fixed. The 2 k choice patterns therefore require distinct strict transcripts, and a binary decision tree has depth at least k. This is only a scalar baseline; the Pareto lower bound below uses a stronger permutation-indexed argument. 

E.3 The addition-optimal endpoint 

Let S(k) be the optimal worst-case number of pairwise comparisons needed to sort k distinct labeled keys. The endpoint notation here is a special case of equation (13): because P ∗(Hk) = k, the addition-optimal comparison value is C∗ 

> k

(Hk). 

Theorem E.2 (Endogenous sorting at the addition optimum) . For every k ≥ 1,

⌈log 2(k!) ⌉ ≤ C∗ 

> k

(Hk) ≤ S(k) + 2 k. (42) 26 Consequently, 

C∗ 

> k

(Hk) = k log 2 k + O(k), C∗  

> P∗(Hk)

(Hk) = Θ( k log k). (43) 

The graph still asks only for labeled DIST output. Proof. For the upper bound, sort the labeled values b1, . . . , b k with an optimal comparison sorter. A scan of the resulting order uses the one-candidate-per-spoke rolling construction formalized in section H; at r = 0 its addition count is at most k and its additional comparison count is at most 2k. This gives the right-hand side. For the lower bound, the causal fan-out argument in theorem F.6, specialized to r = 0, shows that a strict comparison transcript is compatible with at most one of the k! scale-separated spoke orders. A binary decision tree therefore has at least k! leaves and depth at least ⌈log 2(k!) ⌉. This is an information-theoretic sorting-scale lower bound. It does not identify the program’s aggregate comparisons with legal pairwise key comparisons, and so it does not claim the stronger lower bound 

S(k). Finally, the comparison decision-tree lower bound and a standard comparison sort give S(k) = 

k log 2 k + O(k). Combining it with the two inequalities and equation (40) proves the asymptotic statement. The conclusion is an endogenous sorting phenomenon in the information sense. Sorting is not requested as an output and the labeled distances need not be emitted in any order; the arithmetic-optimal schedule nevertheless forces a transcript that distinguishes all k! spoke orders. 

# F Lower bound for the comparison–addition tradeoff 

We now prove the comparison lower bound that interpolates between the linear scalar regime and the sorting endpoint. The proof has four logically separate ingredients. First, after t additions at most t disjoint designated pairs can have become visible, although one addition may expose several pairs at once. Second, a scale-separated counterfactual keeps an adaptive execution synchronized until the relevant pair is visible. Third, an addition budget k + r imposes a deadline on the r-slack visibility schedule. Finally, the resulting bounded-delay permutations can be counted exactly. Throughout this section, the designated pair for spoke i is {bi, z i}. For an affine coefficient vector a, its support is the set of primitive variables with positive coefficient. Since additions are sums of nonnegative coefficient vectors, supports combine by union. 

F.1 Binary-addition pair connectivity 

Lemma F.1 (Binary-addition pair-connectivity) . Let t binary additions be performed on registers initially containing the primitive variables. For disjoint designated pairs {bi, z i}, at most t pairs can have appeared together in the support of some created register. Equivalently, if ci is the first addition time at which a support contains both bi and zi, then 

|{ i : ci ≤ t}| ≤ t. (44) 

Proof. Build an undirected graph Γ t on the primitive variables. Initially it has no edges. Maintain the invariant that the support of every materialized register is contained in one connected component. At an addition, the two operand supports each lie in a current component. If the components differ, add one edge between arbitrary primitives in them; if they coincide, add no edge. The union support then lies in one component, so Γ t has at most t edges after t additions. 27 Group the visible designated pairs by connected component. A component containing pj such pairs contains at least 2 pj distinct designated terminals and therefore at least 2 pj − 1 ≥ pj edges. Summing over components shows that p visible pairs require at least p edges. Hence p ≤ t. This proof permits arbitrary mixed supports, repeated operands, and the possibility that a single late union exposes several pairs: the preparatory unions have already paid the required edge count. 

F.2 Scale-separated main and threat inputs 

The next lemma gives the scale construction explicitly. Its small parameter may depend on the competing program, but not on a choice made after seeing a comparison outcome. 

Lemma F.2 (Finite-program scale separation) . Fix a deterministic finite program with finite worst-case comparison and addition budgets, and fix a permutation π = ( π1, . . . , π k). For all sufficiently small positive ϵ the main input 

a = 1 , zπs = ϵ4s, bπs = 1 − ϵ4s, uπs = ϵ4s+1 (45) 

has a strict transcript apart from comparisons that are identities on this one-parameter family. For each s, define its threat input by changing only 

zπs to z′ 

> πs

= ϵ4s − ϵ4s+2 .

Until {bπs , z πs } is visible, the main and threat executions have identical comparison outcomes, including equality outcomes. The claim allows arbitrary mixed sums, repeated operands, register reuse, and finitely many real literals. Proof. With finite charged budgets, only finitely many formal affine register forms can be reached: after p additions their nonnegative-integer multiplicity vectors have ℓ1 norm at most 2 p, and the program has only finitely many primitive and literal registers. Thus it is enough to preserve a finite set of comparison differences. Write one such difference as D = R −R′, and denote the net coefficients of bi, z i, u i by βbi , β zi , β ui .Substitution of equation (45) turns D into a polynomial in ϵ: its coefficient at exponent 4 s is 

βzπs − βbπs , its coefficient at exponent 4 s + 1 is βuπs , and all these exponents are distinct. Literal terms and the coefficients of a contribute only to the constant coefficient. Before the pair {bi, z i} is visible, neither compared operand contains both variables. If βzi =

βbi = λ̸ = 0, then λ > 0 would force R to contain both variables, while λ < 0 would force R′ to contain both. Consequently, whenever βzi̸ = 0 we have βzi − βbi̸ = 0. On the threat input, 

Dthreat (ϵ) − Dmain (ϵ) = −βzi ϵ4s+2 .

If βzi̸ = 0, the main polynomial already has a nonzero term at exponent 4 s, so the order-4 s + 2 change cannot alter its sign for sufficiently small ϵ. If βzi = 0, the comparison value does not change. If the main polynomial is identically zero, the same argument forces βzi = 0, so equality is preserved exactly. Every nonzero polynomial has a constant sign after deleting a sufficiently small interval at the origin and its finitely many positive roots. Taking a common ϵ for the finite family of possible differences proves the claim. We also include in this finite family the differences between every possible held form and the finitely many threat-output forms used below; this only deletes finitely many additional roots. The displayed main and threat weights are nonnegative for 0 < ϵ < 1. 28 Lemma F.3 (Synchronization before pair visibility) . Let the main input and a threat input be chosen as in theorem F.2. Until the threatened pair {bi, z i} first occurs together in the support of a materialized register, the two executions have the same control state, execute identical instructions, have identical coefficient-vector states, and return identical comparison outcomes. Proof. Initially the executions agree on all already committed leading scales. If they have agreed through one instruction, a free operation or an addition applies to the same registers and therefore creates the same coefficient vector. Before the pair is visible, the polynomial calculation in theorem F.2 preserves every strict outcome and every equality outcome, so the next instruction is the same. Induction over the finite transcript proves the claim. In particular, the argument is about actual materialized-register comparisons and does not turn a counterfactual into a model operation. 

F.3 Threat deadlines 

Fix a permutation π = ( π1, . . . , π k) of the spokes and use the main input in equation (45). Its thresholds bπs − uπs = 1 − ϵ4s − ϵ4s+1 are strictly increasing with s. Let ci be the first visibility time from theorem F.1. 

Lemma F.4 (Threat deadline) . If a correct program for Hk has worst-case addition budget at most 

k + r, then for every main permutation π and every position 1 ≤ s ≤ k,

cπs ≤ s + r. (46) 

Proof. Assume cπs > s +r and inspect the execution after t = s+r additions. Apply the synchronized threat construction to the hidden pair Qπs = {bπs , z πs }. On the threat input the unique shortest path to the hub x uses this inward spoke and has value 1 − ϵ4s+2 . For j ≤ s, the direct source arc is uniquely shortest to vπj ; for j > s , the unique shortest path is the threatened hub path followed by 

x → vπj . Indeed, these alternatives are decided by comparing ϵ4j + ϵ4j+1 with ϵ4s+2 . Thus the 

Ms = 1 + ( k − s) = k − s + 1 required labeled output values are 1 − ϵ4s+2 , 1 − ϵ4s+2 + ϵ4j+1 (j > s ).

They are pairwise distinct, and every displayed form contains both variables of Qπs .No held form whose support omits one member of Qπs can equal one of these values. To see this, regard the evaluation as a polynomial in ϵ. The coefficient at exponent 4 s + 2 forces one copy of the threatened zπs , and cancellation of its exponent-4 s term then forces one copy of bπs . Distinct exponents exclude cancellation by another primitive, while literals affect only the constant term. Our common choice of ϵ avoids every accidental root of the finitely many nonidentity differences. By synchronization, the two executions have the same instructions and coefficient supports through the prefix. Because the pair is still hidden, none of these Ms target values has been materialized. Free copy and selection create no new numerical value, while each future binary addition creates only one register. The remaining budget is (k + r) − (s + r) = k − s = Ms − 1,

so the threat execution cannot materialize all required outputs. This contradicts correctness. If the main branch terminates before t, the same threat follows its complete transcript and already yields the contradiction. Therefore cπs ≤ s + r.29 The deadline lemma is the point at which the addition budget becomes an organizational constraint. It does not say that the program outputs an order; it says that a successful addition-tight execution must expose spoke interfaces with bounded delay relative to the counterfactual order. 

F.4 The exact banded-permutation count 

Lemma F.5 (Banded permutation count) . Let B(k, r ) be the number of permutations σ of [k]

satisfying 

σs ≤ s + r (1 ≤ s ≤ k). (47) 

Then 

B(k, r ) = r!( r + 1) k−r. (48) 

Proof. For position s ≤ k − r, the allowed values lie in {1, . . . , s + r}. The s − 1 values already placed all lie in {1, . . . , s + r − 1}, so exactly r + 1 allowed values remain. After these k − r positions have been filled, the remaining r values can be placed in arbitrary order. Multiplying gives ( r + 1) k−rr!. The same calculation also covers r = k, when the first product is empty. 

F.5 Entropy lower bound 

Define 

Fk(r) = C∗

> k+r

(Hk), qquad Λk,r = log 2

k!

r!( r + 1) k−r . (49) 

Theorem F.6 (Banded-permutation entropy lower bound) . Uniformly for 0 ≤ r ≤ k,

Fk(r) ≥ ⌈ Λk,r ⌉ . (50) 

Together with the scalar baseline, 

Fk(r) ≥ max {k, ⌈Λk,r ⌉} . (51) 

Proof. Fix a complete strict comparison transcript. Its deterministic addition trace fixes all exposure times ci. Rank the pairs by nondecreasing exposure time, breaking ties by label, and write ρ(i) for the rank of pair i. The cumulative capacity lemma gives ρ(i) ≤ ci. Hence every main permutation 

π compatible with this transcript satisfies 

ρ(πs) ≤ cπs ≤ s + r. 

After relabeling by ρ, theorem F.5 shows that this transcript is compatible with at most B(k, r )permutations. Choose the finite main family generically after the program is fixed, so every reached nonidentity comparison is strict; forced identities have only one outcome. A depth-C program has at most 2 C relevant transcripts. Consequently 

k! ≤ 2C B(k, r ).

Substitute equation (48) and take logarithms. The scalar baseline is the independent bound in theorem E.1; taking the maximum gives equation (51). The proof is uniform in r: the program, its finite transcript, and its literal constants are fixed first, and the scale construction is then chosen for that transcript. The finite support search and scale sanity checks used for reproduction are evidence for the lemmas, not substitutes for their quantified proofs. 30 G Bounded-bucket weak ordering 

The upper bound needs only a weak order of the spoke values. We state the needed comparison lemma separately so that the construction is not confused with the paper’s SSSP contribution. 

Definition G.1 (Bounded-bucket weak ordering) . Given k keys and an integer h ≥ 1, a bounded-bucket weak ordering is a sequence of blocks 

B1 < B 2 < · · · < B m, |Bj | ≤ h, (52) where every key in an earlier block is smaller than every key in a later block. The internal order of a block is not produced. Let Q(k, h ) be the minimum worst-case number of pairwise comparisons needed to produce such blocks. On inputs with ties, equality can be assigned to a deterministic adjacent block; the entropy calculation below is for distinct keys. For k = qh + s with 0 ≤ s < h , define Γk,h = log 2

k!(h!) qs! . (53) 

Lemma G.2 (Bounded-bucket weak-order complexity) . For 1 ≤ h ≤ k,

Γk,h ≤ Q(k, h ) ≤ Γk,h + o(Γ k,h ) + O(k). (54) 

If h ≥ k, one block suffices and Q(k, h ) = 0 . In particular, for h = k + 1 , both the natural entropy expression and the comparison cost are zero. Proof. For the lower bound, consider the decision tree on distinct keys. A leaf whose output blocks have sizes t1, t 2, . . . is compatible with at most ∏ 

> j

tj ! total orders, because only the order inside each block is unknown. Subject to tj ≤ h and ∑ 

> j

tj = k, this product is maximized by filling blocks of size h and one residual block of size s; factorial supermultiplicativity gives 

> ∏
> j

tj ! ≤ (h!) qs!.

At least k!/(( h!) qs!) leaves are therefore needed, giving the lower bound Q(k, h ) ≥ Γk,h .For the upper bound, request the ranks h, 2h, . . . , qh from the deterministic multiple-selection algorithm of Kaligosi, Mehlhorn, Munro, and Sanders [KMMS05]. Their worst-case bound is the information lower bound for the requested ranks, plus a lower-order term in that bound and O(k). The selected splitters and the induced intervals are exactly the ordered blocks in equation (52); their information term is Γ k,h . This gives the stated upper bound. The case h ≥ k is immediate. 

Remark G.3 (Scope of the lemma) . Producing blocks is a standard weak-order task. Multiple selection gives the deterministic upper bound above; partial-order production provides a related ITLB + o(ITLB) + O(k) framework [KMMS05, CFJ +10]. We do not replace either lower-order term by O(k): such a deterministic strengthening is not supplied by these references. The contribution here is only the interface from this standard primitive to the rolling SSSP computation. 

# H Rolling-block transfer to SSSP 

Let 0 ≤ r ≤ k and set h = r + 1. Assume that the spoke values have been placed in ordered blocks 

B1 < · · · < B m, |Bj | ≤ h, (57) by the bounded-bucket procedure. We show how to turn this weak order into a legal exact DIST computation with at most k + r additions. 31 H.1 The algorithm 

Maintain a current hub candidate H, initially the source-to-hub register a. Scan the blocks from left to right. Within a block, compare each bi with the current H. If bi < H , materialize the inward candidate Ii = bi + zi and replace H by the smaller of H and Ii. If a scan encounters a spoke with 

bi ≥ H, stop the inward phase after finishing that block; call this the crossing block. Spokes in later blocks are not given inward candidates. Once the hub candidate is final, output a spoke directly when bi ≤ H. Otherwise materialize the outward candidate Oi = H + ui and compare it with bi. All comparisons use a fixed equality rule. The following schematic figure, figure 6, records the only block in which both kinds of candidates can occur.   

> B1
> complete
> B2
> complete crossing
> |B| ≤ hlater blocks

bi < H : bi + zi bi ≥ H : H + ui

Figure 6: Rolling-block processing. Complete blocks are permanently below the current hub candidate. Only the crossing block can contain a spoke that receives both an inward and an outward candidate. 

H.2 Correctness and addition accounting 

Lemma H.1 (Rolling-block transfer) . Given ordered blocks satisfying equation (57) , the rolling algorithm computes all labeled distances of Hk correctly and uses at most 

P ≤ k + r (58) 

additions. Its additional comparison cost is O(k).Proof. At every inward step, H is the minimum of a and all inward candidates materialized so far. If a spoke has bi ≥ H, then bi + zi ≥ H because zi ≥ 0. Since later blocks contain only larger b

values, no later block can lower H. Thus the hub becomes final at the first crossing block, if one exists; if no crossing occurs, it is final after the last block. For a complete block, every bi in the block remains at most the final H: the block was scanned while all its values were below the current candidate, and every later update is a minimum of candidates no smaller than the relevant direct value. Hence di = min {bi, H + ui} = bi for those spokes, and their direct outputs are permanently safe. In the crossing block, spokes below the current H may receive inward candidates; after H is finalized, only those whose direct value is above 

H need an outward candidate. At least one spoke in this block triggered the crossing and therefore received no inward candidate. A spoke in a later block receives no inward candidate at all. Charge one candidate addition to every spoke: an inward candidate for a complete or below-threshold crossing spoke, and an outward candidate for a crossing or later spoke that is above the final hub. The only possible second addition is an outward candidate for a below-threshold spoke in the crossing block. There are at most |B| − 1 ≤ h − 1 = r such spokes, proving P ≤ k + r. The scan uses only a constant number of comparisons per spoke, so its comparison cost is O(k). The weak inequalities also cover ties and zero weights. 

Proposition H.2 (Weak order to Pareto upper bound) . For 0 ≤ r ≤ k and h = r + 1 ,

C∗

> k+r

(Hk) ≤ Q(k, h ) + O(k). (59) 32 Proof. Produce the blocks with a BBWO algorithm and apply theorem H.1. The budget is k + r

and all numerical values that are output have been materialized by the counted additions. 

# I The entropy-tight comparison–addition law 

The lower bound in theorem F.6 and the rolling upper bound have the same leading entropy term whenever that term dominates the linear scalar floor. The comparison between the two entropy expressions is elementary but useful because it translates the weak-order construction into the exact budget parameter from equation (13). 

I.1 Comparing the two entropy terms 

Let h = r + 1 ≤ k, and write k = qh + s with 0 ≤ s < h . Then Γk,h − Λk,r = log 2

h(q−1)( h−1)+ s

(( h − 1)!) q−1s! . (60) 

Lemma I.1 (Entropy comparison) . For h = r + 1 ≤ k,

0 ≤ Γk,h − Λk,r ≤ (log 2 e)k. (61) 

For h = k + 1 (equivalently r = k), both entropy quantities are zero. Proof. The ratio in equation (60) is at least one because ( h − 1)! ≤ hh−1 and s! ≤ hs. For the upper bound, the elementary factorial estimate 

hh−1

(h − 1)! ≤ eh (62) follows, for example, from the integral form of the logarithm bound for factorials. Since 0 ≤ s < h ,the ratio hs/s ! is maximized at s = h − 1, so it is also at most eh. Thus the ratio is at most eqh ≤ ek.Taking base-two logarithms proves the claim. If h = k + 1, then q = 0, s = k, and both denominators equal k!. 

I.2 The complete budget law 

The envelope in figure 7 summarizes the three asymptotic regimes of the tradeoff. 

Theorem I.2 (Deterministic entropy-tight Pareto law) . For every k ≥ 1 and every 0 ≤ r ≤ k, let 

Fk(r) = C∗

> k+r

(Hk), Λk,r = log 2

k!

r!( r + 1) k−r . (63) 

Uniformly in r,

max {k, ⌈Λk,r ⌉} ≤ Fk(r) ≤ Γk,r +1 + o(Γ k,r +1 ) + O(k), (64) 

where Γk,k +1 = 0 . Consequently, 

Fk(r) = Θ( k + Λ k,r ) (65) 

uniformly over 0 ≤ r ≤ k; moreover Fk(r) = (1 + o(1))Λ k,r along every asymptotic regime in which 

Λk,r /k → ∞ .

33 r in the addition budget k + r       

> comparison complexity  r= 0 Θ( klog k)Λk,r = log 2
> k!
> r!( r+ 1) k−r
> r=k
> Θ( k)

Figure 7: Comparison cost on Hk as the addition slack grows. The entropy term controls the curve when it dominates k; the scalar lower bound leaves a linear floor near r = k. The drawing is schematic. 

Proof. The lower inequality is theorem F.6, including the scalar baseline. For the upper bound, set 

h = r + 1. Produce ordered blocks with theorem G.2 and transfer them to Hk using theorem H.2. This gives 

Fk(r) ≤ Γk,h + o(Γ k,h ) + O(k).

When h ≤ k, apply theorem I.1; the difference from Λ k,r is at most (log 2 e)k. When h = k + 1, one block is emitted, Λ k,k = 0, and the rolling computation costs O(k) comparisons. The entropy comparison gives Γ k,h = Λ k,r + O(k). Together with the scalar lower bound this proves the uniform Θ statement. If Λ k,r /k → ∞ , both the O(k) term and the multiple-selection lower-order term are 

o(Λ k,r ), proving the final assertion. At r = 0, Λ k, 0 = log 2(k!), so the law recovers the sorting-scale endpoint in theorem E.2. At 

r = k, the entropy term vanishes and the scalar linear baseline controls the comparison value. The intermediate levels are not asserted to have an additive-O(k) deterministic correction: the standard deterministic multiple-selection bound contains an additional lower-order entropy term. No statement here is intended for arbitrary directed topologies. 

# J Exact numerical universal optimality 

We now ask whether topology specialization confers an intrinsic numerical advantage. The answer is no: one fixed interpreter can match OPT DIST (G, s ) exactly on every topology. The interpreter is not efficient; the result separates existence of an optimal numerical policy from the cost of navigating that policy. 

J.1 Homogeneous programs and transcript cones 

Positive homogeneity of shortest-path distances lets us remove arbitrary literal constants without weakening a competitor. 

Lemma J.1 (Recession normal form) . For every correct finite CA program A, there is a correct program A∞ using only the literal zero such that 

CA∞ (G, s, w ) + PA∞ (G, s, w ) ≤ TA(G, s ) for every w ≥ 0, (68) 

and every held register of A∞ has form ⟨a, w ⟩ for a ∈ Nm 

> 0

.

34 Proof idea. On each unfolded branch, replace the affine register ⟨a, w ⟩+α by its leading homogeneous form. Route a comparison by the sign of its leading difference; when that difference is zero, route by the fixed intercept sign. For any fixed w, the resulting trace is the stable trace of A(tw ) for all sufficiently large t. Homogeneity of the output then identifies each leading output form with the required distance. The complete finiteness and equality-face argument is in section L. Let M be the set of homogeneous coefficient forms represented by physical held registers. Initially 

M0 = {0, e 1, . . . , e m}. (69) A physical comparison transcript is Γ = (( ai, b i, σ i)) ti=1 , σi ∈ { <, =, > },

and represents the relatively open rational polyhedral cone 

P(Γ) = {w ∈ Rm 

> ≥0

: sign ⟨ai − bi, w ⟩ = σi for every i}. (70) Only feasible transcripts are retained. 

Definition J.2 (Ready state) . The pair ( M, Γ) is Ready if, for every output label v̸ = s, there is one fixed form zv ∈ M such that 

⟨zv, w ⟩ = dw(s, v ) for every w ∈ P (Γ) . (71) The witness may depend on v, but it may not vary over an unobserved subregion of the transcript cone. 

J.2 The exact total-budget game 

Define WIN G(M, Γ, r ) recursively. A ready state is winning. A nonready state with r = 0 is losing. Otherwise the policy may choose one of two moves: • add x, y ∈ M , including x = y, insert x + y, and decrease r by one; or • compare distinct represented forms x, y , decrease r by one, and win for every feasible outcome in 

{<, =, > }.An already represented sum and a comparison with only one feasible outcome may be omitted. The game state records only numerical capabilities and the physical outcomes actually observed; it does not store a chamber arrangement or an unfolded strategy tree. 

Theorem J.3 (Exact transcript-cone game) . For every finite reachable rooted directed multigraph and every integer K ≥ 0,

WIN G(M0, ∅, K ) ⇐⇒ OPT DIST (G, s ) ≤ K. (72) 

Proof. Apply theorem J.1 to an arbitrary specialized program. Retain every materialized form, delete duplicate additions, and bypass comparisons whose outcomes are implied by the current physical transcript. An addition does not restrict the compatible weights; a comparison intersects them with exactly its observed sign condition. Thus the inputs reaching a node are precisely P(Γ), every charged instruction is a legal move, and correctness at a leaf supplies the fixed witnesses required by theorem J.2. Backward induction yields a winning strategy with no larger total budget. 35 Conversely, select a winning move at each winning state and maintain one physical register for every form in M . Execute additions and comparisons literally and follow the observed ternary outcome. At a ready state output the fixed witness registers. Their validity over the whole transcript cone includes equality faces, the origin, parallel primitives, ties, and zero-weight cycles. Each play uses at most K charged operations, giving a correct specialized program. The two simulations prove the equivalence. 

Corollary J.4 (No numerical uniformity tax) . There is one fixed deterministic uniform interpreter 

Upspace such that for every (G, s ),

TUpspace (G, s ) = OPT DIST (G, s ). (73) The interpreter first finds the least winning budget from the topology. It then recomputes a winning move from the current state, executes exactly that physical addition or comparison on the input, and appends the observed outcome. Equality in equation (73), rather than only an upper bound, follows from the definition of OPT DIST .

J.3 Succinct state and polynomial space 

A persistent implementation represents materialization by an addition DAG: primitive and zero registers are leaves, and each executed addition stores two parent identifiers. Each comparison stores two identifiers and its ternary outcome. If two registers have the same coefficient vector, one representative suffices because their future numerical capabilities coincide. Bellman–Ford gives the legal total-cost cap 

K0 = 2 m(n − 1) . (74) Along a length-K play there are at most m + K + 1 forms. After j additions, every coefficient is at most 2 j , hence has O(j) bits. The persistent DAG and transcript use O(m + n + K) constant-size records; expanded coefficient vectors are temporary polynomial-size objects. Transcript feasibility is rational linear programming. The terminal predicate has a short complementary certificate: to show non-readiness, choose one output label and, for every held form, give a possibly different transcript-compatible rational weighting and a simple shortest path on which that form is wrong. 

Theorem J.5 (Polynomial-space exact policy generation) . The decision problem 

(G, s, K ) 7 −→ [OPT DIST (G, s ) ≤ K]

is in deterministic PSPACE. The exact value of OPT DIST and a winning next action at every reached transcript-cone state are computable in polynomial space. A direct depth-first implementation uses 

2poly( n+m) deterministic time. Proof. For K ≥ K0, the Bellman–Ford program answers yes. Otherwise the game has polynomial depth and polynomially many candidate actions per succinct state. Enumerate actions one at a time, discard infeasible comparison outcomes by rational linear programming, test Ready in coNP, and evaluate the alternating recurrence depth first. The recursion depth, state encoding, and temporary certificates are polynomial. Iterating K = 0 , . . . , K 0 gives the optimum, and re-enumerating the actions gives a winning next move. The detailed terminal certificate is proved in section M. 36 The polynomial state does not imply a small unfolded policy. For r independent output vertices, each with two parallel source primitives, OPT DIST = r, but the 2 r strict winner vectors require 2 r

distinct fixed-output leaves. The compact loop and transcript state avoid storing that tree; they do not make next-action search fast. The hierarchy is therefore strict: the transcript-cone interpreter has ratio one in charged operations; its optimal-action navigation uses polynomial space but may take exponential time; the active-core lifting sacrifices a sublogarithmic factor to obtain an efficient uniform algorithm. 

# K Efficient universal upper bound 

The ratio-one interpreter may spend exponential ordinary time between two charged operations. We next give the strongest current guarantee under linear topology preprocessing and ordinary RAM accounting. The bridge is a canonical active core whose size is controlled by the full same-program benchmark. 

K.1 Canonical active core 

An arc e = ( u, v ) is dominator-inactive if v dominates u, that is, every s-to-u path passes through 

v. Delete all such arcs. A simple rooted path using ( u, v ) has already visited v, so that arc closes a nonnegative subwalk; deleting the subwalk cannot increase a distance. Conversely, setting all deleted primitives to zero simulates any program for the original graph on the active graph. Inactive deletion is therefore exactly benchmark-neutral. Among the remaining source arcs, let pv be the multiplicity of the class s → v, and define 

ms = ∑

> v

pv, ds = |{ v : pv > 0}| , σ = ms − ds. (75) Reducing these classes costs exactly σ comparisons and yields held minimum registers av. Let E◦

be the active primitives with nonsource tail, put k = |E◦|, and let R be their endpoints. The canonical core H = H(G, s ) has source q, vertex set {q} ∪ R, every primitive of E◦, and one virtual source arc q → v of weight av whenever such a register exists. Register aliasing is free and legal. Every vertex outside R is source-only and its distance is already av. Moreover, 

|V (H)| ≤ 2k + 1 , |E(H)| ≤ 3k. (76) 

Theorem K.1 (Active-core benchmark factorization) . For every finite reachable rooted directed multigraph, 

OPT DIST (H, q ) ≤ OPT DIST (G, s ) ≤ σ + OPT DIST (H, q ) ≤ 2 OPT DIST (G, s ). (77) 

If σ = 0 , then OPT DIST (G, s ) = OPT DIST (H, q ).Proof. For the first inequality, simulate any program for G on an arbitrary core input: alias every source class entering R to its single virtual register, set inactive and discarded source-only primitives to zero, run the original program, and keep only coordinates in R. This adds no charged operation and preserves all mixed sums, equality branches, and cross-output sharing. For the second inequality, reduce source classes in σ comparisons, run a program for H on the held minima and internal primitives, and return the already held source-only outputs. The virtual-source path identity makes the outputs exact. Finally, the same-input active-edge charge in theorem N.3 gives σ + k ≤ 2 OPT DIST (G, s ), in particular σ ≤ OPT DIST (G, s ). Combining this with OPT DIST (H, q ) ≤ OPT DIST (G, s ) gives the last inequality. When σ = 0, the first two inequalities coincide. 37 The factorization is not a sum of separate comparison and addition lower bounds. Both sides use OPT DIST , and the active-edge charge is witnessed on one execution of each competing program. 

K.2 Lifting a general directed-SSSP algorithm 

Duan, Mao, Shu, and Yin give a deterministic exact directed-SSSP algorithm on M arcs and N

vertices with nonnegative real weights and running time [DMSY26] 

F (M, N ) = O

> (

M √log N + √M N log N log log N

> )

. (78) Their algorithm is used here as a black box; the topology-sensitive statement comes from the active-core reduction and benchmark charge. 

Theorem K.2 (Efficient topology-wise bound) . There is one explicit deterministic uniform exact 

DIST algorithm with O(m + n) topology preprocessing and 

TU (G, s ) = O

> (

OPT DIST (G, s )

> √

log +(2 + OPT DIST (G, s )) log log +(4 + OPT DIST (G, s )) 

> )

. (79) 

Its ordinary query work is O(m + n + CU (G, s, w ) + PU (G, s, w )) .Proof. Reduce the active source classes and run the algorithm underlying equation (78) on H. By equation (76), the residual call has M = O(k) and N = O(k), so its numerical cost is 

O

> (

k

> √

log +(2 + k) log log +(4 + k)

> )

.

Adding the σ source comparisons and using σ + k ≤ 2 OPT DIST (G, s ) proves equation (79). Dominator computation, class grouping, and core construction are topology-only linear-time operations. The black-box running-time theorem bounds all of its RAM work. If the bookkeeping convention requires every residual weight-dependent constant-time step to be represented in C + P ,pair it with one harmless comparison of held registers; this changes both quantities by only a constant factor. Source-only scans are absorbed by O(m + n). The bound retains a factor O(√log OPT DIST log log OPT DIST ) over the topology-specific opti-mum. It is strictly below the sorting-scale organization of heap Dijkstra on sparse active cores, but it remains above the linear specialized programs available for Hk. Thus active-core lifting narrows the efficient gap without closing it. 

# L Homogenization at infinity 

This appendix proves theorem J.1 without assuming that intermediate registers are path sums. 

Proof of theorem J.1. It is enough to consider a program with finite worst-case numerical cost. Unfold control merges and conditionally selected aliases by their complete charged comparison histories. Free instructions reveal no new numerical information, so their choices are fixed at an unfolded node, and all old registers may be retained. Every held register there has one affine description 

R(w) = ⟨aR, w ⟩ + αR, aR ∈ Nm 

> 0

, αR ∈ R. (80) This follows inductively from primitive inputs, literals, additions, and aliases and makes no path interpretation. 38 We first justify that only finitely many charged traces matter. Suppose a branch uses at most 

b additions and the code has ℓ literal identities. Treat the m + ℓ primitive and literal registers as distinct formal sources. Every formal expression has a multiplicity vector 

q ∈ Nm+ℓ 

> 0

, ∥q∥1 ≤ 2b.

There are finitely many such vectors even if some evaluate to the same real number. A complete ternary sign table for all ordered pairs of these formal expressions determines every comparison outcome and hence the deterministic run, including aliases, counters, and free loops. Only finitely many such tables are realized. Correctness makes the run for each realized table terminate, so the union T of its charged traces is finite. Replace every reached register in equation (80) by its recession form 

R(w) = ⟨aR, w ⟩. (81) Primitive inputs remain unchanged and every literal uses the initial zero register. Replay additions on recession registers; if a result is already held, use a free alias. Copies and branchwise selections also become aliases. The original intercept attached to an alias is retained only as finite control metadata for routing later comparisons, never as a new numerical register. Suppose an original node compares 

R = ⟨a, w ⟩ + α and R′ = ⟨a′, w ⟩ + α′.

Let δ(w) = ⟨a − a′, w ⟩ and κ = α − α′. If a = a′, omit the numerical comparison and statically take the child labeled by sign κ. Otherwise compare the held recession forms. Route strict outcomes to the corresponding original children and route equality to the child labeled by sign κ. The sign of a difference of two fixed literals is compiled discrete control, not an operation on the input. Fix w ≥ 0. We prove inductively that the transformed prefix corresponds to a prefix of T and that the original execution on tw follows it for all sufficiently large t. At the comparison above, the original sign is sign (tδ (w) + κ).

If δ(w)̸ = 0, this eventually has the sign of δ(w); if δ(w) = 0, it always has the sign of κ. This is exactly the transformed routing rule. Addition and free-control nodes preserve the induction. Because T is finite, the transformed execution reaches an original leaf. The finitely many transformed homogeneous sign tables also show that all transformed traces compile into one finite program; no code is attached below an originally unrealizable branch. At the stable leaf, let the original output for label v be ⟨av, tw ⟩ + αv. For all sufficiently large t,correctness and positive homogeneity give 

t⟨av, w ⟩ + αv = dtw (s, v ) = t d w(s, v ).

Dividing by t and taking the limit yields ⟨av, w ⟩ = dw(s, v ). At w = 0, both sides are zero. Thus the transformed program is correct on the full closed orthant, including equality faces. Each transformed trace is a stable original trace with some redundant operations possibly deleted, proving equation (68). After j additions, every held coefficient vector a satisfies ∥a∥1 ≤ 2j : the initial norms are zero or one, and an addition sums two previous vectors. Repeated operands and shared expressions are included. This bound is used below for polynomial encoding length. 39 M Terminal validity and polynomial-space synthesis 

We supply the details behind theorem J.5. Strict constraints in a transcript cone can be tested by imposing ∑ 

> e

we = 1 and maximizing a common positive margin; if there are no strict constraints, the origin is feasible. All coefficients are rational integers, so this is rational linear programming. 

Lemma M.1 (Complementary certificate for readiness) . At every state reachable within K0 moves, 

Ready( M, Γ) is in coNP with respect to the succinct state encoding. Proof. Fix a held form z and output label v. To certify that z is not identically the distance on 

P(Γ), guess a simple path P = ( v0 = s, v 1, . . . , v t = v), a strict mismatch direction, and rational variables w, π satisfying the transcript constraints and 

w ≥ 0, ∑

> e

we = 1 , πs = 0 ,πy − πx ≤ we for every e = ( x, y ),πvi − πvi−1 = wei for every ei = ( vi−1, v i) on P, 

⟨z, w ⟩ < π v or ⟨z, w ⟩ > π v.

(82) The Bellman inequalities imply that πv is at most the length of every s-to-v path, while equality along P makes πv = w(P ). Hence P is shortest and the last line certifies failure of z.Conversely, from a weighting on which z is wrong, choose a simple shortest path and exact distance potentials. They satisfy equation (82). A strict mismatch cannot occur only at the all-zero weighting, so homogeneity permits normalization. Rational feasibility gives a polynomial-bit witness. The negation of readiness is 

∃v̸ = s ∀z ∈ M ∃wz : ⟨z, w z ⟩̸ = dwz (s, v ).

Only polynomially many forms are held. Concatenate one certificate of the form above for each z;the weighting and path may differ from one form to the next. Thus non-readiness is in NP and readiness is in coNP. The Bellman–Ford cap K0 = 2 m(n − 1) bounds the game depth. Along a play of length at most 

K0, at most m + K0 + 1 forms are held, each coefficient has at most K0 + 1 bits, and at most K0

transcript records are stored. At a state there are polynomially many pairs of held forms, hence polynomially many candidate additions and comparisons. Depth-first minimax keeps one state per recursion level, invokes rational feasibility for each ternary child, and uses theorem M.1 at terminals. Polynomial depth and polynomial state size place the decision problem in PSPACE. Enumerating the polynomial branching tree and the terminal certificates gives the stated single-exponential deterministic upper bound. Repeating the search for K = 0 , . . . , K 0 and then re-enumerating root actions yields the exact value and an optimal next action. For completeness, the parallel-source example from the main text has a genuine exponential unfolded tree. Each of r labeled outputs is the minimum of two independent primitive registers. One comparison per class gives OPT DIST = r. The 2 r strict winner patterns require distinct fixed homogeneous output vectors at leaves, so any completely unfolded fixed-output tree has at least 2 r

leaves. This lower bound concerns an extensional representation, not the succinct online interpreter. 

# N Active-core proofs and the same-input edge charge 

We complete the structural proof used in section K. Write Ga for the graph after deleting dominator-inactive primitives. 40 Lemma N.1 (Inactive deletion is benchmark-neutral) . For every nonnegative weighting and every vertex x, dG(s, x ) = dGa (s, x ), and 

OPT DIST (G, s ) = OPT DIST (Ga, s ).

Proof. If a simple rooted path contains an inactive arc ( u, v ), then its prefix to u has already visited 

v. The arc closes a nonnegative subwalk from v to itself; deleting that subwalk does not increase length. Repetition removes all inactive arcs. The reverse distance inequality is immediate because 

Ga is a subgraph. A program for Ga solves G by ignoring deleted primitive registers. Conversely, replace every inactive input expected by a program for G with the literal zero and run it unchanged. The distance identity applies to this assignment, and the substitution costs no numerical operation. Taking worst cases and infima proves benchmark equality. 

Lemma N.2 (Virtual-source identity and core size) . For every v ∈ R,

dG(s, v ) = dH (q, v ).

Every non-source vertex outside R has distance av, and when k > 0, |V (H)| ≤ 2k + 1 and 

|E(H)| ≤ 3k.Proof. Every simple path in Ga leaves s once and then uses only primitives of E◦. Replacing its first primitive s → x by the reduced minimum ax gives a core path of no greater length. Conversely, expand the first virtual primitive of a core path into a source primitive attaining its held minimum. The two path families therefore have the same minimum. A vertex outside R has no incident active nonsource-tail primitive; reachability forces a source class, and no active alternative can reach or leave it. Its distance is av. Finally, R contains only endpoints of the k internal primitives, so |R| ≤ 2k. At most |R| virtual source arcs are added, proving the size bounds. The simulations in the proof of theorem K.1 now follow directly from theorems N.1 and N.2. They remain valid for arbitrary mixed-sum competitors because they substitute or alias only initial registers and otherwise run the competitor unchanged. It remains to justify the quantitative charge σ + k ≤ 2 OPT DIST . For a rooted order ≺ of the active graph, let m≺ be the number of forward primitive arcs and q≺ the number of forward endpoint classes. Define 

L(≺) = m≺ − n + 1 + q≺ − ds, L∗ = max  

> ≺

L(≺). (83) The generic-tie construction from theorem B.3 applied to the forward DAG of ≺ gives, on one input for any competing program, 

CA ≥ m≺ − n + 1 , PA ≥ q≺ − ds.

Hence L∗ ≤ OPT DIST (G, s ). This is the needed same-program step. 

Lemma N.3 (Active-edge charge) . For the active graph and the notation of equation (75) ,

σ + k ≤ 2L∗ ≤ 2 OPT DIST (G, s ). (84) 41 Proof. Let D be the dominator tree. A standard low-high theorem gives a preorder δ of D such that every v̸ = s either has the arc (idom( v), v ), or has arcs ( a, v ), (b, v ) with a < δ v < δ b and b not a descendant of v [GT12]. Thus δ is rooted. Reverse every child list in D and let ¯δ be the resulting preorder. Ancestor relations are preserved and the order of incomparable vertices is reversed. The parent-arc case still roots v; in the second case b is incomparable with v and therefore precedes it in ¯δ. Hence ¯δ is rooted as well. For every active primitive ( u, v ), v is not an ancestor of u in D. If u is an ancestor of v, the arc is forward in both orders; otherwise the endpoints are incomparable and it is forward in exactly one. Every source arc is forward in both. Therefore 

mδ + m¯δ ≥ 2ms + k. 

One of the two orders, say ≺, has m≺ ≥ ms + k/ 2. Every rooted order has at least one forward incoming endpoint class for each nonsource vertex, so q≺ ≥ n − 1. Hence 

L∗ ≥ L(≺) ≥ m≺ − ds ≥ (ms − ds) + k/ 2 = σ + k/ 2.

This implies σ + k ≤ 2L∗, because σ ≥ 0, and L∗ ≤ OPT DIST gives the second inequality. 

# O A concrete separation between DIST and DO 

For r ≥ 1, let Tr have vertices s, x, v, t 1, . . . , t r and arcs 

s → x : a, s → v : b, x → v : u, v → x : z, v → ti : ci (1 ≤ i ≤ r).

The exact distances are 

d(x) = min {a, b + z}, d(v) = min {b, a + u}, d(ti) = d(v) + ci.

Theorem O.1 (Labeled distances versus distance ordering) . On Tr,

C∗ 

> DIST

= 2 , P ∗ 

> DIST

= r + 1 , C∗ 

> DO

= Θ( r log r).

Indeed the complete DIST region is {(c, p ) : c ≥ 2, p ≥ r + 1 }.Proof. Two comparisons resolve the two cyclic-core minima. Once d(v) is held, the r suffix outputs require r additions, giving the joint point (2 , r + 1). Setting every ci = 0 and discarding suffix outputs reduces a competitor to the two-comparison core, so C ≥ 2. Every rooted order makes one of x → v, v → x forward and all r suffix classes forward; thus ρfwd = r + 1, and theorem B.6 gives the addition lower bound. For DO, restrict to an open region with a, u, z ∈ (1 , 2), b ∈ (5 , 6), and each ci ∈ (10 , 11). Then 

d(x) = a < d (v) = a + u < d (ti), while the order of the suffix distances is exactly the order of the ci.Every one of the r! strict permutations occurs on a nonempty full-dimensional open set. At any reached comparison, two nonidentical affine operands have equality only on a proper hyperplane, so a depth-h adaptive tree has at most 2 h full-dimensional leaves. A leaf outputs one fixed order and cannot serve two permutations. Hence 2 h ≥ r!, giving h = Ω( r log r). Computing the distances and comparison-sorting their registers gives the matching upper bound. 42 P Proof and audit details 

P.1 Self-loops, unreachable vertices, and resource monotonicity 

Deleting a self-loop preserves every labeled nonnegative shortest distance. A program for the loopless graph solves the original graph by ignoring the loop inputs, while a program for the original graph can be partially evaluated at zero loop weights. The branchwise comparison and addition budgets do not increase in either direction. A topologically unreachable vertex has a fixed + ∞ output and can likewise be removed before counting numerical registers. The resource region is upward closed: a program meeting ( c, p ) meets every componentwise larger pair. The budget function C∗ 

> b

is nonincreasing in b. These elementary facts are used when passing from upper and lower envelopes to Pareto points. 

P.2 The generic-tie comparison argument in full form 

For a reachable rooted DAG H, choose potentials algebraically independent over the field generated by the program literals and set wuv = π(v) − π(u). Every source path to v has value π(v). On the finite reached branch, a register is a · w + γ with a ∈ NE(H)0 and γ in that field. Equality of two reached registers forces their coefficient difference into ker BH and their constant terms to agree. If the reached equality normals span a proper subspace Z of the incidence kernel, choose 0̸ = z ∈ ker BH ∩ Z⊥. By theorem B.2, some two paths to one endpoint have different z-slopes. The finite strict margins admit both signs of a sufficiently small perturbation w ± εz on the same adaptive branch, while all equality comparisons remain equal. The one output affine form at that endpoint would need to realize two different minimum slopes, which is impossible. Therefore Z = ker BH and at least |E(H)| − | V | + 1 comparisons are reached. The argument does not require the program to expose a path expression. A mixed sum has exactly the same affine coefficient record, and a repeated variable simply increases a coefficient. A literal changes only the constant term. The same perturbation argument therefore covers all operands allowed by the model. 

P.3 The two-spoke finite obstruction 

For H2, the strict output labels in equation (35) arise from the three-way hub minimum and the two translated spoke minima. The four- comparison upper algorithm exposes two inward candidates and then tests the two outward candidates. The five-comparison, two-addition program is branch-dependent and uses the direct source order to make the two additions mutually exclusive. For the lower endpoint, scale a hypothetical C ≤ 4, P ≤ 2 program along strict positive rays. The leading coefficient state is finite because at most two additions can insert new componentwise sums. Every comparison is a query between two available coefficient vectors. At each state, intersect the eight open output cones with the two strict sides of the query and retain only states for which one affine output label is correct on every surviving cone. An addition state enumerates every unordered pair of available vectors, including repeated and mixed supports. Closing these finite states under four queries and two insertions leaves no accepting state. This is the finite normal-form statement used in theorem D.2; it is independent of any path-register restriction. The geometric proof of C∗(H2) ≥ 4 is separate from this finite closure: the eight cells require eight full-dimensional leaves, their facet graph is connected, and each possible root wall cuts the interior of another cell. The finite closure is an independent verification of the stronger two-addition endpoint. 43 P.4 A convenient form of the banded count 

The condition σs ≤ s + r can also be counted recursively. At each position s ≤ k − r, exactly r + 1 unused values remain eligible, because all previously selected values are at most s + r − 1. Once those positions are filled, the remaining r values are unrestricted. This gives B(k, r ) = ( r + 1) k−rr!without invoking a probabilistic estimate. For the entropy comparison, write h = r + 1 and k = qh + s. The exact ratio is 2Γk,h −Λk,r = h(q−1)( h−1)+ s

(( h − 1)!) q−1s! .

The numerator dominates the denominator termwise, giving nonnegativity. The factorial estimate 

hh−1/(h − 1)! ≤ eh bounds the ratio by eqh , which is at most ek. This proves the uniform interval in theorem I.1. 

P.5 Resource accounting checklist 

For a DAG, class reduction contributes m−q comparisons, candidate selection contributes q −(n−1), and non-source endpoint classes contribute q − ds additions. For Hk, every rooted order has exactly one forward arc from each spoke pair, so ρfwd = k. In the rolling construction, one candidate addition is charged to each spoke and the crossing block contributes at most h − 1 = r extra candidate additions. These are numerical register creations; all block scans, selections, and output naming use only already materialized values. 

# References 

[AHLT99] Stephen Alstrup, Dov Harel, Peter W. Lauridsen, and Mikkel Thorup. Dominators in linear time. In Proceedings of the 31st Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing , pages 382–391. Association for Computing Machinery, 1999. [AHS +24] Sunny Atalig, Alexander Hickerson, Arrdya Srivastav, Tingting Zheng, and Marek Chrobak. Lower bounds for adaptive relaxation-based algorithms for single-source shortest paths. In Julián Mestre and Anthony Wirth, editors, 35th International Symposium on Algorithms and Computation (ISAAC 2024) , volume 322 of Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics (LIPIcs) , pages 8:1–8:16. Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2024. [CFJ +10] Jean Cardinal, Samuel Fiorini, Gwenaël Joret, Raphaël M. Jungers, and J. Ian Munro. An efficient algorithm for partial order production. SIAM Journal on Computing ,39(7):2927–2940, 2010. [DMM +25] Ran Duan, Jiayi Mao, Xiao Mao, Xinkai Shu, and Longhui Yin. Breaking the sorting barrier for directed single-source shortest paths. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing , pages 36–44. Association for Computing Machinery, 2025. [DMSY26] Ran Duan, Xiao Mao, Xinkai Shu, and Longhui Yin. A faster directed single-source shortest path algorithm. In 53rd International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming , volume 374 of Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics (LIPIcs) ,pages 81:1–81:23. Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2026. 44 [Epp23] David Eppstein. Lower bounds for non-adaptive shortest path relaxation. In Pat Morin and Subhash Suri, editors, Algorithms and Data Structures – 18th International Symposium, WADS 2023 , volume 14079 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 416–429. Springer, 2023. [GT12] Loukas Georgiadis and Robert E. Tarjan. Dominator tree certification and independent spanning trees, 2012. [HHR +24] Bernhard Haeupler, Richard Hladík, Václav Rozhoň, Robert E. Tarjan, and Jakub Tětek. Universal optimality of Dijkstra via beyond-worst-case heaps. In 2024 IEEE 65th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS) , pages 2099–2130, 2024. [JS82] Mark Jerrum and Marc Snir. Some exact complexity results for straight-line computa-tions over semirings. Journal of the ACM , 29(3):874–897, 1982. [Juk15] Stasys Jukna. Lower bounds for tropical circuits and dynamic programs. Theory of Computing Systems , 57(1):160–194, 2015. [Kar72] Richard M. Karp. Reducibility among combinatorial problems. In Raymond E. Miller, James W. Thatcher, and Jean D. Bohlinger, editors, Complexity of Computer Compu-tations , pages 85–103. Springer, 1972. [KMMS05] Kanela Kaligosi, Kurt Mehlhorn, J. Ian Munro, and Peter Sanders. Towards optimal multiple selection. In Automata, Languages and Programming: 32nd International Colloquium, ICALP 2005 , volume 3580 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 103–114. Springer, 2005. [Mah82] Bernd Mahr. Algebraic complexity of path problems. RAIRO. Informatique Théorique ,16(3):263–292, 1982. [Pet02] Seth Pettie. On the comparison-addition complexity of all-pairs shortest paths. In 

Algorithms and Computation: 13th International Symposium, ISAAC 2002 , volume 2518 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 32–43. Springer, 2002. [PR05] Seth Pettie and Vijaya Ramachandran. A shortest path algorithm for real-weighted undirected graphs. SIAM Journal on Computing , 34(6):1398–1431, 2005. [SBJ25] Elis Stefansson, Oliver Biggar, and Karl H. Johansson. Faster shortest-path algorithms using the acyclic-connected tree, 2025. Version 2, revised 11 March 2026. [SP75] P. M. Spira and A. Pan. On finding and updating spanning trees and shortest paths. 

SIAM Journal on Computing , 4(3):375–380, 1975. Conference version: 14th Annual Symposium on Switching and Automata Theory, DOI 10.1109/SWAT.1973.17. [Tar81] Robert Endre Tarjan. Fast algorithms for solving path problems. Journal of the ACM ,28(3):594–614, 1981. [vdHRR25] Ivor van der Hoog, Eva Rotenberg, and Daniel Rutschmann. Simpler universally optimal Dijkstra. In 33rd Annual European Symposium on Algorithms (ESA 2025) , volume 351 of Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics (LIPIcs) , pages 71:1–71:9. Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2025. 45