Title: Fast decremental tree sums in forests

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.06555v1

Published Time: Fri, 08 May 2026 01:36:56 GMT

Number of Pages: 34

Markdown Content:
# Fast decremental tree sums in forests 

# Benjamin Aram Berendsohn 1,2 and Marek Sokołowski 1,3 1Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarbrücken, Germany 

> 2

benjamin.berendsohn@fu-berlin.de 

> 3

msokolow@mpi-inf.mpg.de 

We study two fundamental decremental dynamic graph problems. In both prob-lems, we need to maintain a vertex-weighted forest of size n under edge deletions, weight updates, and a certain information-retrieval query. Both problems can be solved in O(log n) time per update/query using standard dynamic forest data struc-tures like top trees – even if additionally edge insertions are allowed. We investigate whether the deletion-only problem can be solved faster. First, we consider tree-sum queries, where we ask for the sum of vertex weights in one of the connected components (i.e., trees) in the forest. We give a data structure with O(n) preprocessing time and O(log ∗ n) time per operation, based on a micro-macro tree decomposition (Alstrup et al., 1997). If the forest is unweighted (i.e., all weights are 1 and cannot be changed), then the operation time can be improved to 

O(1) .Additionally, we give an asymptotically universally optimal algorithm. More specifically, our algorithm works in the group model , and processes m operations on an initial forest F in running time O(OPT( F, m )) . Here OPT( F, m ) is the num-ber of weight additions and subtractions that a best possible algorithm performs to handle a worst-case instance for a fixed initial forest F and a fixed number m of op-erations. We achieve this with a combination of the aforementioned decomposition technique, precomputation of optimal data structures for very small instances, and some insights into the behavior of OPT . Note that even the worst-case complexity of this algorithm remains unknown to us. Second, we consider subtree-sum queries. Here, the forest is rooted, and a query 

subtree-sum (v) returns the sum of weights in the subtree rooted at v. An easy reduction from the well-known prefix sum problem shows that the general, weighted version of the problem requires Θ( n log n) time for n operations. Interestingly, we prove that the Ω( n log n) complexity lower bound still holds even if weight updates are disallowed. On the other hand, we show that the unweighted version can be solved with O( log n  

> log log n

) time per operation, and this is tight. 1

> arXiv:2605.06555v1 [cs.DS] 7 May 2026

# 1. Introduction 

Maintaining connectivity in dynamic graphs is one of the fundamental problems in the design of algorithms, with a plethora of major results in the area throughout the decades. An efficient data structure maintaining connectivity in dynamic forests was given by Sleator and Tarjan [ST83]: Their link/cut trees support connectivity queries under edge insertions and removals in an n-vertex forest in O(log n) time. They also show that their data structure supports weights of vertices and various queries related to these weights in the same time complexity, such as the sum of weights of vertices in a tree component containing a given vertex, or the sum of weights of vertices in a subtree rooted at a specified vertex. The optimality of this data structure – even in the unweighted setting – was only shown much later by Pătraşcu and Demaine [PD06]. In the more general setting of arbitrary dynamic graphs, the asymptotic behavior of an optimal data structure is still not fully understood, with the currently best algorithm of Huang et al. [HHK +23] being a factor of Θ((log log n)2) away from the logarithmic lower bound. Aiming to break through the logarithmic operation lower bound, we may decide to restrict the space of possible updates to the graph. The incremental setting, in which edges may only be inserted to the graph, is precisely the disjoint set union problem, which was already studied by Galler and Fischer [GF64] and subsequently improved: Hopcroft and Ullman gave a data structure supporting insertions and connectivity queries in O(log ∗ n) time per operation [HU73], with the complexity analysis later refined by Tarjan to O(α(n)) per operation [Tar75]. Here, 

log ∗ n and α(n) denote two very slow-growing functions, namely the iterated logarithm and the 

inverse Ackermann function . Again, the presented data structures can be easily adapted to support weights of vertices and report aggregate information on the connected components of the graphs. The bound of O(α(n)) was later shown to be optimal in various computational models by Tarjan [Tar79] and Fredman and Saks [FS89], even under the promise that the graph always remains a forest. In this work, we focus on the decremental setting, where a data structure is given an initial graph and edges may only be removed from the graph. This restriction has also received con-siderable attention over the years, and the decremental connectivity problem has been solved optimally: A data structure processing m operations in an n-vertex forest in total O(n+m) time was given by Alstrup, Secher and Spork [ASS97], with the result later strengthened to planar graphs by Łącki and Sankowski [ŁS17]. However, interestingly, even the decremental forest data structure employs various bit-optimization tricks to achieve the optimal time complexity, which renders it unable to handle weights of vertices efficiently. This suggests a natural question: How efficiently could we implement a data structure for weighted decremental forests that can also report summaries of tree components – such as the sum of the weights of the vertices in the component – dynamically? And can such a data structure also handle more complex queries, such as the sum of the weights of the vertices in a rooted subtree of a specified tree component? 

Setting. We now formally introduce the problem. The task is to maintain a vertex-weighted 

rooted forest (F, w ), where weights come from some commutative group G, under some or all of the following operations: 

• cut (v): Delete the edge between v and its parent (we assert that this edge exists). 

• update-weight (v, x ): Set w(v) ← x.

• tree-sum (v) → x: Return the sum x of weights in the tree containing v.

• subtree-sum (v) → x: Return the sum x of weights in the subtree Fv rooted at v.We are mostly interested in the group model of computation, where the weights of the vertices are considered to be opaque objects. The implementation of a data structure may manipulate the weights (elements of the group) by adding them together or subtracting one from another, but no other operations – such as comparisons or the extraction of the representation of the weight in memory – are allowed. 2All operations listed above can be implemented in O(log n) worst-case time in the group model with well-known efficient fully dynamic forest data structures such as aforementioned link/cut trees [ST83] or top trees [AHdLT05], so any sequence of m operations can be processed in O(( n + m) log n) time. The question remains: Can (some or all) of the operations above be implemented more efficiently, knowing that the edges may only be removed from the forest? 

## 1.1. Results and techniques 

In the following, we formally present our results and give basic ideas on how to prove them. In the informal discussion following each result, we will assume for convenience that the number of operations m is roughly equal to the number n of vertices in the input forest. Thus the running times in the discussion will always be the total of the initialization time and the time required to process all m ≈ n operations. We will also assume the forest given initially is a tree. 

Tree-sums with recursive cluster decompositions. Our first result concerns the basic tree-sum 

problem. 

Theorem 1.1. There is a data structure that maintains a weighted rooted forest (F, w ) on n

vertices under cut , update-weight , and tree-sum , with running time O(( m + n) log ∗ n) for m

operations. 

We prove Theorem 1.1 in Section 3 using the well-known technique of micro-macro decompo-sition (defined in [ASS97], though similar ideas already exist in [GT85]), although we adapt it to our purposes and call it cluster decomposition . Here, we define this decomposition for rooted trees , which simplifies the presentation considerably. The basic idea is to partition the input tree into Θ( n  

> log n

) clusters , each of size O(log n), and contract each of these parts into either a single vertex or two vertices connected by an edge to obtain a cluster tree of size Θ( n  

> log n

).Recall a basic O(n log n) algorithm; call it Alg 1. An O(n log log n) algorithm Alg 2 can be obtained as follows: Construct the cluster tree in linear time, run Alg 1 on this cluster tree, and the same algorithm on each cluster. The running time for the cluster tree algorithm is 

O( n  

> log n

log n  

> log n

) = O(n), and the running time for each cluster with k ≤ log n vertices is 

O(k log k), for a total of O(n log log n). This approach can be iterated: an algorithm Alg t is implemented the same way, only that Alg t−1 is used for each of the clusters. Iterating this approach log ∗ n times gives an algorithm with log ∗ n “levels”, each of which takes O(n) time in total; thus, the total running time of Alg log ∗ n is O(n log ∗ n).Of course, the above presentation is heavily simplified. We will note one interesting detail. Performing a cut within a cluster may affect the weights stored in the cluster tree, necessitating an update-weight operation on the cluster tree. Hence, the number of operations in the cluster tree can be Θ( n), instead of Θ( n  

> log n

), as we assumed above. The solution to this is to use an algorithm where each update-weight operation takes only O(1) time (whereas cut s each take Θ(log n) amortized time). Note that standard dynamic tree solutions require Θ(log n) per operation, and thus are not suitable for this purpose. Instead, we design a simple decremental-only algorithm Alg 1 with this property. 

Unweighted and 0-1-weighted tree-sums. For unweighted forests, we can improve the above algorithm (Section 4). In fact, our solution works when the weight function only takes values zero and one. 1

Theorem 1.2. There is a data structure in the Word RAM model of computation that maintains a 0-1-weighted rooted forest (F, w ) with n vertices under cut , update-weight and tree-sum 

operations, in O(m + n) time for m operations. 

> 1The underlying group is the set of integers, so if all weights are one, we recover the unweighted tree-sum problem.

3We describe the algorithm for the unweighted case. The idea is to apply the cluster decompo-sition above only twice; then the bottom-level clusters form a decomposition of the input tree into O( n  

> log log n

) small trees of size at most k ≤ O (log log n). Note that the number of distinct (labeled) trees of size at most k is no more than kO(k) ≪ n  

> log log n

. Thus, we can essentially precompute all answers for every possible such tree, and then do a lookup for each cluster. This technique is commonly used in algorithm design [ADKF70, BV94, BF00, BF04]. For a data structure this is not quite as straightforward, since the queries are not known at the beginning. Still, we can compute something akin to a state graph that stores all necessary information, and can be navigated efficiently. 

An optimal weighted tree-sum algorithm. We can take the idea of precomputation even fur-ther (Section 5), based on a technique of decision trees used by Pettie and Ramachandran [PR02] (also see e.g. [Lar90, Mat92] for different applications of this approach). Perform the cluster de-composition three times, obtaining trees of size at most k ≤ O (log log log n). For these very small trees, we can precompute the optimal data structure in time o(n) (Appendix A). If OPT( n, m ) is the optimal total running time for m operations on a forest with n vertices, then our algorithm has running time 

O(n + m) + X

> i

OPT( ni, m i),

where ni ≤ k is the number of vertices in the ith cluster, and mi is the number of operations applied to that cluster. Note that P ni ≤ n and P mi ≤ m.With some effort (Section 5.1), we can argue that the above formula is upper bounded by 

O(n + m + OPT( n, m )) , since the function OPT satisfies a weak, asymptotic form of super-additivity : P 

> i

OPT( ni, m i) ≤ O (OPT( P 

> i

ni, P 

> i

mi) + P 

> i

ni) for any pair of positive integer sequences {ni}, {mi}. Interestingly, even this weak variant of super-additivity is quite chal-lenging to prove. The proof proceeds via a series of reductions involving data structures for 

tree-sum that are initialized with forests with zero weights . The rationale is that OPT 0(n, m )

– the function denoting the optimal total running time for m operations on a zero-initialized 

forest with n vertices – can be directly shown to be super-additive, i.e., P 

> i

OPT 0(ni, m i) ≤

OPT 0(P 

> i

ni, P 

> i

mi).We finally obtain 

Theorem 1.3. There exists a data structure with running time O(OPT( n, m ) + n + m) for any forest on n vertices and any sequence of m operations. 

Note that our data structure is as fast (up to constant) as any other data structure, even if the latter has n and m hard-coded into it. It turns out we can prove something even stronger: Our data structure is optimal even compared to other data structures with a hard-coded initial forest F . For such data structures, the only non-hard-coded parts of the input are the initial weights and the sequence of operations. This is precisely the notion of universal optimality ,popularized by works of Haeupler, Wajc, and Zuzic [HWZ21] and Haeupler, Hladík, Rozhon, Tarjan, and Tetek [HHR +24], and we adopt it here as well. Universally optimal algorithms have been recently studied for various static problems, such as Single-Source Shortest Paths [HWZ21, HHR +24, vRR25c], planar convex hull [ABC17, vRR25a] and sorting [HHI +25, vRR25b]. Arecent work of the first author presents a universally optimal data structure for the related 

tree-min problem [Ber26]. We now discuss some details of Theorem 1.3, in particular in comparison with Pettie and Ramachandran’s famous optimal minimum spanning tree (MST) algorithm [PR02]. They sim-ilarly reduce a large instance to many smaller instances, though their reduction is much more complex. On the other hand, for them, computing the optimal algorithm for small instances is quite straightforward, since every MST algorithm in the comparison model can be represented 4as a decision tree. Thus, they only need to enumerate all decision trees for the given small graph, and choose the best correct one. In contrast, the tree-sum problem is an online problem in the group model , which presents some interesting challenges. For example, testing correctness of a decision tree computing the MST of a static k-vertex graph is easy (just check all possible graphs, and for each graph, all possible input weight orders), but testing correctness of an algorithm (or a data structure) in the group model is harder. Another interesting problem is that the number operations applied to a single cluster is initially unknown, and can be much larger than the size of the cluster. Dealing with these problems requires some new insights. 2

Finally, Pettie and Ramachandran note that an explicit provably optimal algorithm for MST was actually known before. An argument of Jones [Jon97] transforms any optimal verification algorithm for a computational problem (which is known for MST) into an optimal algorithm. Interestingly, Jones’s argument does not work for the online data structure problems like ours. Thus, our optimality result in itself is novel. In any case, this approach yields massive constants in the running time and does not imply anything about the decision tree complexity of MST. In contrast, the running time of Pettie and Ramachandran’s algorithm matches the decision tree complexity. Theorem 1.3 similarly matches the optimal number of additions and subtractions, up to constant factors. That means that any algorithm that only performs a linear number of additions and subtractions in total (with arbitrary running time) implies a data structure with linear total running time. 

Subtree-sums. Finally, we consider the harder subtree-sum problem. In its full generality, with support for subtree-sum , update-weight , and cut , it is a generalization of the well-known partial-sum problem [BM80, Die89, Fen94, Fre82, FS89, Yao85]. In the partial-sum problem, we are tasked to maintain an array of weights under the operations of computing the sum of a prefix and changing an entry. Clearly, we can interpret the array as a degenerate path-like rooted tree. Then partial sums are subtree-sum operations and entry changes are update-weight operations (cut operations are not used). For the partial-sum problem, an Ω( n log n) lower bound was shown by Pătraşcu and Demaine [PD06], so we have: 

Observation 1.4. Each data structure that maintains a weighted forest with n vertices under the operations subtree-sum and update-weight requires Ω( n log n) time for n operations, even in the Word RAM model of computation and assuming G = Z.

Much more interesting is the case where we do not allow update-weight operations, only 

subtree-sum and cut . In Section 6, we show a randomized reduction from the lower bound of [PD06], asserting the Ω( n log n) lower bound in this restricted setting: 

Theorem 1.5. Each data structure that maintains a weighted forest with n vertices under the operations subtree-sum and cut requires Ω( n log n) time for Θ( n) operations in the Word RAM model of computation and assuming G = Z.

On a high level, we design a hard instance for the problem as follows. We show in Appendix B that the Ω( n log n) lower bound of Pătraşcu and Demaine also holds under the assumption that the underlying array contains √n integers ranging from 0 to Θ( √n), with each element of the array updated Θ( √n) times. The weighted forest in our proof consists then of a spine of √n

vertices – each representing an element of the array – with √n leaves of various weights attached to each vertex of the spine, so that a partial sum of i initial elements of the array can be inferred from the subtree-sum of the subtree rooted at the ith vertex of the spine. We also show a  

> 2In a different paper, Pettie and Ramachandran also give a provably optimal algorithm for an online data structure problem [PR05, Appendix B]. This is in the comparison model, so some of our challenges do not apply. Additionally, there appears to be an error in that paper that hides some of the complexity; see the discussion around Lemma 5.2 in Appendix A.2.

5Las Vegas randomized subroutine that efficiently translates an update of the ith element of the array to a sequence of O(1) cut s of leaves that are still attached to the ith vertex of the spine. This way, any sequence of Θ( n) operations in a partial-sum data structure is interpreted as a sequence of Θ( n) operations in the subtree-sum structure, and the Ω( n log n) lower bound for the former implies the same lower bound for the latter. With Observation 1.4 and Theorem 1.5 in mind, we study the unweighted variant of the problem (or, more precisely, the 0-1-weighted variant with no weight updates). Here, we are able to obtain an improved (amortized) running time of O( log n  

> log log n

) per operation (Section 7.2). Again, we state the slightly more general case of 0-1 weights: 

Theorem 1.6. There is a data structure in the Word RAM model maintaining a 0-1-weighted forest with n vertices under the operations subtree-sum and cut , with O(( m + n) log n  

> log log n

) total time for m operations. 

Theorem 1.6 again uses recursive cluster decompositions, but with larger clusters: Instead of 

O( n  

> log n

) clusters of size O(log n), we use roughly k = √log n clusters of size O( nk ). Recursively applying this decomposition until clusters have constant size yields a decomposition of depth 

O(log k n) = O( log n  

> log log n

). Each cluster tree obtained in this process has size at most k, which notably implies that it can be encoded with O(log n) bits, which fits into a single word. This allows us to combine a delayed-updating technique of Dietz [Die89] with some precomputation to obtain a fast data structure for these very small cluster trees. Note that the paper of Dietz [Die89] cited above solves a variant of our problem where the initial tree is a 0-1-weighted path updated by update-weight rather than cut , with the same 

O(( m + n) log n  

> log log n

) total time; this data structure is known to be optimal due to Fredman and Saks [FS89]. On the other hand, the path variant of Theorem 1.6 (reporting subtree-sum s in an unweighted or 0-1-weighted path with n vertices updated by cut ) is much easier – it can be solved in O(m + n) time, e.g. via a reduction to the marked ancestor problem [AHR98]. In contrast, we show in Section 7.1 that for general forests, our problem is as hard as the path variant with weight updates. 

Theorem 1.7. Each data structure in the Word RAM model that maintains an unweighted forest with n vertices under the operations subtree-sum and cut requires Ω( n log n  

> log log n

) time for 

n operations. 

In other words, the data structure of Theorem 1.6 is asymptotically optimal. 

## 1.2. Outlook to the offline setting 

We can consider the decremental tree-sum problem in an offline setting, where the entire sequence of m operations is provided to the algorithm together with the initial weighted n-vertex forest at the time of initialization. It turns out that the offline variant of the problem can be solved in O(n + m) time: Simulating the sequence of operations backwards, we reduce 

tree-sum to the incremental variant – that is, the disjoint set union problem – where the merge forest (the forest containing an edge uv for every merge of sets containing vertices u and v) is known in advance. This simplified variant of the problem is solvable in linear time in the Word RAM model by a data structure of Gabow and Tarjan [GT85]. Moreover, reporting tree-sum srequires additionally only n − 1 operations in the group G: Whenever two sets (i.e., vertex sets of two tree components of a forest) are merged, the tree sum of the resulting tree components is simply the sum of the tree sums of the components being merged. This discussion unveils an interesting phenomenon: In the online incremental setting of 

tree-sum , it is the maintenance of connected tree components that is strictly more compu-tationally expensive (requiring on average Ω( α(n)) time per edge insertion) than the additional bookkeeping of the tree sums ( O(1) time per insertion). However, the opposite appears to be the 6case in the decremental setting: The tree components can be maintained in amortized constant time per edge removal, but it is not clear at all whether tree sums can be tracked this efficiently. 

# 2. Preliminaries 

For k ∈ N, define [k] = {1, 2, . . . , k }. All logarithms in this work are binary, unless specified otherwise. For convenience, assume that log x = 0 for all x ≤ 1. Then for k ∈ N+, we define the k-fold logarithmic function log [k] x: log [1] x = log x and log [k] x = log(log [k−1] x) for k > 1.Finally, the iterated logarithm, log ∗ x, is defined as the smallest k such that log [k] x ≤ 1.All trees and forests in this work are rooted. In a tree T and vertices u and v, we say that 

u is an ancestor of v if u lies on the unique path from the root of T to v. In this case, we also say that v is a descendant of u. Strict ancestors and descendants are defined analogously, only that we additionally require that u̸ = v. For a tree T and its vertex v, we denote by Tv the subtree of T rooted at v, i.e., the subtree induced by all descendants of v. The depth of a vertex 

v, denoted by depth T (v), is its distance to the root (0 for the root itself), and the height of T

is the maximum depth of a vertex. We assume the standard Word RAM model of computation with memory cells ( words or 

registers ) of size b = Θ(log n) [FW90]. Formally, the memory is represented by an array R of 

b-bit integers, with access to standard arithmetic and bitwise operations, as well as comparisons and indirect accesses (of the form R[R[i]] ← R[j]). Each such access takes constant time. Most of the algorithms in this paper work in the group model . In this model, some memory cells may contain – instead of a b-bit integer – an element of a commutative group G. The elements of G can be manipulated in constant time via addition and subtraction, and the comparisons between the elements of G (including the zero-comparisons of the elements of G) are disallowed. In particular, it is forbidden to examine or modify the memory representation of any memory cell containing an element of G. The weights of vertices of F come from the group G. For convenience, we will denote by W [v] the memory cell occupied by the current weight w(v) of a vertex v.If F is a forest with a weight function w : V (F ) → G, then for U ⊆ V (F ) we define w(U ) = P 

> v∈U

w(v). Similarly, if T is a (sub)tree of F , then w(T ) = w(V (T )) . If S ⊆ V (F ), then we denote by F [S] the subgraph of F induced by S, and by w|S : S → G the restriction of the weight function w to the vertices in S.

Decremental connectivity. Our data structures rely heavily on the Word RAM data structures supporting connectivity queries in decremental forests. Such a data structure, when initialized with a forest F , supports the following updates and queries: 

• cut (v): Delete the edge between v and its parent (we assert that this edge exists). 

• root (v) → r: Return the root of the tree containing v.

• connected (u, v ) → bool : Indicate whether u and v are in the same component of F .

• ancestor (u, v ) → bool : Indicate whether u is an ancestor of v in F (which implies they are connected). As mentioned before, in the Word RAM model, there exists a linear-time data structure for decremental connectivity of forests supporting cut and root [ASS97]. Therefore: 

Lemma 2.1 ([ASS97]) . There is a Word RAM data structure that maintains a forest with n

vertices, and supports cut , root , connected , and ancestor in O(n + m) time for m operations. Proof. The operation connected (u, v ) is easily implemented by comparing root (u) and root (v).For ancestor , observe that if F 0 is the original forest and F is the current forest, then a vertex 

u is an ancestor of a vertex v if and only if u is an ancestor of v in F 0 and the two vertices are connected in F . The ancestor queries in F 0 can be answered in constant time after linear preprocessing by consulting the pre-order and post-order traversals of F 0.7Figure 1: A cluster decomposition (left) and the associated cluster tree (right) 

Binarization and auxiliary vertices. In our algorithms, it will be convenient to transform the input trees into binary trees, in which each vertex has at most two children. It is well-known that this can be done by transforming high-degree vertices into binary trees, which introduces a linear number of additional vertices. For most applications, the fact that the number of vertices increases by only a constant factor is sufficient to retain desired running times. However, for our optimal algorithm in Section 5, inserting additional vertices causes technical problems. To address this, we introduce the concept of auxiliary vertices .Let F be the input forest for one of our data structures. If a vertex v in F is marked as auxiliary, then no operations may be applied to v (e.g., cut (v) and update-weight (v, ·) are illegal). Moreover, if a weight function is associated to F , then w(v) = 0 . In the interest of brevity, we still write just F for a forest with auxiliary vertices; it will be made clear at the start of each relevant section whether algorithms allow auxiliary vertices or not. Using auxiliary vertices, we can transform any forest into a binary forest that is equivalent for our data structure problems. 

Theorem 2.2. Let (F, w ) be a weighted forest. Then, in linear time, we can compute a binary 

weighted forest (F ′, w ′), such that V (F ) ⊆ V (F ′), |V (F ′)| ≤ 2|V (F )|, every sequence of oper-ations cut , update-weight , tree-sum , and subtree-sum is legal in (F, w ) if and only if it is legal in (F ′, w ′), and every such sequence yields the same results on (F, w ) and (F ′, w ′).Moreover, w′(v) = w(v) for each v ∈ V (F ) and w′(v) = 0 for each v ∈ V (F ′) \ V (F ).Proof. For every vertex v ∈ V (F ) with dv ≥ 3 children, we replace v with a rooted path Pv

consisting of a root v and dv − 1 auxiliary vertices of weight 0. Each child of v then becomes a child of a different vertex in Pv. This transformation can be done in linear time, and it clearly satisfies all requirements of the theorem. 

## 2.1. The cluster decomposition 

We now formally describe a decomposition of a binary tree T into small disjoint well-structured subgraphs of T , which we call the cluster decomposition of T . The decomposition is inspired by the work of Alstrup et al. [ASS97], however our variant of the decomposition will be particularly convenient to use in the upcoming data structures. Let T be a tree, and let C ⊆ V (T ) induce a connected subtree of T . A vertex v ∈ C is called an upper boundary vertex if the parent of v is not contained in C, or v is the root of T . Note that each connected set C ⊆ V (T ) has precisely one upper boundary vertex, which we denote by ub( C). A vertex in C is called a lower boundary vertex if it has at least one child that is not contained in C. We call C a cluster if it has at most one lower boundary vertex, and moreover, no child of the lower boundary vertex is in C. Let lb( C) denote the lower boundary vertex of a cluster C, if it exists, or let lb( C) = ⊥ otherwise. Note that a single vertex is always a valid cluster. A cluster decomposition (see Fig. 1) of a tree T is a partition of V (T ) into a set C of disjoint clusters. The cluster tree of C is a tree S where V (S) are all boundary vertices of the clusters in C. A vertex u ∈ V (S) is a child of v ∈ V (S) if one of the following is true: 

• There is a cluster C ∈ C with u = lb( C) and v = ub( C), or 8ub( C1)?|C1| ≥ kub( C2)ub( C1)??|C1| + |C2| ≥ k(a) Two variants of case (a) lb( C2)ub( C2)lb( C1)ub( C1) (b) Case (b) ub( C2)ub( C1)|C1| + |C2| < k (c) Case (c) 

Figure 2: Illustration of the proof of Lemma 2.3. The returned cluster is colored red. 

• u and v are in different clusters and u is a child of v in T (then u must be an upper boundary vertex and v must be a lower boundary vertex). Note that every vertex in V (S) has a parent, except the root r of T . Thus, the cluster tree is indeed a (rooted) tree. Note that the cluster tree contains no auxiliary vertices, regardless of whether T contains auxiliary vertices or not. 

Lemma 2.3. Let T be a binary tree with n vertices, and let k ≤ n. Then, in linear time, we can compute a cluster decomposition of T into at most 6 nk clusters, each of size at most k, along with the corresponding cluster tree. Proof. The algorithm works by growing and merging clusters in a bottom-up fashion. We formulate it as a recursive algorithm construct , which, applied to a vertex v, partitions the rooted subtree Tv into clusters, and returns the cluster C containing v. Each cluster stores 

ub( C), lb( C) and |C|, so reconstructing the cluster tree is easy afterwards. Consider a call construct (v). We first apply construct on the up to two children of v. Let 

C′ be the set of up to two returned clusters. Consider these three cases (see Fig. 2): (a) If the total size of the clusters in C′ is at least k, then we create a new singleton cluster C

with V (C) = {v}, ub( C) = lb( C) = v, which we return. (b) If there are two clusters C1, C 2 ∈ C ′, lb( C1)̸ = ⊥ and lb( C2)̸ = ⊥, then we return a singleton cluster as above. (c) Otherwise, we merge the clusters in C′ with v. We create a new cluster C with V (C)

containing v and all vertices in C′ and set ub( C) = v. We further set lb( C) = u if 

lb( C′) = u for some C′ ∈ C ′ (note that u is unique by assumption), or lb( C) = ⊥

otherwise. (Note that if C′ is empty, then this creates a singleton cluster as in the previous cases, except that lb( C) = ⊥.) It is easy to see that this creates a valid cluster decomposition, and that all clusters have size at most k. We now show that the total number of clusters is at most 6 nk .Consider all times a cluster is finished by the algorithm. This can happen in three different ways. First, in the root call, a single root cluster is returned at the end. Second, in (a), we finish one or two clusters of total size at least k. This can happen at most nk times, limiting the number of such clusters to 2 nk .Third and finally, in (b), we finish exactly two clusters C1, C 2 of arbitrary size. Both these clusters have a lower boundary vertex, which means that are not leaves in the cluster tree S.Thus, we can already deduce that the number of leaves in S is at most 2 nk from the above. Additionally, C1 and C2 are children of the same cluster (which was just newly created) in S.Thus, each instance of this third case happening corresponds to an inner vertex of S with exactly two children. The number of such vertices is bounded by the number of leaves in S, minus one. Thus, the total number of clusters is at most 1 + 2 nk + 2 · (2 nk − 1) ≤ 6 nk .Both of our main algorithms use a cluster decomposition C of the input tree. The decom-position C itself is never modified, even when clusters become disconnected. However, we will modify the cluster tree by removing edges; for this, the following definition will be useful. 9Let T be a tree, let C be a cluster decomposition of T , and let S be the corresponding cluster tree. For every forest F obtained by removing some set of edges from T , we define the cluster forest induced by F as the forest G with V (G) = V (S), such that u is a child of v in G if: 

• There is a cluster C ∈ C with u = lb( C) and v = ub( C), and u, v are connected in F , or 

• u and v are in distinct clusters and u is a child of v in F .Note that G can be obtained from S by removing edges. More specifically, consider a sequence of edge removals within T that produces F . To construct G, we do the following: Whenever an edge between the boundary vertices of two clusters is removed, the corresponding two vertices in 

G are likewise disconnected. Whenever an edge within a cluster C is removed, if this disconnects 

lb( C) and ub( C), the corresponding edge in G is deleted. Since connectivity can be maintained in constant time per operation (Lemma 2.1), it is easy to construct the following data structure: 

Lemma 2.4. Suppose we are given a tree T on n vertices, and a cluster decomposition C of 

T . There is a data structure that maintains the induced cluster forest under (up to n − 1) edge deletions in O(n) total time. 

# 3. Tree sums in O(n log ∗ n) time 

In this section, we prove: 

Theorem 1.1. There is a data structure that maintains a weighted rooted forest (F, w ) on n

vertices under cut , update-weight , and tree-sum , with running time O(( m + n) log ∗ n) for m

operations. 

We start with a simple O(n log n+m)-time data structure (Section 3.1), which we then iterate using cluster decompositions (Section 3.2). For technical reasons, our data structures need to support a slightly modified cut opera-tion: cut-report (v) performs a cut (v), but additionally returns the results of tree-sum (v) and 

tree-sum (u), where u is the (former) parent of v. This will be useful to avoid extra calls to 

tree-sum that complicate the running time analysis. In this section, let a tree-sum data structure refer to a data structure that maintains a bi-nary weighted forest, potentially with auxiliary vertices, under tree-sum , update-weight , and 

cut-report . By Theorem 2.2, this also implies an analogous data structure for general weighted forests. 

## 3.1. A simple algorithm with constant-time queries and weight updates 

As mentioned in the introduction, well-known dynamic forest data structures can solve the tree-sum problem with O(log n) time per operation. The data structure presented next takes 

Θ(log n) (amortized) time per cut , but only O(1) time for tree-sum and update-weight , which is crucial to prove Theorem 1.1. The data structure is a straightforward adaptation of [ES81, Section 2], but we provide a full proof for completeness. 

Lemma 3.1. There is a tree-sum data structure with the following running times for n vertices: 

O(n) for initialization, O(1) for each tree-sum and update-weight , and O(n log n) in total for all cut-report operations. Proof. Let (F, w ) be the maintained weighted forest. We keep an explicit representation of 

F (with parent and child pointers) and a helper data structure R on F for root queries (Lemma 2.1). Each tree root r stores the total weight of the respective tree, which we de-note by S[r]. Each vertex additionally stores its current weight w(v).Initialization clearly takes O(n) time. To answer a tree-sum (v) query, we first compute 

r ← R. root (v), and then return S[r]. For update-weight (v, x ), first let y = w(v) be the previous 10 weight of v. Set w(v) ← x, then again compute r ← R. root (v) and set S[r] ← S[r] + x − y.Each tree-sum or update-weight operation clearly takes constant time, as desired. We now implement cut (v) (and deal with cut-report later). First determine r ← R. root (v).Then perform R. cut (v) and remove the edge between v and its parent from the explicit rep-resentation of F . Now v and r are both roots in the forest, and we need to (re)compute S[v]

and S[r]. Let X be the previous value of S[r]. We compute the weight sums of each of the two trees Fv and Fr with a straightforward traversal, in O(|Fv|), resp. O(|Fr|) time. However, we do this in parallel and stop when one of the two traversals is finished. In this way, we compute either S[v] or S[r] in O(min {| Fv|, |Fr|} ) time. If, say, we have S[v], we can easily compute 

S[r] ← X − S[v], and vice versa. We now determine the total running time of all cut operations. It is easy to see that it asymptotically follows the recursion 

t(1) = 1; t(n) ≤ max  

> k∈[n−1]

(min {k, n − k} + t(k) + t(n − k)) ,

which is well-known to solve to O(n log n).Finally, cut-report simply performs a cut and then two appropriate tree-sum operations. This takes O(1) extra time per cut-report , and since there are at most n − 1 edges to delete, this is O(n) extra work in total. 

## 3.2. Iterating the algorithm 

We now show how to build data structures with running times of roughly log log n, log log log n,etc. per operation. The following reduction using cluster decompositions is the main necessary ingredient. 

Lemma 3.2. Suppose there is a tree-sum data structure X with total running time f (n′, m ′) for 

n′ vertices and m′ operations. Then, there exists a tree-sum data structure with the following property. For each number of operations m and number of vertices n, there exists an integer 

k ∈ N+ and integers mi ∈ N0, ni ∈ N+ for i ∈ [k] with Pki=1 ni ≤ n, Pki=1 mi ≤ m, and 

ni ≤ log n for all i ∈ [k], such that the total running time on any instance with n vertices and 

m operations is at most 

O(n + m) + 

> k

X

> i=1

f (ni, m i).

The numbers ni in Lemma 3.2 refer to the cluster sizes, and mi to the number of operations applied to a particular cluster. The lemma then essentially states that each operation is delegated to a single cluster, with overall linear overhead. In the remainder of this section, we prove Lemma 3.2. For simplicity, we assume the initial forest is a tree; otherwise, if the forest is disconnected, we can apply the data structure separately for each connected component, and use Lemma 2.1 to find the proper data structure to query or modify. Let (T 0, w 0) be the initial weighted binary tree. We first use Lemma 2.3 with the maximum cluster size k = log n to compute a cluster decomposition C of T 0 with cluster tree S. We maintain the induced cluster forest G as described by Lemma 2.4. We also maintain a weight function w′ on the vertices in the cluster forest G, as follows. Suppose (F, w ) is the current weighted forest. Let C be some cluster, and let u = ub( C) ∈ V (G).Then w′(u) is defined as the sum of weights of all vertices in C that are connected to u. On the other hand, if v = lb( C) exists, then w′(v) is defined as the sum of weights of all vertices in C

that are connected to v, but not to u = ub( C). In particular, note that w′(v) = 0 as long as v

is connected to u.11 Observation 3.3. Let v ∈ V (G) be a boundary vertex of some cluster, let T be the tree in F

containing v, and let U be the tree in G containing v. Then w(T ) = w′(U ).

In the following, let F denote the current forest, and let G denote the cluster forest induced by F . Let w denote the current weight function on F , and let w′ denote the weight function on 

G defined as above. Our data structure maintains (F, w ) and (G, w ′) explicitly (with child and parent pointers), and additionally: 

• A data structure R for connected queries in F (Lemma 2.1). 

• An instance D of the data structure from Lemma 3.1 on (G, w ′).

• A cluster object for each cluster C, which stores ub( C) and lb( C).

• For each cluster C, an instance XC of the given data structure X (defined in Lemma 2.3) on the induced subforest F [C], with the weight function w restricted to C.

• For each vertex, a pointer to the cluster object containing it. Initialization works as follows. First compute C and G using Lemma 2.3, with k = log n.Create the cluster objects and point each vertex towards its cluster. Then initialize R, D, and all instances XC . Finally, compute w′ by summing the weights of each cluster and assigning this sum to the upper boundary vertex (recall that all clusters are still connected). We now describe the three operations. 

• Consider an operation tree-sum (v). We first try to find a boundary vertex that is con-nected to v, by determining its cluster C, and then checking connectivity between v and 

ub( C), resp. lb( C), using R. If v is not connected to either, then the component of F

containing v is entirely within C. Thus, we can return XC .tree-sum (v). Otherwise, if v

is connected to some u ∈ { ub( C), lb( C)}, then we can return D. tree-sum (u) by Observa-tion 3.3. 

• Consider update-weight (v, x ). Say y is the weight w(v) before the operation. We again first determine the cluster C containing v, and call XC .update-weight (v, x ). Further, the change to w may affect w′ for either ub( C) or lb( C). We again check connectivity between 

v and the two boundary vertices. If v is connected to ub( C), then we increase w′(ub( C)) 

by x − y. Otherwise, if v is connected to lb( C), we increase w′(lb( C)) by x − y. If neither is true, w′ does not change for any vertex. 

• Consider cut-report (v). Let u be the parent of v (before the operation). Suppose first that u and v are in distinct clusters. Then u is a lower boundary vertex and v is an upper boundary vertex. Thus, we can simply call D. cut-report (v) and pass along the two returned values. No cluster is changed, so w′ and XC do not need to be touched. Second, suppose that u and v are both contained in a single cluster C. This still may remove an edge from G; we check this as in Lemma 2.4 and call D. cut if necessary. We then call XC .cut-report (v), which returns the sums xu and xv of weights of vertices in C

connected to u, resp. v. Now w′ could have changed for ub( C) or lb( C), and we need to update it in D. Recalling the definition of w′, it is straightforward to determine w′(ub( C)) 

and w′(lb( C)) by checking connectivity between ub( C), lb( C), u, and v, and then using 

xu or xv if necessary. If w′ changes, we call D. update-weight appropriately. Finally, we need to return the results for tree-sum (u) and tree-sum (v). This is again straightforward to compute: If connected to ub( C) or lb( C), we can use D. tree-sum ; if not, we can use xu or xv, respectively. Note that we never call operations on auxiliary vertices in XC , since by assumption we are never given an auxiliary vertex as parameter v.We now bound the running time. Initialization, aside from the instances XC , takes time O(n).Besides calls to XC and D, each operation performs a constant amount of work, for a total of 12 O(m) across m operations. By Lemma 3.1, the time spent in D is O(m + |V (G)| log |V (G)|) ≤O(m + n).Finally, consider the time spent in a single instance XC . By definition, this is f (ni, m i), where 

mi is the number of operations called on XC , and ni = |C|. It remains to show that the stated conditions on mi and ni are true. Clearly, the total size of all clusters is n, so P ni = n. Also, each cluster has size at most log n, so ni ≤ log n. Further, observe that each operation (in the data structure we just described) results in at most one call to an operation of XC . Thus, we have P mi ≤ m. This concludes the proof of Lemma 3.2. 

Corollary 3.4. There is a tree-sum data structure, parameterized with t ∈ N+, with total running time O(t(m + n) + n log [t] n) for m operations and n vertices. Proof. Use Lemma 3.1 for the case t = 1 . For t ≥ 2, use Lemma 3.2 and the data structure constructed for t − 1. By induction, the running time of the latter is, up to an absolute mul-tiplicative constant, bounded by f (m′, n ′) = t(m′ + n′) + n′ log [t] n′ for m′ operations and n′

vertices. The running time of the new data structure then is, up to an absolute multiplicative constant, at most 

m + n +

> k

X

> i=1

(t − 1)( mi + ni) + ni log [t−1] ni ≤ t(m + n) + n log [t] n, 

using that P mi = m, P ni = n, and ni ≤ log n.With t = log ∗ n, Corollary 3.4 implies Theorem 1.1. 

# 4. Tree sizes in linear time 

In this section, we prove: 

Theorem 1.2. There is a data structure in the Word RAM model of computation that maintains a 0-1-weighted rooted forest (F, w ) with n vertices under cut , update-weight and tree-sum 

operations, in O(m + n) time for m operations. 

Recall the algorithm summary from the introduction; we now fill in the details. Let a tree-size data structure be a data structure as in Theorem 1.2, which supports auxiliary vertices in the input. 

Lemma 4.1. Fix a machine word size b and some ℓ ≤ b  

> 3+log b

. There is a tree-size data structure that maintains a 0-1-weighted forest on up to ℓ vertices, with O(ℓ) initialization time and O(1) 

time per operation. The data structure requires a global table, only depending on ℓ, that can be precomputed in time O((5 ℓ)ℓ).Proof. We show how to handle forests with precisely ℓ vertices. If an input forest has fewer than 

ℓ vertices, we can simply add isolated vertices as necessary. Let F be the set of all possible 0-1-weighted forests (F, w ) on ℓ vertices. We can always assume that V (F ) = [ ℓ]. Encode each (F, w ) in a bitstring id (F, w ) as follows: For each vertex v ∈ [ℓ],in order, encode its parent (zero if v is a root) with ⌈log( ℓ + 1) ⌉ bits. Then, encode its weight with one additional bit. The length of id (F, w ) is c := ℓ(⌈log( ℓ + 1) ⌉ + 1) ≤ b, so it fits into a single machine word. Moreover, the number of bitstrings of length c is at most 2c ≤ (4 ℓ + 4) ℓ.We now describe the global table required by our data structure. Call it A. For each 0-1-weighted forest (F, w ) of size ℓ, we store the following information in A[id (F, w )] :

• A table S of size ℓ, containing the results of tree-sum (v) for each v ∈ V (F ).13 • For i ∈ { 0, 1}, a table Ui of size ℓ. This table contains, for each v ∈ V (F ), the encoding 

id (F, w ′), where w′ is obtained from w by setting w′(v) to i. That is, let w′(v) = i and 

w′(u) = w(u) for all u̸ = v.

• A table C of size ℓ containing, for each vertex v, the encoding id (F ′, w ), where F ′ is obtained from F by applying cut (v) (or F ′ = F , if v is already a root in F ). Computing these tables is easily done in O(ℓ) time (note that the encodings id (F, w ′) and 

id (F ′, w ) can be computed from id (F, w )). Since A has size 2c, the total running time to compute A is O(2 c · ℓ) ≤ O ((5 ℓ)ℓ).Now suppose we are given a 0-1-weighted forest (F, w ). Our data structure consists of simply the bitstring x ← id (F, w ), which we construct in O(ℓ) time. Now suppose we call 

D. tree-sum (v), for v ∈ [ℓ]. Then we find the entry A[x], recover the table S, and return S[v].For D. update-weight (v, i ), we find A[x], take the table Ui, and set x ← Ui[v]. We can han-dle D. cut in the same way, using C. Each of these operations clearly takes constant time, as desired. We can now combine Lemma 4.1 with Lemma 3.2 to prove Theorem 1.2. The only additional observation necessary is that the reduction of Lemma 3.2 preserves the property that w is a 0-1 weight function. Internally, the more general weight function w′ is used only for the data structure D (which uses Lemma 3.1), not for the data structures XC .

Proof of Theorem 1.2. Start by precomputing the global table of Lemma 4.1, with parameter ℓ =

⌊log log n⌋. This takes o(n) time. We now have a data structure with running time f (m′, n ′) ∈O(m′ + n′) for m′ operations and n′ vertices, but only if n′ ≤ log log n. Applying Lemma 3.2 gives us a data structure with running time O(m′ + n′) for all forests with n′ ≤ log n vertices, and applying it the second time yields the claim. 

# 5. Tree sums in optimal time 

We now present an explicit data structure with unknown, but optimal running time. In this section, let a tree-sum data structure support operations cut , tree-sum , and update-weight ;auxiliary vertices are again allowed. Unlike in Section 3, we are not restricted to binary input trees, and do not require support for cut-report .Let D be a tree-sum data structure and let F be a forest. Let T(D, F, m ) be the maximum number of additions and subtractions that D performs when executing a legal sequence of m ∈ N0

operations with the initial forest F . The maximum is thus taken over the operation sequences and the initial weights. Let OPT( F, m ) be the minimum T(D, F, m ) over all data structures D.Note that the quantity OPT( n, m ) defined in the introduction is the maximum OPT( F, m ) over all forests F on n vertices. 3 The main result of this section is: 

Theorem 5.1. There exists a single data structure with running time O(OPT( F, m ) + m + n)

for any forest F on n vertices and any sequence of m operations. Note that the data structure does not know F , n, or m upfront. 

This means that our data structure performs asymptotically as good as even the data struc-tures that have the number of operations m and the initial forest F hard-coded. In particular, Theorem 5.1 implies Theorem 1.3. As stated in the introduction, the main idea is to precompute an optimal data structure for very small trees. 

> 3In the introduction, we did not allow auxiliary vertices; however, it is easy to see that marking a vertex as auxiliary cannot make the problem easier.

14 Lemma 5.2. Given a forest F with n vertices, in time 22nO(1) 

, we can precompute a tree-sum data structure D that performs m ∈ N0 operations with the initial forest F (and arbitrary initial weights) in time O(OPT( F, m ) + m + n).

We will show Lemma 5.2 in Appendix A. Our data structure (for large trees) works as follows. First, for each (ordered) binary tree T on at most k = ⌊log log log n⌋ vertices, compute an optimal data structure DT for T with Lemma 5.2. As is well known, there are no more than 

O(4 k) ≤ O (log n) such trees. We can combine them into a single data structure X with optimal running time (with linear overhead) for all binary trees of size at most log log log n.4

Now take the components S1, S 2, . . . , S k of the input forest F . Binarize each of them using Theorem 2.2, obtaining binary trees T 1, T 2, . . . , T k. As usual, we build the helper data structure of Lemma 2.1 to identify the affected tree when performing an operation on the overall forest. For each T i, apply Lemma 3.2 three times, using X as the data structure for small trees. Note that Lemma 3.2 requires X to support cut-report , which we simulate with one cut and two 

tree-sum operations. The running time for m′ operations on one of the trees T i is as follows, for some k ∈ N+,some partition of T i into (cluster) subtrees T i, 1, T i, 2, . . . , T i,k , and some m1, m 2, . . . , m k ∈ N0

with Pkj=1 mj ≤ m′:

O(|V (T i)| + m′) + 

> k

X

> j=1

OPT( T i,j , 3mj ).

The factor 3 in OPT( T i,j , 3mj ) is due to the fact that each cut-report operation results in three actual operations on X.We now need the following lemma, which we will show in a moment in Section 5.1. 

Lemma 5.3. Let F be a forest, and let T1, T 2, . . . , T k be the trees induced by a partition of V (F )

into connected subsets. Further let m1, m 2, . . . , m k ∈ N0. Then: 

> k

X

> i=1

OPT( Ti, 3mi) ≤ O (OPT( F, m ) + n).

This bounds the running time for m′ operations on T i by O(|V (T i)| + m′ + OPT( T i, m ′)) .Now observe that OPT( Si, m ′) = OPT( T i, m ′), since by Theorem 2.2, all operation sequences return exactly the same results on Si and T i. Applying Lemma 5.3 again on the components 

S1, S 2, . . . , S k yields the running time O(n + m + OPT( F, m )) for m operations on F . Thus, we have shown Theorem 1.3. 

## 5.1. Weak super-additivity of OPT 

In this section, we prove Lemma 5.3. We need the following definitions. An initial-zero tree-sum data structure is a tree-sum data structure that only accepts initial forests where all weights are zero. (Thus, weights need to be changed before obtaining anything useful from tree-sum 

queries). Define OPT 0 in the same way as OPT , but for initial-zero tree-sum data structures. It turns out that OPT 0 is easier to work with than OPT . Indeed, we can show that OPT 0 is 

super-additive .In the following statement, we say that U ⊆ V (F ) is convex if for each u, v ∈ U , if u and 

v are connected in F , then they are also connected in F [U ]. In other words, U includes from each tree T of F either a connected subgraph of T , or nothing at all. In the initial-zero setting, this in particular implies that any sequence of operations in an instance (F, w ) that is legal in 

(F [U ], w |U ) yields the same results in both instances.            

> 4When given an initial binary tree T, the combined data structure Xcan identify the respective DTin O(|V(T)|)
> time, using a table containing each DT.

15 Lemma 5.4. Let F be a forest, U1, U 2 be a partition of V (F ) into convex subsets, and let 

m1, m 2 ∈ N0. Then OPT 0(F [U1], m 1) + OPT 0(F [U2], m 2) ≤ OPT 0(F, m 1 + m2).Proof. Let F1 = F [U1], let F2 = F [U2], and let m = m1 + m2. Let D be an optimal initial-zero tree-sum data structure for F, m , that is, the maximum number of additions and subtractions D

performs when handling any m operations with the initial forest F and zero weights is precisely 

OPT 0(F, m ). We now give two data structures D1 and D2 for the forests F1 and F2, respectively, and then show that they perform at most OPT 0(F, m ) additions and subtractions in total when presented with m1 and m2 operations, respectively. First, D1 is the same as D. In particular, D1 behaves as if initialized with the original forest F ,although it only accepts cut (v), update-weight (v, ·) or tree-sum (v) if v ∈ U1. Now take an operation sequence X∗ 

> 1

of length m1 on F1 such that the number of additions and subtractions 

D performs to execute X∗ 

> 1

is maximized . Run D with X∗ 

> 1

, and capture the final state of the data structure. Hard-code this state into the data structure D2, except set the weights of all vertices in F1 and all group elements stored by the data structure to zero. When presented with an operation sequence X2 on F2 (one operation at the time), D2 continues the execution of D

from that final state. 5

The correctness of D1 is easy to see: Suppose X1 is a sequence of m1 operations on F1.Consider a tree-sum (v) query in X1 (possibly after some cut s). In D1, the query returns the sum of weights of some set U ⊆ V (F1). In D, it returns the sum of weights of some superset 

U ′ ⊇ U . However, since U and U ′ induce connected subgraphs of F , and V (F1) is convex, we have U ′ \ U ⊆ V (F2). Moreover, weights in V (F2) are zero at the start and never changed by 

X1. Thus, the query returns the same result in both cases. We can show correctness of D2 in a similar, but slightly more complicated way. Consider a 

tree-sum (v) query from X2 applied to D, assuming X∗ 

> 1

and all previous queries in X2 have been applied already. The return value x of this query is computed by a series of additions and subtractions involving (previous or current) weights from F1 and F2. By ignoring all such additions and subtractions performed during the execution of X∗ 

> 1

, we get that x is a linear combination of (1) weights from F1 and F2, all read during the execution of X2, and (2) values stored in the data structure directly after execution of X1. Now recall that D2 sets all those stored values to zero, and also sets all weights in F1 to zero. Thus, what D2 returns is the reduced linear combination with only the weights from F2. As above, by convexity, this is precisely the correct result. Having shown correctness, we now argue the stated running times. Let X1 and X2 be some operation sequences on F1 and F2, respectively. Recall that T(D′, F ′, m ′) is the maximum number of additions and subtractions that a data structure D′ performs when executing m′ ∈ N0

operations with an initial forest F ′. For convenience, let also T(D′, F ′, X ′) be the number of additions and subtractions that D′ performs when executing a specific sequence X′ of operations on F ′. Note that T(D′, F ′, m ′) is the maximum of T(D′, F ′, X ′) over all sequences X′ of length 

m′.By construction, we have T(D1, F 1, X 1) = T(D, F, X 1), and T(D, F, X ∗ 

> 1

) + T(D2, F 2, X 2) = 

T(D, F, X ∗ 

> 1

+ X2), and further T(D, F, X 1) ≤ T(D, F, X ∗ 

> 1

). These three inequalities imply that 

T(D1, F 1, X 1) + T(D2, F 2, X 2) ≤ T(D, F, X ∗ 

> 1

+ X2) ≤ OPT 0(F, m ).

Since this is true for any pair of sequences X1 and X2, we have 

OPT 0(F1, m 1) + OPT 0(F2, m 2) ≤ OPT 0(F, m ),

as desired. 

> 5This formulation assumes that data structures have access to the zero element of the weight group. However, note that we can easily simulate additions with zero instead of actually storing zeroes.

16 We will now generalize Lemma 5.4 to normal tree-sum data structures without the initial-zero assumption. We need a technical lemma about the relation between OPT and OPT 0.

Lemma 5.5. We have OPT( F, m ) ≤ OPT 0(F, 5m) + 2 n for each forest F on n vertices and 

m ∈ N0.

The proof of Lemma 5.5 requires a forest partition similar to a cluster decomposition (see Lemma 2.3). We cannot use the latter, since it requires binary trees, and we need the lemma to work for arbitrary trees. Fortunately, not all properties of cluster decompositions are needed, so we can use the following simplification. 

Lemma 5.6. Let F be a (not necessarily binary) forest and let k ∈ N+. Then there exists a partition P of V (F ) such that each P ∈ P induces a (connected) subtree of F , and, for each 

P ∈ P ,(a) either the root of F [P ] is a root of F and |P | < k ,(b) or |P | ≥ k and removing the root of F [P ] splits F [P ] into subtrees of size less than k.Proof. We can use a simplified version of the algorithm in Lemma 2.3: Essentially, grow sets P

bottom-up, and finish a set when it grows to at size k or larger. Analogously to Lemma 2.3, we define a recursive algorithm construct ′(v) that will be applied to every root v of F and returns the part P ∈ P containing v. It works as follows. If v has children, apply construct ′ to each of them. Let C be the set of returned parts that have size less than k. Destroy these parts and return P = {v} ∪ S C. In the end, let P be the set of all parts that were created, but not destroyed. It is easy to see that every vertex is contained in some part in P, and that each part satisfies one of the two requirements of the lemma. 

Proof of Lemma 5.5. First, observe that an initial-zero tree-sum data structure can simulate a (normal) tree-sum data structure by using update-weight at the start to set the weight of each non-auxiliary vertex (recall that auxiliary vertices have weight zero). This requires n operations, so we have OPT( F, m ) ≤ OPT 0(F, m + n). If n ≤ 4m, we are done. Now suppose that conversely m ≤ 14 n. Take an initial-zero tree-sum data structure D0 that optimally handles 5m operations on F . We will present a tree-sum data structure D for F that handles m operations with at most O(n) additional operations. Given is F and an initial weight function w on F . Our data structure D first computes a decomposition P as defined in Lemma 5.6 with k = ⌈ nm ⌉. Note that we do not care about running time, only number of additions and subtractions (of which we have done none so far). Call a part special if it induces a component of the current forest and has size smaller than k.Note that each cut splits some part into two new parts. If the original part was special, the two new parts must also both be special. Otherwise, up to one new part may be special. We claim that initially there are at most 2 nk non-special parts. Indeed, there clearly are at most nk parts of size at least k. Further, each component that is not induced by a special part contains at most one part of size less than k (the one containing the root), and at least one other part (which must have size at least k by Lemma 5.6). Thus, the number of such small non-special parts is no more than nk , so overall we have no more than 2 nk non-special parts. For now, let us assume that F contains no auxiliary vertices. Initialization works as fol-lows. For each non-special part P , we compute the sum of its weights x. Then, we call 

D0.update-weight (r, x ), where r is the root of F [P ]. This requires fewer than n additions and subtractions, and at most 2 nk update-weight operations on D0. Observe that at this point of time, the sum of weights of each non-special component is correct in D0; we will maintain this invariant throughout. Now consider an operation tree-sum (v). If v is contained in a special part, we compute the sum of the respective special component by brute force, consulting the weight function w. Since 17 special components have size smaller than k, this takes fewer than k − 1 operations. If v is contained in a non-special part, we delegate the query to D0. The result will be correct by our invariant. Second, consider an operation update-weight (v, x ). We update w accordingly. If v is con-tained in a non-special part P , we call D0.update-weight (r, y ), where r is the root of F [P ], and 

y is the old weight of r in D0, plus the difference between x and the previous weight w(v). This requires up to one addition and one subtraction, and maintains the invariant. Finally, consider an operation cut (v). If v and its parent u are contained in the same non-special part P , we split P into the two parts P1 and P2 that stay connected after removing the edge {u, v }. One or both of the new parts may be non-special, so we need to store their weight sums in their respective roots. By Lemma 5.6, when splitting any part in this way (even repeatedly), at least one of the newly created parts has size at most k −1. Thus, we can compute the weight sum of one of P1 and P2 with at most k − 2 additions, and compute the weight sum of the other part with a single subtraction. Then, we update the root weights in D0 with two 

update-weight operations, and finally perform cut (v) in D0, for a total of three operations in 

D0.For initialization and m operations, our data structure performs at most 2 nk + 3 m ≤ 5m oper-ations in D0, and additionally performs at most n + m · (k − 1) ≤ 2n additions and subtractions, as desired. It remains to show how to support auxiliary vertices in F . The algorithm described above may illegally access an auxiliary vertex when performing D0.update-weight (r, ·) on the root 

r of a part; this can happen during initialization or as the result of an update-weight or cut 

operation. To avoid this, we define the representative of a part as an arbitrary, but fixed non-auxiliary vertex. Assuming such a vertex exists, we can simply use the representative instead of the root. If no such vertex exists, all vertices in the given part have weight zero by definition. In that case, we can skip the call D0.update-weight (r, x ) during initialization ( x = 0 anyway). Moreover, no update-weight or cut operation can be applied to any vertex in that part, so no 

D0.update-weight will be ever necessary. We need one more property of OPT , namely that several instances of a data structure process-ing m operations on a forest F can be combined into a single instance processing significantly more than m operations on F .

Lemma 5.7. Let F be a forest and m ∈ N+. Then OPT( F,  32 m) ≤ 3 · OPT( F, m ).Proof. Suppose we have an optimal data structure Dm for m operations on F . We handle a sequence X of at most  32 m operations as follows. Initialize an instance I of Dm with the initial forest and weight assignments, and perform the first m operations of X on I. Let (F ′, w ′) be the weighted forest obtained after performing the first m operations. Let E be the set of edges of F

that were cut by the first m operations of X, so F ′ = F − E. Let also C be the set of connected components of F ′. For any subset C′ ⊆ C , define the cost of C′, denoted c(C′), as the number of edges in E that need to be cut to separate all components in C′ from each other. Naturally, 

c(C) = |E| ≤ m. In general, c(C′) equals the sum, over all trees T of F containing at least one component from C′, of the number of components of C′ contained in T minus one. We will now prove that C can be partitioned into two families C1, C2 such that c(C1), c (C2) ≤ 12 m. Indeed, consider any tree T of F containing k components from C, say A1, . . . , A k. The contribution of T to c(C) is k − 1. Assigning the components A1, . . . , A k to C1 and C2 evenly ensures that each Ci receives at most  k

> 2

 components from T , and thus the contribution of 

T to c(Ci) is at most  k

> 2

 − 1 ≤ k−12 . Therefore, c(C1), c (C2) ≤ 12 c(C) ≤ 12 m, so in particular 

c(C1), c (C2) ≤  12 m.We now initialize two more instances I1 and I2 of Dm. The instance Ii will receive the initial 18 forest (F, w ′

> i

) with the following initial weights: 

w′

> i

(v) = 

(

w′(v) if v is contained in a component from Ci,

0 otherwise. Then, the instance Ii immediately receives a sequence of cut s separating all components in Ci

from each other; by our previous discussion, this requires at most  12 m operations in Ii. At this point, observe that the tree-sum of any vertex v in F ′ can be computed by adding the results of 

tree-sum (v) in both I1 and I2. Now perform the remaining  12 m operations from X as follows: 

• update-weight operations are delegated to the instance Ii responsible for the component containing the affected vertex; 

• cut operations are forwarded to both I1 and I2; and 

• tree-sum operations are performed by querying both I1 and I2 and returning the sum of the results. Clearly, this is correct, and each instance Ii performs in total at most  12 m +  12 m = m

operations. This yields the required bound. Applying Lemma 5.7 a constant number of times yields OPT( F, c · m) ≤ O (OPT( F, m )) for every fixed constant c ≥ 1. With this, we are finally ready to prove: 

Lemma 5.3. Let F be a forest, and let T1, T 2, . . . , T k be the trees induced by a partition of V (F )

into connected subsets. Further let m1, m 2, . . . , m k ∈ N0. Then: 

> k

X

> i=1

OPT( Ti, 3mi) ≤ O (OPT( F, m ) + n).

Proof. We have 

> k

X

> i=1

OPT( Ti, 3mi) ≤

> k

X

> i=1

OPT 0(Ti, 15 mi) + O(n) (Lemma 5.5) 

≤ OPT 0(F, 15 m) + O(n) (Lemma 5.4) 

≤ OPT( F, 15 m) + O(n) (obvious) 

≤ O (OPT( F, m ) + n). (Lemma 5.7) Observe that, unsurprisingly, the constant 3 in Lemma 5.3 can be replaced by an arbitrary constant. We believe that the function OPT is properly super-additive. That is, we make the following conjecture: 

Conjecture 5.8. Let F be a forest, U1, U 2 be a partition of V (F ) into convex subsets, and let 

m1, m 2 ∈ N0. Then OPT( F [U1], m 1) + OPT( F [U2], m 2) ≤ OPT( F, m 1 + m2).

# 6. Hardness of weighted subtree-sum 

In this section we prove Theorem 1.5, restated here for convenience. 

Theorem 1.5. Each data structure that maintains a weighted forest with n vertices under the operations subtree-sum and cut requires Ω( n log n) time for Θ( n) operations in the Word RAM model of computation and assuming G = Z.

19 We remark that the lower bound holds even in the more general cell-probe model of compu-tation, where the time complexity of an operation is only measured in the number of memory accesses (probes) it makes, regardless of the computation performed between probes. Moreover, we allow for Las Vegas randomization. Auxiliary vertices are not allowed in this section. In our hardness proof, we invoke the Pătraşcu and Demaine’s lower bound for the partial-sum 

problem [PD06]. Recall that in this problem, we maintain an array A of length n with values from 0 to U −1 for some U ≥ nΩ(1) , supporting operations of the form update (i, x ) (set A[i] ← x)and partial-sum (p) (return Ppi=1 A[i]). We will say that a sequence of operations performed on A is epoch-based if all operations can be partitioned into some E epochs, such that within each epoch, each element of A is update d exactly once and the sum of each prefix is queried exactly once. We will use the following version of the lower bound: 

Theorem 6.1. Consider any cell-probe data structure for the partial-sum problem on an array 

A of length n and values from 0 to U ≥ nΩ(1) that may use Las Vegas randomization. Let 

E ≤ nO(1) . The data structure requires Ω( En log n) time to process Θ( En ) operations, even if we assume that the sequence of operations is epoch-based and comprises E epochs. 

We remark that Theorem 6.1 is not explicitly stated in [PD06], but it can be derived from their techniques; we provide a proof in Appendix B. Towards Theorem 1.5, assume we have a data structure X supporting subtree-sum and cut .Using X, we will construct a data structure Y for partial-sum from Theorem 6.1, as follows. Suppose Y is initialized with an array A of length n′ containing integers from 0 to n′ − 1. Let 

n = n′(9 n′ + 2) . We construct a weighted forest F comprising two trees: T+ on n+ = n′(8 n′ + 1) 

vertices and T− on n− = n′(n′ + 1) vertices. T+ contains a path v+1 v+2 . . . v + 

> n′

of n′ vertices, where each v+ 

> i

has weight 0. For each i ∈ [n′], we create 8n′ additional vertices, denoted 

ui, 1, u i, 2, . . . , u i, 8n′ , where ui,j has weight j. We connect each ui,j and v+ 

> i

with an edge. T− is constructed similarly, with a path v− 

> 1

v− 

> 2

. . . v − 

> n′

of n′ vertices of weight 0, and for each i ∈ [n′], n′

additional vertices wi, 1, w i, 2, . . . , w i,n ′ of weight 1 connected to v− 

> i

. We root T+ at v+ 

> n′

and T−

at v− 

> n′

, so that subtree-sum (v+ 

> i

) (respectively, subtree-sum (v− 

> i

)) returns the sum of weights of all vertices ui′,j (resp., wi′,j ) with i′ ≤ i. We remark that F contains no auxiliary vertices. The data structure X is initialized with F and the given weights. We will now show how to use X to process an epoch-based sequence of operations on A

comprising E = n′ epochs, with a total of Θ(( n′)2) = Θ( n) operations. Suppose an update is performed on A during the pth epoch, replacing A[i] with a new value from range [0 , n ′ − 1] and thus increasing A[i] by some ∆ ∈ [−n′ + 1 , n ′ − 1] . Then X performs three cut s: it cuts ui,j 1

and ui,j 2 from T+, where j1 and j2 are chosen such that j1 + j2 = 7 n′ − ∆ and both ui,j 1 and 

ui,j 2 are still connected to v+ 

> i

, and it cuts wi,p from T−. Later we will show that such j1 and j2

always exist and can be found by a randomized algorithm in expected constant time. Observe that after these cuts, the value of the expression 

subtree-sum (v+ 

> k

) − 7n′ · subtree-sum (v− 

> k

)

remains unchanged for k < i , and increases by ∆ for k ≥ i. Thus, given suitable preprocessing, we can compute any partial sum of A in constant time using two subtree-sum queries – one in each of T+ and T−. The details follow. At the time of the initialization, we construct a table B of size n′, so that 

> k

X

> i=1

A[i] = subtree-sum (v+ 

> k

) − 7n′ · subtree-sum (v− 

> k

) + B[k] for all k ∈ [n′]. (1) Note that initially, subtree-sum (v+ 

> k

) = 4 kn ′(8 n′ +1) and subtree-sum (v− 

> k

) = kn ′ for all k ∈ [n′],so B can be computed in O(n′) time. The invariant (1) will be maintained throughout the execution of the data structure. We will also preserve the following invariant: after p update s20 to the value of A[i], exactly 2p vertices ui,j have been cut from T+, and exactly vertices wi,p ′ for 

p′ ≤ p have been cut from T−.Consider now an operation during the pth epoch. A partial-sum query for some k ∈ [n′]

can be answered by computing the right-hand side of (1), which requires two subtree-sum 

queries and a constant amount of additional work. Now consider an update changing A[i] by 

∆ ∈ [−n′ + 1 , n ′ − 1] , and define s = 7 n′ − ∆ ∈ [6 n′ + 1 , 8n′ − 1] .

Lemma 6.2. There exist j1, j 2 ∈ [8 n′] such that j1 + j2 = s and both ui,j 1 and ui,j 2 are still connected to v+ 

> i

. Furthermore, such j1 and j2 can be found by a Las Vegas randomized algorithm in expected constant time. Proof. Consider the 3n′ pairs of integers (j, s − j) for j ∈ [3 n′]. Since s ∈ [6 n′ + 1 , 8n′ − 1] , all 

6n′ integers in these pairs are distinct and belong to [8 n′]. Since p < n ′, by the invariant at most 

2( p − 1) < 2n′ of these integers correspond to vertices ui,j that have already been cut from T+.Therefore, at least n′ pairs (j, s − j) remain such that both ui,j and ui,s −j are still connected to v+ 

> i

. Thus, the sought pair (j1, j 2) exists, and it can be found by randomly sampling pairs as above until a valid one is found, which takes expected constant time. After finding such j1 and j2, X performs cut (ui,j 1 ), cut (ui,j 2 ), and cut (wi,p ). This preserves all the invariants, as argued above, completing the description of the data structure Y . However, by Theorem 6.1, Y requires Ω( En ′ log n′) = Ω( n log n) time to process E = n′ epochs of operations. 

Y manages to perform the entire sequence of operations via Θ(( n′)2) = Θ( n) operations on X

and a total of O(( n′)2) = O(n) additional work (for maintaining B and finding j1, j 2). Thus, X

must require Ω( n log n) time to process the Θ( n) operations, proving Theorem 1.5. We also observe that this proof can be rewritten to also apply in the group model setting: 

Corollary 6.3. Each data structure that maintains a weighted forest under n vertices under the operations subtree-sum and cut requires Ω( n log n) time for Θ( n) operations in the group model of computation. Proof. Let B = o(n) be such that the weights of the vertices in the forest F above are strictly smaller than B, and let D be the considered data structure in the group model of computation. Since D works correctly in any commutative group, it can report the correct subtree sums in the group ZnB of integers modulo nB ; these are equal in value to the subtree sums in Z, as all subtree sums are strictly smaller than nB . Meanwhile, all operations in ZnB can be simulated by a Word RAM machine in constant time; therefore there exists a data structure D′ in the Word RAM model of computation with the same complexity guarantees that maintains F under 

subtree-sum and cut . Theorem 1.5 applied to D′ finishes the proof. 

# 7. Subtree sizes 

In this section, we consider the subtree-sum problem on unweighted and 0-1-weighted forests, where update-weight is not available and subtree-sum (v) returns the number of vertices (resp., the number of vertices with weight 1) in the subtree rooted at v. Our algorithms (Section 7.2) support auxiliary vertices. We determine the complexity of the problem to be Θ( n log n  

> log log n

) for 

Θ( n) operations. 

## 7.1. Lower bound 

We prove the lower bound (Theorem 1.7) below: 

Theorem 1.7. Each data structure in the Word RAM model that maintains an unweighted forest with n vertices under the operations subtree-sum and cut requires Ω( n log n  

> log log n

) time for 

n operations. 

21 Similarly to Theorem 1.5, we reduce from the partial-sum problem; however, we find it more convenient to invoke a result from an earlier work by Fredman and Saks [FS89] that concerns the partial-sum-parity problem. In partial-sum-parity , we are given an array A of length 

n with values from {0, 1}, and we should support two operations: update (flipping the value of 

A[i]) and partial-sum-parity (returning the parity of the sum of the first i values of A). 

Theorem 7.1 ([FS89, Theorem 3]) . Consider any cell-probe data structure for the problem of partial-sum-parity on an array A of length n that may use amortization and Las Vegas randomization. The data structure requires Ω( n log n  

> log log n

) time to process Θ( n) operations, even if each element of the array is update d at most once. Proof of Theorem 1.7. Let X be a data structure for subtree-sum on unweighted forests. Using 

X, we will construct a data structure Y for partial-sum-parity on an array A of length n′.On initialization of Y with an array A, we construct a tree T of size n ≤ 3n′ as follows. Let 

v1v2 . . . v n′ be a path of n′ vertices. For each i ∈ [n′], if A[i] = 0 , we create one additional vertex 

ui, 1 connected to vi; if A[i] = 1 , we create two additional vertices ui, 1 and ui, 2 connected to 

vi. We root T at vn′ . This construction ensures the following invariant: For each i ∈ [n′], the parities of subtree-sum (vi) and Pij=1 A[j] are the same. The data structure X is initialized with T . Then, to process an update of A flipping the parity of A[i], we simply invoke cut (ui, 1);this is legal (since each element of A is update d at most once) and preserves the invariant. Therefore, a partial-sum-parity query for some k ∈ [n′] can be answered by simply invoking 

subtree-sum (vk) and returning its parity. By Theorem 7.1, Y requires Ω( n′ log n′  

> log log n′

) time to process Θ( n′) operations. On the other hand, our implementation of Y performs Θ( n′) operations on X and a total of O(n′) additional work. Since n′ = Θ( n), this finishes the proof. 

## 7.2. Upper bound 

We start with a data structure for forests that are very small relative to the size of a machine word, which we denote by b. This is somewhat similar to Lemma 4.1. However, here we actually need to maintain small weighted forests, which means that we need a different approach. The weights are assumed to fit in one word each, i.e., to be an integer in [0 , 2b − 1] . We only allow a very limited way of changing weights: the operation decrement-weight (v), which decreases the weight w(v) of v by one (only allowed if w(v) ≥ 1). Note that this data structure is merely used as a subroutine; in the end, we give a data structure for unweighted forests of size n = Θ(2 b).The proof can be thought of as an adaptation of Dietz’s data structure for Subset Rank [Die89] – essentially, partial sums of 0-1-arrays – to forests. 

Lemma 7.2. Fix a word size b, and let k ≤ 14

√b be a power of two. There is a data struc-ture maintaining a weighted forest with k vertices under the operations subtree-sum , cut , and 

decrement-weight , provided that all weights are non-negative integers, and the sum W of all weights in the initial forest is at most 2b − 1.The data structure requires a certain global table only depending on k, which can be computed in time O((3 k)k). After precomputing that table, initialization takes O(k) time, each subtree-sum 

operation takes constant time, each cut operation takes O(k) time, and all decrement-weight 

operations together take O(W ) time. Proof. Let (F, w ) denote the current weighted forest, and say V (F ) = [ k].We follow Dietz [Die89] in using two arrays A and B of length k. A stores the actual subtree-sum for each vertex in F , but is only updated every k operations (such an update is called a 

flush ). B stores for each vertex the number of decrements since the last flush. Since this number can be no more than k, the entire array B fits in k(1 + log k) ≤ b bits, so it fits into a single machine word. 22 To adapt the Dietz’s idea to trees with cut s, we need the following two extra data structures. First, we want to store, for each vertex v, the set of vertices V (Fv) in the subtree rooted at v

(i.e., the ones whose weights count towards subtree-sum (v)). We store the mapping v → V (Fv)

in an array C. Each V (Fv) is represented as a bitstring, so C has size k2 ≤ b and fits into a single machine word. Second, to actually obtain the sum w(Fv), we need the global table mentioned in the statement of the lemma. We denote it by Q and it maps a pair (B′, U ) to an integer. Here B′ is an array of length k, storing k numbers in [0 , k ] (as B above), and U is a subset of V (F ) = [ k], stored as a bitstring. Both B′ and U fit into single machine words. The value Q[B′, U ] is P 

> i∈U

B′[i]. Note that Q has (k + 1) k · 2k entries, each entry fits into a machine word, and Q can be computed in time |Q| · O (k) = O((3 k)k). Observe that Q only depends on k, as required. We now show how to implement the operations. We maintain the invariant that A is correct for a previous point in time (the last flush ), and since then at most k − 1 decrement-weight and no cut operations have been performed. In turn, B[v] is the number of decrement-weight (v)

operations since the last flush. 

• Initially, we compute A and C in a bottom-up fashion, in O(k) time. We initialize B as an all-zero vector, and assume Q has been already precomputed. 

• To answer a subtree-sum (v) query, we calculate A[v] − Q[B, C [v]] , in constant time. 

• To perform decrement-weight (v), we first increment B[v]. Then, if k decrement-weight 

operations have been performed since the last flush, we perform a flush as follows. For each v ∈ V (F ), set A[v] ← A[v] − Q[B, C [v]] , and then reset B to the all-zero array. The amortized time for the flushes is clearly constant per decrement-weight operation. Since we can perform no more than W decrement-weight operations, the total time is at most 

O(W ).

• To perform cut (v), we first perform a flush, then recover all vertex weights from A, then delete the edge from v to its parent and recompute A and C. This requires O(k) time, as desired. We now show how to iterate Lemma 7.2, again using a cluster decomposition (though with different cluster size than before). We introduce a new operation that simplifies the analysis. When maintaining a weighted forest which is initially a tree, the parameterless operation root-sum () returns the sum of weights of vertices still connected to the root of the initial tree. Note that root-sum can and will be implemented with a single call subtree-sum (v), where v is the initial tree root (which can be stored at the beginning). We present a sequence of data structures X1, X 2, . . . , which support increasingly larger inputs, but also have successively worse running time. For now, we assume the input is a binary tree. For technical reasons related to binarization (Theorem 2.2), we consider 0-1-weighted forests instead of unweighted forest. Below, big-O notation only hides constants not depending on the values n, b, or t.

Lemma 7.3. Fix a word size b and let ℓ be a power of two with ℓ ≤ 148 

√b. For each parameter 

t ∈ N+, there is a data structure maintaining an 0-1-weighted binary forest, initially a tree, with 

n ≤ min {ℓt, 2b − 1} vertices under the operations cut and subtree-sum .The data structure requires a certain global table only depending on ℓ, which can be computed in time O((36 ℓ)12 ℓ). After precomputing that table, the initialization takes O(tn ) time, each 

subtree-sum operation takes O(t) time, each root-sum operation takes O(1) time, and all cut 

operations together take O(t(n + ℓ2)) time. 

23 Proof. The case t = 1 follows from Lemma 7.2. We thus focus on the case t ≥ 2.Let (T 0, w 0) be the initial 0-1-weighted tree. At the start, use Lemma 2.3 to compute a cluster decomposition C of (T 0, w 0) with |C| ≤ 6ℓ, where each cluster has size at most nℓ .As in Lemma 3.2, we keep the cluster decomposition the same throughout the run of the data structure. At any point, let (F, w ) denote the current weighted forest, and let G denote the cluster forest induced by C. We again maintain G using Lemma 2.4, and also keep the helper data structure of Lemma 2.1 on F .We also introduce a weight function w′ on G, which is slightly different from the one used in Lemma 3.2. For each cluster C, we let w′(ub( C)) be the total weight of all vertices in C \{ lb( C)}

that are connected to ub( C). The weight of lb( C) is always w(lb( C)) . Observe that, if v is a boundary vertex of some cluster, then the subtree-sum of v w.r.t. (F, w ) is precisely the same as the subtree-sum of v w.r.t. (G, w ′).The weighted cluster forest (G, w ′) is maintained using an instance D of the data structure of Lemma 7.2 with parameter k = 12 ℓ. To check that all conditions of Lemma 7.2 are met, first observe that G has at most 2|C| ≤ 12 ℓ = k ≤ 14

√b vertices. Second, the sum of weights w′(G)

is precisely the sum of weights w(F ), which is at most |V (F )| = n ≤ 2b − 1, as required. As in the proof of Corollary 3.4, we maintain a cluster object for each cluster C, which is referenced by a pointer from each of its vertices. The cluster object stores pointers to ub( C),to lb( C), and additionally a subtree-size data structure XC on the subtree (T 0, w 0) induced by 

C \ { lb( C)}. This data structure is constructed recursively with parameter t − 1. This is possible because each cluster has size at most nℓ ≤ ℓt−1.We now describe how to implement the three operations. 

• Consider a call subtree-sum (v). If v is a boundary vertex, we return D. subtree-sum (v),as explained above. Otherwise, determine the cluster C containing v, and check whether v

is an ancestor of lb( C). If lb( C) = ⊥ or v is not an ancestor of lb( C), then we can simply return XC .subtree-sum (v), since all descendants of v are contained in C. Otherwise, we return XC .subtree-sum (v) + D. subtree-sum (lb( C)) . It is easy to see that this is correct. 

• root-sum () is implemented simply by calling D. subtree-sum (u) on the initial tree root u

(which can be stored at the start). Observe that u is a boundary vertex, and thus indeed contained in D.

• Finally, consider a call cut (v). First update G using Lemma 2.4; if this results in an edge removed from G, mirror this with D. cut . Let C be the cluster containing v. If v = ub( C)

or v = lb( C), then no change to XC is needed. Otherwise, we call XC .cut (v). This may disconnect some vertices of C \ { lb( C)} previously connected to u = ub( C). Thus, we may need to change w′(u). Since u is the root of T 0[C], we can determine the new value with 

XC .root-sum () . Observe that w′(u) can only decrease; thus, we can update w′(u) using an appropriate number of calls to D. decrement-weight (u).We now analyze the running time. The global table needs only be computed once (for D and all the recursive data structures, since ℓ is fixed). The initialization takes O(n) time for everything besides the data structures XC . By induc-tion, the total time is O(tn ).For subtree-sum , observe that we perform constant work plus (possibly) one recursive call to XC .subtree-sum . Again by induction, this takes O(t) time. Then root-sum works like 

subtree-sum , but the XC .subtree-sum call is always omitted, so the time is constant. For cut , we perform constant work, plus at most one XC .root-sum call, one XC .cut call, one 

D. cut call, and some number of D. decrement-weight calls. The XC .root-sum takes constant time by induction. By Lemma 7.2, each D. cut call takes O(k) = O(ℓ) time, and there are at most |C| − 1 ≤ k − 1 ≤ O (ℓ) such calls, so the total running time is O(ℓ2). The total running 24 time of D. decrement-weight is O(W ), where W is the total weight of vertices in G, which is at most n by definition. This means the total time for all cut s is O(n + ℓ2) plus the time for all XC .cut calls. Since the total number of all vertices in all clusters is precisely n, we obtain the bound O(t(n + ℓ2)) 

by induction. We are now ready to prove: 

Theorem 1.6. There is a data structure in the Word RAM model maintaining a 0-1-weighted forest with n vertices under the operations subtree-sum and cut , with O(( m + n) log n  

> log log n

) total time for m operations. Proof. We assume the machine word size is at least b = 1 + ⌈log( n + 1) ⌉.6 Let b′ = ⌈log n⌉ ≤ b.As usual, we can assume the initial weighted forest is a tree (T 0, w 0). First, binarize the tree with Theorem 2.2 to obtain (T 1, w 1). Now use Lemma 7.3 with parameters ℓ = ⌊ 148 

√b′⌋ and 

t = ⌈log ℓ(2 n)⌉. Note that |V (T 1)| ≤ 2n < 2b − 1 and |V (T 1)| ≤ ℓt, so the conditions for Lemma 7.3 are satisfied. The total running time is O(t(m + n + ℓ2)) . Observe that ℓ2 ≤ b′ ≤ n.Moreover, we have t ≤ O ( log n  

> log log n

) by an easy calculation. The statement follows. 

# References 

[ABC17] Peyman Afshani, Jérémy Barbay, and Timothy M. Chan. Instance-optimal geomet-ric algorithms. J. ACM , 64(1):3:1–3:38, 2017. doi:10.1145/3046673 .[ADKF70] V. L. Arlazarov, E. A. Dinic, M. A. Kronrod, and I. A. Faradžev. On economical construction of the transitive closure of a directed graph. Doklady Akademii Nauk SSSR , 194(3):1209–1210, 1970. Russian. [AHdLT05] Stephen Alstrup, Jacob Holm, Kristian de Lichtenberg, and Mikkel Thorup. Main-taining information in fully dynamic trees with top trees. ACM Trans. Algorithms ,1(2):243–264, 2005. doi:10.1145/1103963.1103966 .[AHR98] Stephen Alstrup, Thore Husfeldt, and Theis Rauhe. Marked ancestor problems. In 

39th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, FOCS 1998, Palo Alto, California, USA, November 8-11, 1998 , pages 534–544. IEEE Computer Soci-ety, 1998. doi:10.1109/SFCS.1998.743504 .[ASS97] Stephen Alstrup, Jens P. Secher, and Maz Spork. Optimal on-line decremen-tal connectivity in trees. Inf. Process. Lett. , 64(4):161–164, 1997. doi:10.1016/ S0020-0190(97)00170-1 .[Ber26] Benjamin Aram Berendsohn. Universally optimal decremental tree minima, 2026. 

arXiv:2602.15977 .[BF00] Michael A. Bender and Martin Farach-Colton. The LCA problem revisited. In Gaston H. Gonnet, Daniel Panario, and Alfredo Viola, editors, LATIN 2000: Theo-retical Informatics, 4th Latin American Symposium, Punta del Este, Uruguay, April 10-14, 2000, Proceedings , volume 1776 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 88–94. Springer, 2000. doi:10.1007/10719839\_9 .[BF04] Michael A. Bender and Martin Farach-Colton. The level ancestor problem simplified. 

Theor. Comput. Sci. , 321(1):5–12, 2004. doi:10.1016/J.TCS.2003.05.002 .      

> 6The assumption that b≥Ω(log n)is standard, and if it is a constant factor less than necessary, we use the usual simulation of b-bit-word operations with a constant number of words.

25 [BM80] Jon Louis Bentley and Hermann A. Maurer. Efficient worst-case data structures for range searching. Acta Informatica , 13:155–168, 1980. doi:10.1007/BF00263991 .[BV94] Omer Berkman and Uzi Vishkin. Finding level-ancestors in trees. J. Comput. Syst. Sci. , 48(2):214–230, 1994. doi:10.1016/S0022-0000(05)80002-9 .[Die89] Paul F. Dietz. Optimal algorithms for list indexing and subset rank. In Frank K. H. A. Dehne, Jörg-Rüdiger Sack, and Nicola Santoro, editors, Algorithms and Data Structures, Workshop WADS ’89, Ottawa, Canada, August 17-19, 1989, Pro-ceedings , volume 382 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 39–46. Springer, 1989. doi:10.1007/3-540-51542-9\_5 .[ES81] Shimon Even and Yossi Shiloach. An on-line edge-deletion problem. J. ACM ,28(1):1–4, 1981. doi:10.1145/322234.322235 .[Fen94] Peter M. Fenwick. A new data structure for cumulative frequency tables. Softw. Pract. Exp. , 24(3):327–336, 1994. doi:10.1002/SPE.4380240306 .[Fre82] Michael L. Fredman. The complexity of maintaining an array and computing its partial sums. J. ACM , 29(1):250–260, 1982. doi:10.1145/322290.322305 .[FS89] M. Fredman and M. Saks. The Cell Probe Complexity of Dynamic Data Struc-tures. In Proceedings of the Twenty-First Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing , STOC ’89, pages 345–354, New York, NY, USA, 1989. Association for Computing Machinery. doi:10.1145/73007.73040 .[FW90] Michael L. Fredman and Dan E. Willard. BLASTING through the information theoretic barrier with FUSION TREES. In Harriet Ortiz, editor, Proceedings of the 22nd Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, May 13-17, 1990, Baltimore, Maryland, USA , pages 1–7. ACM, 1990. doi:10.1145/100216.100217 .[GF64] Bernard A. Galler and Michael J. Fischer. An improved equivalence algorithm. 

Commun. ACM , 7(5):301–303, 1964. doi:10.1145/364099.364331 .[GT85] Harold N. Gabow and Robert Endre Tarjan. A linear-time algorithm for a special case of Disjoint Set Union. J. Comput. Syst. Sci. , 30(2):209–221, 1985. doi:10. 1016/0022-0000(85)90014-5 .[HHI +25] Bernhard Haeupler, Richard Hladík, John Iacono, Václav Rozhon, Robert E. Tarjan, and Jakub Tetek. Fast and simple sorting using partial information. In Yossi Azar and Debmalya Panigrahi, editors, Proceedings of the 2025 Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, SODA 2025, New Orleans, LA, USA, January 12-15, 2025 , pages 3953–3973. SIAM, 2025. doi:10.1137/1.9781611978322.134 .[HHK +23] Shang-En Huang, Dawei Huang, Tsvi Kopelowitz, Seth Pettie, and Mikkel Tho-rup. Fully dynamic connectivity in O(log n(log log n)2) amortized expected time. 

TheoretiCS , 2, 2023. doi:10.46298/THEORETICS.23.6 .[HHR +24] Bernhard Haeupler, Richard Hladík, Václav Rozhon, Robert E. Tarjan, and Jakub Tetek. Universal optimality of Dijkstra via beyond-worst-case heaps. In 65th IEEE Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, FOCS 2024, Chicago, IL, USA, October 27-30, 2024 , pages 2099–2130. IEEE, 2024. doi:10.1109/ FOCS61266.2024.00125 .[HU73] John E. Hopcroft and Jeffrey D. Ullman. Set merging algorithms. SIAM J. Comput. ,2(4):294–303, 1973. doi:10.1137/0202024 .26 [HWZ21] Bernhard Haeupler, David Wajc, and Goran Zuzic. Universally-optimal dis-tributed algorithms for known topologies. In Samir Khuller and Virginia Vassilevska Williams, editors, STOC ’21: 53rd Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing, Virtual Event, Italy, June 21-25, 2021 , pages 1166–1179. ACM, 2021. 

doi:10.1145/3406325.3451081 .[Jon97] Neil D. Jones. Computability and complexity - from a programming perspective .Foundations of computing series. MIT Press, 1997. [Lar90] Lawrence L. Larmore. An optimal algorithm with unknown time complexity for convex matrix searching. Inf. Process. Lett. , 36(3):147–151, 1990. doi:10.1016/ 0020-0190(90)90084-B .[ŁS17] Jakub Łącki and Piotr Sankowski. Optimal decremental connectivity in pla-nar graphs. Theory Comput. Syst. , 61(4):1037–1053, 2017. doi:10.1007/ S00224-016-9709-X .[Mat92] Jirí Matousek. Range searching with efficient hierarchical cuttings. In David Avis, editor, Proceedings of the Eighth Annual Symposium on Computational Geometry, Berlin, Germany, June 10-12, 1992 , pages 276–285. ACM, 1992. doi:10.1145/ 142675.142732 .[Păt08] Mihai Pătraşcu. Lower bound techniques for data structures . PhD thesis, Mas-sachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA, 2008. URL: https: //hdl.handle.net/1721.1/45866 .[PD06] Mihai Pătraşcu and Erik D. Demaine. Logarithmic lower bounds in the cell-probe model. SIAM J. Comput. , 35(4):932–963, 2006. doi:10.1137/S0097539705447256 .[PR02] Seth Pettie and Vijaya Ramachandran. An Optimal Minimum Spanning Tree Al-gorithm. J. ACM , 49(1):16–34, January 2002. doi:10.1145/505241.505243 .[PR05] Seth Pettie and Vijaya Ramachandran. A shortest path algorithm for real-weighted undirected graphs. SIAM J. Comput. , 34(6):1398–1431, 2005. doi: 10.1137/S0097539702419650 .[ST83] Daniel Dominic Sleator and Robert Endre Tarjan. A data structure for dynamic trees. J. Comput. Syst. Sci. , 26(3):362–391, 1983. doi:10.1016/0022-0000(83) 90006-5 .[Tar75] Robert Endre Tarjan. Efficiency of a good but not linear set union algorithm. J. ACM , 22(2):215–225, 1975. doi:10.1145/321879.321884 .[Tar79] Robert Endre Tarjan. A class of algorithms which require nonlinear time to main-tain disjoint sets. J. Comput. Syst. Sci. , 18(2):110–127, 1979. doi:10.1016/ 0022-0000(79)90042-4 .[vRR25a] Ivor van der Hoog, Eva Rotenberg, and Daniel Rutschmann. A combinatorial proof of universal optimality for computing a planar convex hull. In Anne Benoit, Haim Kaplan, Sebastian Wild, and Grzegorz Herman, editors, 33rd Annual European Symposium on Algorithms, ESA 2025, Warsaw, Poland, September 15-17, 2025 ,volume 351 of LIPIcs , pages 102:1–102:13. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2025. doi:10.4230/LIPICS.ESA.2025.102 .27 [vRR25b] Ivor van der Hoog, Eva Rotenberg, and Daniel Rutschmann. Simpler optimal sorting from a directed acyclic graph. In Ioana Oriana Bercea and Rasmus Pagh, editors, 

2025 Symposium on Simplicity in Algorithms, SOSA 2025, New Orleans, LA, USA, January 13-15, 2025 , pages 350–355. SIAM, 2025. doi:10.1137/1.9781611978315. 26 .[vRR25c] Ivor van der Hoog, Eva Rotenberg, and Daniel Rutschmann. Simpler universally optimal Dijkstra. In Anne Benoit, Haim Kaplan, Sebastian Wild, and Grzegorz Her-man, editors, 33rd Annual European Symposium on Algorithms, ESA 2025, War-saw, Poland, September 15-17, 2025 , volume 351 of LIPIcs , pages 71:1–71:9. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2025. doi:10.4230/LIPICS.ESA.2025. 71 .[Yao85] Andrew Chi-Chih Yao. On the complexity of maintaining partial sums. SIAM J. Comput. , 14(2):277–288, 1985. doi:10.1137/0214022 .

# A. Optimal data structures for small trees 

In this section, we give the details on our procedure to efficiently compute (asymptotically) optimal tree-sum data structures for very small forests. Recall that OPT( F, m ) is the mini-mum number of group operations required by any data structure to process m operations with the initial forest F , in the worst case taken over all initial weight assignments and operation sequences. As in Section 5, we say that a tree-sum data structure supports cut , update-weight , tree-sum ,and allows for auxiliary vertices. It is crucial here that any single data structure is required to work with any given group, it does not know the group, and cannot make decisions based on memory cells that store group elements. For example, comparisons with zero are not allowed; c.f. Preliminaries (Section 2). We will prove: 

Lemma 5.2. Given a forest F with n vertices, in time 22nO(1) 

, we can precompute a tree-sum data structure D that performs m ∈ N0 operations with the initial forest F (and arbitrary initial weights) in time O(OPT( F, m ) + m + n).

## A.1. Computation trees 

It will be useful to define the following alternative model of computation, similar to decision trees. Fix an initial forest F with n vertices, potentially containing some auxiliary vertices. A 

computation tree for F is a (rooted) tree C. Each edge of C is labeled with an operation , which is 

cut (v), tree-sum (v), or update-weight (v) for some vertex v ∈ V (F ). Note the missing weight parameter for update-weight .Each node x is labeled with a sequence Ix of instructions . Informally, each instruction is an addition or subtraction of weights or memory registers, the result of which is stored in a specified memory register. More precisely, each instruction has one of the following forms. Here X and 

Y each represent either R[j] for some j ∈ N+ or W [v] for some v ∈ V (F ).

• R[i] ← X + Y for i ∈ N+

• R[i] ← X − Y for i ∈ N+

(Sequences of this form are sometimes called straight-line programs in the literature.) If x is not the root and the edge to its parent is labeled tree-sum (v) for some v, then x is additionally labeled with a return value Ex, which is again either R[j] for some j ∈ N+ or W [v]

for some v ∈ V (F ).28 Informally, the semantics of this model are as follows. The R[i] are freely usable registers which store group elements, and each W [v] represents the current weight of a vertex v. The computation starts at the root r of C and initially executes the sequence Ir of instructions (potentially storing some values in registers R[i]). When an operation is performed, follow the respective edge to a child node y, and execute Iy. If the operation is update-weight (v, t ), first update W [v] ← t and then follow the edge update-weight (v) and execute Iy. If the operation is tree-sum , return Ey at the end. Note that a computation tree is specific to a forest, and moreover can only handle a finite number of operations. We now formally define the correctness of a computation tree. First, we say that C is valid if: 

• If an edge e is labeled cut (v), then v is not auxiliary nor a root of F , and no ancestor edge of e is labeled cut (v).

• For each node x ∈ V (C) of depth at most height( C) − 1, and each v ∈ V (F ), there are edges labeled cut (v), tree-sum (v), and update-weight (v) from x to a child, if allowed by the previous condition. 

• No two edges from the same parent share a label. Note that this implies that all leaves of C have the same depth. Fix a valid computation tree C of height m on F , a group G, an initial weight function 

w : V (F ) → G, and a sequence σ of at most m operations. The output of C on (G, w, σ ) is a sequence of values g1, g 2, . . . , g k ∈ G, one for each tree-sum operation in σ, computed as follows. 

• At the start, initialize arrays R and W with R[i] ← 0 for each i ∈ N+, and W [v] ← w(v).Also initialize a pointer x to the root of C. Execute the instructions Ix in the obvious way. 

• For each operation, first follow the corresponding edge from x to a child y (observe that such an edge exists by definition). If the operation is update-weight (v, t ), set W [v] ← t.Then, execute Iy. if the operation is tree-sum , add the value Ey to the output. Finally, set x ← y.We call C correct for (G, w, σ ) if applying the operations σ to (F, w ) in a tree-sum data structure yields the same output. Further, we call C correct if C is correct for each (G, w, σ )

where |σ| ≤ m = height( C).We now define an analog of the time complexity of a computation tree C. Let the instruction depth ix of x be P 

> y∈Y

|Iy|, where Y is the set of ancestors of x, including x itself. The maximum instruction depth of C is MID( C) = max x∈V (C) ix.For a forest F and m ∈ N+, define OPT CT (F, m ) as the minimum MID( C) among all correct computation trees for F of height m.We call C succinct if all indices i, j of the registers used in instructions of Ix are at most the instruction depth ix of x. Observe that every computation tree can be converted into a succinct computation tree with the same time complexity, by reassigning register indices based on their first use. With the next two lemmas, we show that (succinct) computation trees are equivalent to tree-sum data structures in terms of time complexity, at least when we restrict ourselves to a specific initial forest F . In particular, we will show that OPT CT (F, m ) = OPT( F, m ). Below, we say a tree-sum data structure is for a forest F if it only accepts F as the initial forest (with arbitrary weights). 

Lemma A.1. Let C be a correct succinct computation tree of depth m for a forest F of size 

n with time complexity t. Then, there exists a tree-sum data structure for F that performs m

operations in time O(n + m + MID( C)) , using MID( C) additions and subtractions. 

29 Proof. When defining the output of a computation tree above, we essentially already constructed a tree-sum data structure based on C. The number of additions and subtractions is clearly 

MID( C). The time overhead is linear for initialization and constant for each operation or instruction. 

Lemma A.2. Let F be a forest of size n and let D be a tree-sum data structure for F . Then, there exists a computation tree C for F with MID( C) ≤ T(D, F, m ).Proof. The crucial observation is that, for a fixed forest F and a fixed sequence of operations, the data structure D performs precisely the same Word RAM operations; only the contents of the memory cells holding group elements depend on the initial weights and weight updates. We now proceed with the formal proof. First, construct a valid computation tree C for F

of height m, ignoring the instruction sequences Ix and return values Ex for now. Observe that there is a unique such computation tree. Construct each Ix and Ex as follows. Start D with some dummy weights, and record all addi-tions and subtractions performed during preprocessing. Put all these additions and subtractions into Ir for the root r of C. Then, record the state of the algorithm (excluding contents of special registers with group elements), and (temporarily) store it as sr.Now, for every possible edge labeled ℓ from x to a child y, we do the following: Make a copy of D with state sx. On this copy, perform the operation ℓ; if it is update-weight , use a dummy weight as the second parameter. Again, record all additions and subtractions. Build the corresponding instructions, put them into Iy, and store the final state as sy. If ℓ = tree-sum (v),also record the memory cell returned by D and store it as Ey.It is easy to see that C is correct if D is correct. Moreover, the maximum instruction depth of C is precisely the maximum number of additions and subtractions that D performs for a sequence of m operations. That is, MID( C) ≤ T(D, F, m ), as desired. 

Corollary A.3. For every forest F and every m ∈ N+, we have OPT CT (F, m ) = OPT( F, m ).

## A.2. Computing optimal computation trees 

We now show how to find an optimal computation tree for a given forest F and number m of operations by brute force. First, we bound the number of computation trees that we need to consider. 

Lemma A.4. Let F be a forest of size n ≥ 2 and let m, d ∈ N+. The number of valid and succinct (but not necessarily correct) computation trees for F with height m and maximum instruction depth d is at most 2nO(m)·d, and they can be enumerated within the same time bound. Proof. Let C be a succinct computation tree for F . There are 3n possible edge labels (three operation types applied to n different vertices), so each node in C has at most 3n children. Since the height of C is precisely m, we have |V (C)| ≤ nO(m).Since the maximum instruction depth is at most d by assumption, in particular each instruc-tion sequence Ix has length at most d. Thus, the total number of instructions in C is |V (C)| · d.Since F is succinct, it only uses register indices up to d. The weight array W is accessed with vertex indices at most n. Thus, each instruction can be encoded using at most 2 log max {n, d }

bits, so the number of bits to encode C is 

nO(m) · d · log max {n, d } = nO(m) · d. 

To enumerate C, simply enumerate all bitstrings of this length, and check for each whether it corresponds to a valid and succinct computation tree. The time to do the latter is clearly polynomial in the bitstring length, and thus negligible. 30 Second, we show how to check the correctness of a computation tree and compute its maximum instruction depth (in order to select the best one later on). 

Lemma A.5. Let F be a forest of size n ≥ 2, and let m ∈ N+. Let C be a valid and succinct computation tree for F of height m. Then, we can compute MID( C) and check whether C is correct in time nO(m) · MID( C).Proof. Computing MID( C) is trivially done in time proportional to the total number of vertices and instructions in C, which is |V (C)| · MID( C) ≤ nO(m) · MID( C).Let n′ be the number of non-auxiliary vertices in F . To perform correctness check for operation sequences of length at most m, we use the commutative group G = Zn′+m; let 

ei = (0 , 0, . . . , 0, 1, 0, . . . , 0) ∈ G for i ∈ [n′ + m] denote the canonical base vector that con-tains a single value 1 at position i. Assume that the set of non-auxiliary vertices in F is indexed by [n′] and set the initial weight of vertex i ∈ [n′] to ei. The ith call update-weight (·, w i)

updates the weight of a specified vertex to wi = en′+i. Whenever the computation of C returns a sum corresponding to some subgraph T of the initial forest F , we check that it is a vector with only zeros and ones, where all ones correspond precisely to the current weights of the vertices in 

V (T ). Thus, the simulation of C on a given operation sequence can be done in time polynomial in n and m.If any of tested sequences fails the simulation (i.e., it returns an incorrect result for any query), then C is clearly incorrect. Otherwise, it is easy to see that the data structure is correct for any commutative group G.Observe that we test C on at most nO(m) operation sequences. Since a single addition or subtraction in C can be computed in O(m+n) time, the time to test a single operation sequence is at most (m+n)·MID( C). The overall time is thus nO(m) ·(m+n)·MID( C) = nO(m) ·MID( C),as desired. 

Corollary A.6. Let F be a forest of size n ≥ 2, and let m ∈ N+. Then, we can compute a correct computation tree C for F with height m and MID( C) = OPT( F, m ) in time 2nO(m)

.Proof. From Lemmas 3.1 and A.2, it follows that OPT( F, m ) ≤ O (m + n log n). Enumerat-ing all possible valid and succinct computation trees with maximum instruction depth d ≤O(m + n log n) can be done within the time bound above using Lemma A.4. We can filter out incorrect computation trees and select one C with MID( C) = OPT CT (F, m ) = OPT( F, m )

using Lemma A.5. The overall running time is as stated. By now, we have shown how to compute optimal computation trees when the number m of operations is known. We now proceed to build an (asymptotically) optimal data structure for arbitrary, initially unknown m, thereby proving Lemma 5.2. The idea is to start with an optimal data structure Cm for some constant m. As soon as we receive the (m + 1) th instruction, we switch to an optimal data structure Cm′ with a larger m′,and so on. It is tempting to just double m in every step, and try to apply a geometric sum argument. However, we do not actually know enough about the function OPT( F, m ) to make this work. Instead, we start with a constant time budget t, compute the largest m such that 

OPT( F, m ) ≤ t, and use Cm. Whenever we go over the limit of m operations, we double the time budget, and recompute m. With this, the geometric sum argument works. We remark that Pettie and Ramachandran use first strategy of doubling m in their optimal data structure for the split-findmin problem [PR05, Appendix B]. It appears that the same problem (and solution) applies to that problem, so their proof is erroneous, but fixable. 

Lemma 5.2. Given a forest F with n vertices, in time 22nO(1) 

, we can precompute a tree-sum data structure D that performs m ∈ N0 operations with the initial forest F (and arbitrary initial weights) in time O(OPT( F, m ) + m + n).

31 Proof. For each 1 ≤ m ≤ n2, compute a correct computation tree Cm of height m and with 

MID( Cm) = OPT( F, m ), using Corollary A.6. Note that we can at the same time compute and store the value t(m) := MID( Cm) + n + m for each m. Observe that t1 ≤ 2n + 1 ≤ 3n, since 

t1 ≤ OPT( F, 1) ≤ n (a single query can be answered by adding all required vertex weights by brute force). Turn each Cm into a data structure Dm using Lemma A.1; the data structure has total running time O(OPT( F, m ) + n + m) = O(t(m)) for any sequence of at most m operations. Suppose for now that the (initially unknown) number of operations is at most n2. Our data structure now works as follows: Set t∗ = 3 n, and set m∗ to the maximum m ≤ n2 such that 

t(m) ≤ t∗. Observe that m∗ is well defined, since t1 ≤ 3n, as shown above. Also store the list σ

of operations received so far, and initialize the data structure D ← Dm∗ .As long as |σ| ≤ m∗, we delegate all operations to D. Now suppose we receive the (m∗ + 1) th instruction. Then, we set t∗ ← 3t∗, recompute m∗ to be again the maximum m such that 

t(m) ≤ t∗, reinitialize a new data structure D ← Dm∗ , and then replay all operations so far on 

D. We continue delegating to D, while occasionally rebuilding. Let now m be the actual number of operations, and let m∗ 

> i

be the number of operations before the ith update was triggered. The number of rebuildings we have performed is q = log 3 t∗ 

> 3n

; let 

m∗ 

> q+1

denote the final value of m∗. Observe that m∗ 

> 1

≤ . . . ≤ m∗

> q+1

. Moreover, m∗ 

> q

< m ≤ m∗

> q+1

by construction. If q = 0 , then t(m) ≤ t(m∗

> 1

) ≤ t∗ = 3 n and so the total running time of D is 

O(n).Now assume q ≥ 1. Then m > m ∗ 

> q

, so in particular t(m) > 13 t∗ since m∗ 

> q

is maximal such that t(m∗ 

> q

) ≤ 13 t∗. Thus t∗ < 3t(m) ≤ 3(OPT( F, m ) + n + m). Also t(m∗ 

> i

) ≤ 3i−q−1t∗ for all 

i ∈ [q + 1] by construction. The overall running time of our data structure is clearly Pq+1  

> i=1

O(t(m∗ 

> i

)) . The required bound on the running time follows from a simple calculation: 

> q+1

X

> i=1

t(m∗ 

> i

) ≤

> q+1

X

> i=1

3i−q−1t∗ ≤ 43 t∗ < 4(OPT( F, m ) + n + m).

We now discuss how to handle the case where the final number of operations m is greater than n2. For the first T operations, we proceed as above; this takes time O(OPT( F, n 2) + n2).Observe that by Lemma 3.1 we have in particular OPT( F, n 2) ≤ O (n log n + n2) = O(n2).Therefore, the first n2 operations are processed in total time O(n2). After n2 operations, we reinitialize D to the data structure of Lemma 3.1, replaying the list σ of received operations one final time; and afterwards, we relay all subsequent operations to that data structure. The data structure takes time O(n log n + m) = O(m) to process all m queries. Adding these two terms yields the running time of O(m) ≤ O (OPT( F, m ) + n + m).

# B. Proof of Theorem 6.1 

For completeness, we include the proof of Theorem 6.1. We recall the statement below: 

Theorem 6.1. Consider any cell-probe data structure for the partial-sum problem on an array 

A of length n and values from 0 to U ≥ nΩ(1) that may use Las Vegas randomization. Let 

E ≤ nO(1) . The data structure requires Ω( En log n) time to process Θ( En ) operations, even if we assume that the sequence of operations is epoch-based and comprises E epochs. 

While the proof can be deduced from the techniques of the original work of Pătraşcu and Demaine [PD06], we find it more convenient to use the framework laid out by Pătraşcu’s the-sis [Păt08, Chapter 3]. His lower bound assumes that a data structure maintains an array A of 

n integers from 0 to U − 1, where U ≥ nΩ(1) , and the sequence of operations to A is governed by a permutation π on [n]. The sequence of operations is as follows: For each i ∈ [n], the 

partial-sum of initial π(i) elements of A is queried first, and then A[π(i)] is update d to some 32 new value from 0 to U −1, chosen uniformly at random. Let us call such a sequence of operations 

single-epoch-based , and each data structure executing such a sequence a single-epoch-based data structure .In order to give a lower bound on the number of cell probes required to execute this sequence of operations, we introduce a lower-bound tree T : a binary tree with n leaves. Each non-leaf vertex has a left and a right child. The leaves of T are identified with the indices 1, 2, . . . , n of the array A, from left to right. For each internal vertex v of T , we define the interleaving at v,denoted IL( v), as follows. Let Lv be the set of values π(i) for all leaves i in the left subtree of 

v, and Rv be the analogous set for the right subtree of v. The interleaving at v is defined as the number of pairs (x, y ) with x ∈ Lv, y ∈ Rv, where x comes immediately before y in the sorted sequence of Lv ∪ Rv. The total interleaving of π (with respect to T ) is defined as the sum of interleavings at all internal vertices of T . We then have: 

Theorem B.1 ([Păt08, Theorem 3.6]) . Consider any cell-probe single-epoch-based data structure for partial-sum on a length-n array with entries from 0 to U − 1 (U ≥ nΩ(1) ) that may use Las Vegas randomization. The structure executes the sequence of operations governed by a permutation π on [n]. The expected number of cell probes performed by the data structure is at least Θ  P  

> v∈T

IL( v) − n.

Note that Theorem B.1 holds for any permutation π and lower-bound tree T . Pătraşcu then concludes his lower bound proof by showing that a random permutation π has a large expected total interleaving: 

Lemma B.2 ([Păt08, Claim 3.7]) . Let π be a permutation on [n] chosen uniformly at random. Then, the expected total interleaving of π (with respect to some fixed lower-bound tree T with n

leaves) is Ω( n log n).

We now turn to the proof of Theorem 6.1. Consider a cell-probe data structure D processing epoch-based sequences of operations as defined in the theorem statement. We construct a single-epoch-based data structure D′ as follows. Suppose D′ is initialized with an array A′ of size 

n′ = En with initial values from 0 to U . For i ∈ [n], let the ith block of A′ be the subarray 

A′[( i − 1) E + 1 . . . iE ]. Intuitively, the ith block of A′ will be compressed to the element A[i] of the array A of size n used by D; and during each of E epochs of D, one element of each block will be updated. We now choose a permutation π′ on [n′] governing the sequence of operations to D′. Let π be a permutation on [n] chosen uniformly at random. Then: 

π′(( p − 1) n + q) = ( π(q) − 1) E + p for all p ∈ [E], q ∈ [n]; 

that is, in the qth operation of the pth epoch, we update the pth element of the π(q)th block of 

A′. Hence the first epoch update s the first element of each block, the second epoch update s the second element of each block, and so on. The order of blocks being updated in each epoch is identical and determined by the random permutation π. We observe that π′ has large expected interleaving: 

Lemma B.3. The expected total interleaving of π′ (with respect to some fixed lower-bound tree 

T ′ with n′ leaves) is Ω( n′ log n′).Proof. Let T be the lower-bound tree with n leaves from Lemma B.2 used to analyze π. We construct T ′ by creating E copies T1, . . . , TE of T , and relabeling the leaf q of Tp with (p−1) n+q;then, we link all the copies of T ′ to form a new binary tree T containing the subtrees T1, . . . , TE

in the left-to-right order. By the definition of π′, the value P 

> v∈T p

IL( v) is equal to the total interleaving of π with respect to T for each p ∈ [E]; this is because within each epoch, the order of blocks being updated is 33 identical and determined by π. Therefore, the total interleaving of π′ with respect to T ′ is equal to E times the total interleaving of π with respect to T . The lemma now follows from Lemma B.2 and the fact that Ω( En log n) = Ω( n′ log n′); note that here we use that E ≤ nO(1) .Theorem B.1 and Lemma B.3 now imply that the expected number of cell probes performed by D′ is at least Ω( n′ log n′). It remains to implement D′ using D. To this end, we first notice that the partial-sum queries within each block can be implemented efficiently: 

Lemma B.4. Suppose B is a dynamic integer array of length s undergoing s update s, where the pth update modifies B[p]. A data structure reporting partial sums of B can be initialized in 

O(s) time and perform each query in O(1) time. Proof. On initialization, we copy B to B0 and compute all partial sums of B0 in O(s) time; this allows us to determine the sum of any interval B0[i . . . j ] in O(1) time. We also incrementally maintain updated partial sums: Let B1 be an initially zeroed array of length s. After p update s, each B1[i] for i ∈ [p] contains the current sum of i first elements of B. When B[p] is update d, 

B1[p] is computed from B1[p − 1] (if it exists) and the new value of B[p] in O(1) time. Finally, we keep a counter p of the number of update s performed so far. A partial-sum query on B

at index i can be computed in O(1) time as follows: If i ≤ p, return B1[i]. Otherwise, return 

B1[p] + B0[p + 1 . . . i ].Now, on initialization of D′, we instantiate a data structure X1, . . . , X n of Lemma B.4 for each of the n blocks of A′. We would like to initialize an array A of size n for D, where A[i]

contains the sum of elements in the ith block of A′. However, this poses an issue: the elements of A may be as large as (U − 1) · E, while D only supports elements up to U − 1. To resolve this, we represent each element of A in base U . More precisely, let c ∈ N be a constant such that U c > (U − 1) E. We actually initialize c arrays A0, A 1, . . . , A c−1 of size n for D, preserving the following invariant: for each i ∈ [n], the sum of elements in the ith block of A′ is precisely Pc−1 

> j=0

Aj [i] · U j . For convenience, in the following description, we let A denote the collection of arrays A0, A 1, . . . , A c−1 (where each array is handled by a separate instance of D), and whenever we speak of updating an element of A or querying a partial sum of A, we actually mean updating or querying all arrays A0, A 1, . . . , A c−1 appropriately. To process the (( p − 1) n + q)th update of D′, which changes the pth element of the π(q)th block of A′, we first perform the update on Xπ(q), and then replace A[π(q)] with the altered sum of elements in the π(q)th block of A′. This involves one update to Xπ(q), c update s to the arrays in A, and additional constant overhead. To process the (( p − 1) n + q)th partial-sum 

query of D′, which requests the sum of the first (π(q) − 1) E + p elements of A′, we first query 

A for the sum of the first π(q) − 1 elements (i.e., the total sum of initial π(q) − 1 blocks of A′), and then query Xπ(q) for the sum of the first p elements of the π(q)th block, adding these to the result. Similarly, this involves one query in Xπ(q) and c queries in A, plus constant overhead. Summing up, all Θ( n′) operations of D′ can be reduced to: 

• Θ( cn ′) = Θ( n′) operations on D,

• Θ( n′) operations on the data structures X1, . . . , X n of Lemma B.4, each taking O(1) time, and 

• additional Θ( n′) overhead. Hence, by the lower bound on D′, the total number of cell probes performed by D is at least 

Ω( n′ log n′ − n′) = Ω( n′ log n′). This concludes the proof. 34