Title: Piecewise isometry groups of Euclidean tessellations

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.28893v1

Published Time: Mon, 03 Aug 2026 00:20:46 GMT

Number of Pages: 23

Markdown Content:
PIECEWISE ISOMETRY GROUPS OF EUCLIDEAN TESSELLATIONS      

> ROBERT BIERI, ALEX FEINGOLD, AND DANIEL STUDENMUND
> Abstract. Given a tessellation of Euclidean or hyperbolic space, the piecewise isometry group is the group whose elements are given by cutting space into finitely many tessellated convex subsets and gluing them back together. Groups of piecewise isometries of tessellations generalize Houghton’s groups and Thompson’s group V, and for cubical tessellations were studied by Bieri and Sach. We prove structure results about groups of piecewise isometries of sufficiently nice tessellations of Euclidean space, such as tessellations associated to crystallographic root systems, in particular proving that they are elementary amenable. Future work in progress will prove finite generation and higher finiteness properties.

1. Introduction 

Let V be a finite-dimensional Euclidean or hyperbolic space, and Ω a collection of codimension-1 totally geodesic subspaces in V such that Isom (V, Ω), the group of isometries of V preserving Ω, acts properly discontinuously on V with finite covolume and acts on Ω with finitely many orbits. Cutting V along hyperplanes of Ω determines a tessellation ∆ of V . The piecewise isometry group P I (∆) consists of transformations V → V defined by cutting V into finitely many convex pieces along hyperplanes in Ω and pasting those pieces by isometries bijectively onto the pieces of another such decomposition of V .The motivation of our project was triggered by the simple (but then surprising) unifying obser-vation of Bieri and Sach [3]: The piecewise isometric groups P I (∆) constitute a geometrically attractive and suggestive environment which hosts both Thompson’s groups and Houghton’s groups. These two classes groups, which were around but alien to one another for more than half a century, were now prominently located in the low dimensional core of a new attractive common homestead: (1) If ∆ is the (unique) regular tessellation of the line, then the end-preserving subgroup of 

P I (∆) quotiented by isometries of individual tiles is Houghton’s group H2. The higher Houghton group Hn occur similarly when the tessellated line ∆ is replaced by the disjoint union of n parallel tessellated rays. (2) If ∆ is the (unique) regular tessellation of the hyperbolic plane by ideal simplices, one ob-serves that all pieces of finite decompositions are either half-spaces or finite tile-clusters, and the decompositions are partially ordered along a tree. Then the quotient of P I (∆) by the subgroup of elements supported on finitely many triangles is Thompson’s group 

V . This observation seems to be folklore; see Bieri–Sach [3, §2.6]. Thompson’s groups were the starting point of a whole new development in group theory with an extended literature. This includes work based on their faithful piecewise isometric action on the 

> Date : 30 July 2026.
> 1arXiv:2607.28893v1 [math.GR] 30 Jul 2026

hyperbolic plane with applications to (asymptotically rigid) mapping class groups of surfaces [17, 9, 10, 2]. In this paper, we consider the case that V is a Euclidean space, and ∆ is cut out by finitely many families of parallel hyperplanes such that the group of isometries preserving ∆ acts prop-erly discontinuously and cocompactly. The most important examples of tessellations satisfying these hypotheses are given by those associated to crystallographic root systems [12], where the isometry group of the tessellation is virtually an affine Weyl group. Not all such tessellations arise directly from root systems: for example, the trihexagonal tiling of the plane, also called the kagome lattice. Our main theorem generalizes a result of Bieri and Sach [3]. 

Theorem 1.1. Let ∆ be a tessellation of Euclidean space as above. Then P I (∆) is elementary amenable. 

Theorem 1.1 is proved by using the geometry of the tessellation to define a normal series in 

P I (∆) and analyzing the successive quotients. Given a convex polyhedral set C cut out by hyperplanes in Ω, define its limit set L(C) to be the set of unit vectors u ∈ V such that C

contains a ray in the direction u. Define the rank of C to be one more than the dimension of its limit set, and say that C is irreducible if it cannot be decomposed as a union of two convex polyhedral sets of equal rank with disjoint interiors. Define a germ to be an equivalence class of irreducible convex polyhedral sets, where two are equivalent if each has the same rank as the interior of their intersection. The piecewise isometry group P I (∆) acts on the set of germs Γ preserving rank. We use this action to define normal subgroups C+ 

> r

, C r, G r ≤ P I (∆) for each r = 0 , . . . , dim( V ), where Cr is subgroup fixing each germ of rank r. The main theorem follows immediately from the following summary of the results of Section 3.8. 

Proposition 1.2. There is a chain of normal subgroups of P I (∆) 

{1} = C+0 ≤ C0 ≤ G0 ≤ C+1 ≤ · · · ≤ Cdim( V ) ≤ Gdim( V ) = P I (∆) 

where each quotient Gr/C r or Cr/C + 

> r

is locally finite and each quotient C+ 

> r

/G r−1 is abelian. 

Future work will build on this description to prove finiteness properties of the group P I (∆), further generalizing results of Bieri and Sach. 1.1. Examples. Our intuition about piecewise isometries was built by studying examples aris-ing from crystallographic root systems. Such root systems are products of irreducible root systems, which are completely classified. The irreducible root system of type A1 gives rise to a piecewise isometry group of the real line whose quotient by the locally finite normal subgroup 

C0 (as defined above) is Houghton’s group H2. The reducible root system of type ( A1)n gives rise to the piecewise isometry group studied by Bieri and Sach [3]. In Section 4, we give an explicit description of the set of germs for crystallographic tessellations. We include illustrations for the root system of type A2, which generates the tessellation of the plane by equilateral triangles, and provide examples of piecewise isometries lying at different terms in the chain of normal subgroups in Proposition 1.2. We also provide pictures of irreducible convex polyhedral sets for the tessellation corresponding to the root system of type A3 in R3.As examples of tessellations which are not coming from an affine Weyl group we discuss the 2D 

> 2

and 3D kagome tessellations. We include many figures to illustrate the beautiful geometry in these examples, and hope that they spark joy for the reader and they did for us. 1.2. Context. Piecewise-defined maps have long been a source of interesting examples of groups. For example, the regular tessellation of the hyperbolic plane by ideal triangles has orientation-preserving isometry group PSL 2(Z). The subgroup of Homeo( S1) composed of elements which are piecewise-PSL 2(Z) is isomorphic to Thompson’s group T , a result attributed to Thurston [11]. Imbert shows moreover that both are isomorphic to Penner’s universal Ptolemy group [13, 17], a group generated by edge flips of ideal triangle tessellations of the hyperbolic plane equipped with a distinguished oriented edge. An application of that example in physics was found by Osborne and Stiegemann [16]. One way to generalize this is to realize P SL (2 , Z) as the even subgroup of the hyperbolic Weyl group, 

P GL (2 , Z) ∼= T (2 , 3, ∞)of a rank 3 hyperbolic Kac-Moody Lie algebra, F = AE 3 = A++ 1 , studied by Feingold and Frenkel [4] in 1983. Weyl groups of two rank 4 hyperbolic Kac-Moody Lie algebras contain finite-index subgroups P SL (2 , E ) and P SL (2 , Z[i]), where E = Z[eπi/3] is the ring of Eisen-stein integers and Z[i] is the ring of Gaussian integers. These Weyl groups were studied by Feingold-Kleinschmidt-Nicolai [5, 6, 7] in 2009 in relation to normed division algebras, and by Feingold-Valli` eres [8] in 2017 in relation to Clifford algebras. They are arithmetic subgroups of 

P SL (2 , C) which act properly discontinuously on hyperbolic 3-space, H3. One motivation of our current project is to study piecewise isometry groups of the tessellations of H3 determined by these hyperbolic Weyl groups, giving us definitions of new groups which could be called 

P P SL (2 , E ) and P P SL (2 , Z[i]). Associated to each ideal vertex of these hyperbolic tessella-tions is a Euclidean tessellation of a sufficiently small horosphere, and the piecewise isometry groups of the Euclidean A2 and B2 tessellations arise as parabolic subgroups of the hyperbolic piecewise isometry group. Cutting and pasting also appears in the context of Hilbert’s third problem, which asks whether, given two polyhedra of equal volume, one can be cut into finitely many polyhedral pieces and reassembled to form the second. While the question is long-settled, research into cut-and-paste equivalence continues using the Zakharevich’s language of assemblers [18]. See Remark 2.8 for a definition of our piecewise isometry groups following Kupers et al. [14]. 2. Piecewise isometries 

Group actions will be right actions, following much of the literature of piecewise groups. When it will not cause confusion, elements of groups that are naturally functions may be written on the left in function notation. 2.1. Tessellations. Let ( V, (·, ·)) be a finite-dimensional real inner product space. Let Ω be a collection of affine hyperplanes in V such that Isom( V, Ω), the group of isometries of V preserving Ω, acts on V properly discontinuously and cocompactly, and acts on Ω with finitely many orbits. This determines a tessellation ∆ of V . The open top-dimensional tiles are connected components of V − S 

> H∈Ω

H, called regions of the arrangement, and their facets are regions of intersection 

> 3

subspaces. Then ∆ is a locally finite polyhedral complex with isometry group Isom(∆) acting cocompactly on V . Tessellations formed in this way are the central object of our study. By assumption, Isom(∆) is a lattice in the Lie group Isom( V ), and so the translation subgroup 

T ≤ Isom(∆) has finite index. It follows then that Ω admits a decomposition as a disjoint union Ω = Ω 1 ⊔ · · · ⊔ Ωm of finitely many families of parallel hyperplanes. Given a hyperplane H ∈ Ω, let Ω H ⊂ Ω denote its parallelism class. Let H be the collection of all closed half-spaces M ⊂ V bounded by hyperplanes H ∈ Ω. Let 

ι : H → H be the involution sending each half-space M to the half-space ι(M ) = V − M . The map H → Ω mapping M 7 → ∂M is a 2-to-1 surjection. By a maximal nested family in H we mean a maximal subset ξ ⊂ H with the property that for any two half-spaces M, M ′ ∈ ξ, either M ⊂ M ′ or M ′ ⊂ M . Each maximal nested family in H

is of the form 

ξM = M ′ ∈ H M ⊂ M ′ or M ′ ⊂ M

for some M ∈ H . Each maximal nested family is totally ordered by containment, and the boundaries of its elements constitute a parallelism class Ω H for some H ∈ Ω. 

Definition 2.1. Let Ξ be the collection of all maximal nested families in H. The involution 

ι : H → H descends to an involution of Ξ, which by abuse of notation we also denote by ι.

2.2. Convex polyhedral sets. The building blocks for piecewise isometries are convex poly-hedral sets. 

Definition 2.2. A convex polyhedral subset of V is a subset P ⊆ V that is either empty or is a set with nonempty interior equal to the intersection finitely many closed half-spaces bounded by hyperplanes H ∈ Ω.

The full space V and the empty set ∅ are convex polyhedral subsets. Note that a nonempty intersection of such half-spaces has empty interior if and only if it is contained in some hyperplane 

H ∈ Ω. The intersection of two convex polyhedral sets may have empty interior, and therefore not be convex polyhedral. To remedy this, define the essential intersection of convex polyhedral sets P, Q as 

P ⋒ Q =

(

∅ if P ∩ Q has empty interior 

P ∩ Q else. Say that P and Q are essentially disjoint if P ⋒ Q = ∅.

Definition 2.3. A finite decomposition of a subset X ⊆ V is a finite collection of convex polyhedral subsets P1, . . . , P m ⊆ X whose union is X and which are pairwise essentially disjoint. If X ⊆ V admits a finite decomposition, call it a polyhedral set .

Note that the collection of polyhedral sets is closed under intersections, unions, and complements. 2.3. The limit complex at infinity. A direction in V is a parallelism class of rays in V . Let 

∂V be the set of directions in V , thought of as the sphere at infinity. Each convex subset C ⊂ V

has a limit set L(C), the set of directions contained in C. For any hyperplane H ∈ Ω, its limit set L(H) ⊂ ∂V is a great subsphere. The collection of all sets L(H) for H ∈ Ω is a finite collection of great subspheres, one for each parallelism class Ω H .

> 4

The collection of all L(H) for H ∈ Ω gives ∂V the structure of a spherical cell complex. The open cells of top dimension are the components of the deleted space ∂V − S 

> H∈Ω

L(H). The open cells of dimension k are top-dimensional cells of the subsphere arrangements induced in 

k-dimensional subspheres Sk ⊂ ∂V which are intersections of limit sets L(H). In particular, the vertices of the complex are elements v ∈ ∂V such that the antipodal pair {v, −v} is equal to the intersection of a finite collection of sets L(H) for H ∈ Ω. The collection of all open cells, including the ( −1)-dimensional empty cell, will be written L(∆). This complex has the structure of the set of (co)vectors of an oriented matroid [1, §1.3.4]. Each maximal nested family ξ ∈ Ξ has a well-defined limit set L(ξ), by definition equal to the closed hemisphere L(M ) for any M ∈ ξ. The intersection L(ξ) ∩ L(ι(ξ)) is equal the boundary 

∂L (ξ), which is equal to the great subsphere L(∂M ) where ∂M is the boundary hyperplane of any representative M ∈ ξ. The closure of any cell in L(∆) is then equal to an intersection of hemispheres L(ξ1), . . . , L (ξn) for some ξ1, . . . , ξ n ∈ Ξ, and such an intersection represents the closure of an open cell if and only if it is minimal among all such intersections of its dimension. If convex sets C and D have nonempty intersection, then L(C ∩D) = L(C)∩L(D). In particular, if a nonempty convex polyhedral set P is the intersection of half-spaces M1, . . . , M n, then L(P ) is the intersection of the closed hemispheres L(M1), . . . , L (Mn). Therefore L(P ) has the structure of a subcomplex of the spherical cell complex L(∆). Let S(V ) be the unit sphere in V . There is an identification between ∂V and S(V ) sending each parallelism class of rays to the unit vector in its direction. Under this identification, for any convex set C ⊂ V the limit set L(C) ⊂ ∂V is identified with cone( C) ∩ S(V ), where cone( C) is the recession cone of C. The recession cone of a convex set C is the set of vectors v ∈ V such that x + tv ∈ C for any t > 0 and x ∈ C (cf. [19, 1.5]). The recession cone is a cone at the origin. 2.4. Definition of piecewise isometries. We now define the main object of our study, the group G = P I (∆) of piecewise isometries of V determined by ∆. For the remainder of this section, let Γ denote a subgroup of Isom(∆). When Γ is omitted from notation we assume Γ = Isom(∆). 

Definition 2.4. A piecewise-Γ embedding is an injective function f : X1 → X2 between poly-hedral subsets X1, X 2 ⊂ V such that X1 admits a finite decomposition by convex polyhedral sets 

P1, . . . , P n such that the restriction of f to the interior each Pi extends to an element of Γ.

If the restriction of f to the interior of a convex polyhedral set P extends to an element of Γ, we say that f is Γ -isometric on P . When Γ is the full isometry group Isom(∆), say simply that 

f is isometric on P .

Lemma 2.5. Consider subsets X1, X 2 ⊂ V , a function f : X1 → X2, and a convex polyhedral subset P ⊂ X1 on which f is Γ-isometric. 

(1) f (P ) ⊂ V is a convex polyhedral subset. 

(2) Given a finite decomposition Q1, . . . , Q m ⊂ f (P ) of f (P ), setting Pi = f P

> −1

(Qi) defines a finite decomposition of P by convex polyhedral subsets P1, . . . , P m ⊂ P on which f is 

Γ-isometric. Proof. Evident. □

> 5

Lemma 2.6. The composition of two piecewise-Γ embeddings is a piecewise-Γ embedding. Proof. Given two piecewise-Γ embeddings f : X1 → X2 and g : X2 → X3, let P1, . . . , P m ⊂ X1

and Q1, . . . , Q k ⊂ X2 be finite decompositions of X1 and X2 by convex polyhedral sets on which 

f and g are, respectively, Γ-isometric. Then for each i, the collection Q1 ⋒ f (Pi), . . . , Q k ⋒ f (Pi)is a finite decomposition of f (Pi), where ⋒ is the essential intersection. Then by Lemma 2.5, the collection f −1 (Qj ⋒ f (Pi)) forms a finite decomposition of X1 by convex polyhedral sets on which g ◦ f is Γ-isometric. □

Because the image of the interior of a convex polyhedral set under a Γ-isometry is again the interior of a convex polyhedral subset, the inverse of an invertible piecewise-Γ embedding is again a piecewise-Γ embedding. Say that an invertible piecewise-Γ embedding is a piecewise-Γ

isometry .

Definition 2.7. The piecewise-Γ isometry group of ∆ is the group P I (∆ , Γ) of all piecewise-

Γ isometries f : V → V under composition. When Γ = Isom(∆) , we call this the piecewise isometry group of ∆ and write P I (∆) .Remark 2.8 . Piecewise isometries of tessellations may also be defined using Zakharevich’s lan-guage of assemblers [18], following the presentation of Kupers et al. [14]. We outline the construction here, though we will not use it in the sequel. Let AΓ be the category whose objects are convex polyhedral sets and whose morphisms P → Q for nonempty P are f ∈ Γ such that 

f (P ) ⊂ Q, and for P = ∅ there is a unique morphism P → Q for each Q. A covering family is a collection of morphisms with the same target, the union of whose images is equal to the target. This gives AΓ the structure of an assembler. Then, in the notation of Kupers at al. [14], the piecewise isometry group P I (∆ , Γ) is the group Aut G(AΓ)(V ). Note however that A is neither an EA-assembler nor an S-assembler. 2.5. Translations. Recall that T ≤ Isom(∆), the group of all translations preserving the tes-sellation, acts properly discontinuously and cocompactly on V . Given any hyperplane H ∈ Ω, there is a positive lower bound on the distance between H and Ht for t ∈ T , and therefore there is a translation tH ∈ T minimizing the distance. 

Lemma 2.9. Given any hyperplane H ∈ Ω, let stab T (H) be the stabilizer of H in T . For any 

tH ∈ T minimizing the nonzero distance between H and Ht H , there is a direct sum decomposition 

T ∼= stab T (H) ⊕ ⟨ tH ⟩.Proof. The quotient group T /stab T (H) acts on the set of hyperplanes Ω H . Given ϕ ∈ T /stab T (H), chose the N such that Ht NH lies closest to Hϕ . Then Hϕ = Ht NH by minimality of tH . The assignment ϕ 7 → tN is a section of the quotient map T → T /stab T (H). □

Lemma 2.10. For each hyperplane H ∈ Ω, the stabilizer stab T (H) ≤ T acts cocompactly on H.Proof. Pick any tH ∈ T minimizing the nonzero distance between H and Ht H , and let A ⊂ V

be the convex set bounded by H and Ht H . Let p ∈ V be any point equidistant from H and 

Ht H . A fundamental domain D for the action of T on V is given by a Voronoi region about p,which is contained in A. By Lemma 2.9, the union of the stab T (H)-orbit of D is all of A. It follows that the action of stab T (H) on A is cocompact, and so the action of stab T (H) on H is cocompact. □

> 6

Corollary 2.11. If L ⊂ V is an affine line that is the intersection of hyperplanes in Ω, then 

stab T (L) acts cocompactly on L.Proof. Given any H ∈ Ω, choosing coordinates on H gives H the structure of an inner product space with a distinguished collection of hyperplanes, the collection of all proper subsets H ∩ H′

for H′ ∈ Ω. This defines a tessellation of H which has a cocompact and properly discontinuous group of isometries by Lemma 2.10 with finitely many orbits of hyperplanes. The result now follows from Lemma 2.10 by induction. □

3. Structure of convex polyhedral sets 

3.1. Bounds and rank. Each nonempty convex polyhedral subset P is a finite intersection of half-spaces in H. Since each maximal nested family is discretely linearly ordered, this intersection contains minimal elements in each such family. Here we introduce notation for this. For each ξ ∈ Ξ, say that P is ξ-bounded if P ⊂ M for some M ∈ ξ. If no such bounding half-space exists, say that P is ξ-unbounded . Let Ξ P ⊂ Ξ be the collection of ξ for which P is 

ξ-bounded. Given ξ ∈ ΞP , let bP (ξ) ∈ H be the minimal half-space M ∈ ξ such that P ⊂ M .We evidently have the following description of P :(1) P = \

> ξ∈ΞP

bP (ξ).

A key tool in understanding the structure of polyhedral sets will be decompositions into irre-ducible pieces. The appropriate notion of irreducibility is defined using the concept of rank. 

Definition 3.1. The rank of a convex subset P ⊂ V , denoted rk( P ), is the maximal number of linearly independent rays in P . Define the rank of the empty set to be −1.

It is clear that if Q ⊆ P then rk( Q) ≤ rk( P ). In fact, the rank of a convex polyhedral set is related to the dimension of its limit set. 

Lemma 3.2. If P is a convex polyhedral set of rank k then L(P ) ⊂ ∂V is a closed submanifold with corners of dimension k − 1, equal to the intersection of finitely many closed hemispheres. Proof. From Eq. (1) we deduce the equality (2) L(P ) = \

> ξ∈ΞP

L(ξ),

hence L(P ) ⊂ ∂V is a closed submanifold with corners. For the computation of dimension, let 

W ⊂ V be the linear span of the recession cone, cone( P ). Then L(P ) is the intersection of the codimension-0 submanifold cone( P ) ⊂ W with the codimension-1 submanifold S(V ) ∩ W ⊂ W ,so L(P ) has dimension one less than that of W . This completes the proof, since the dimension of W is equal to the rank of P . □

Lemma 3.3. Suppose P is a convex polyhedral set. For each ξ ∈ Ξ, there is a containment 

L(P ) ⊂ L(ξ) if and only if P is ξ-bounded. 

> 7

Proof. It is clear that if P is ξ-bounded then L(P ) ⊂ L(ξ). Conversely, let Ξ P be the set of 

ξ ∈ Ξ such that P is ξ-bounded and consider any β ∈ Ξ − ΞP . For each ξ ∈ Ξ choose a vector 

vξ ∈ V that is a positive normal vector to the hyperplane ∂M for any M ∈ ξ. Since P is β-unbounded, clearly vβ cannot be written as a nonnegative linear combination of vξ for ξ ∈ ΞP .It follows from a standard formulation of the Farkas Lemma (for example, see Farkas Lemma 3 of Anderson [1, §1.5.2, page 30]) that there is a unit vector v ∈ S(V ) such that ( v, v β ) < 0and ( v, v ξ) ≥ 0 for all ξ ∈ ΞP . It follows from the latter conditions and Equation Eq. (2) that 

v ∈ L(P ), and from the former condition that v / ∈ L(ξ). □

We are interested in how rank changes upon “cutting” a polyhedral set by a hyperplane. That is, we are interested in relating the rank of P to the rank of P ⋒ M for M ∈ H . The relation between the ranks of these subsets depends on the boundedness of P .

Proposition 3.4. Suppose P is a nonempty convex polyhedral set. Fix ξ ∈ Ξ and a half-space 

M ∈ ξ such that P ⋒ M is nonempty. 

(1) If P is ξ-bounded, then rk( P ⋒ M ) = rk( P ).

(2) If P is ξ-unbounded and ι(ξ)-bounded, then rk( P ⋒ M ) < rk( P ).

(3) If P is unbounded with respect to both ξ and ι(ξ), then rk( P ⋒ M ) = rk( P ).Proof. First suppose P is ξ-bounded. Then Item 1 follows from Equation (2) since 

L(P ⋒ M ) = L(P ) ⋒ L(M ) = \

> ξ∈ΞP

L(ξ) ⋒ L(M ) = L(P ).

Now suppose P is ξ-unbounded and ι(ξ)-bounded. It follows from Equation (2) that L(P ⋒ M )is contained in ∂L (ξ). By Lemma 3.3 there is some v ∈ L(P ) − ∂L (ξ). By spherical convexity of the limit set L(P ), there is a spherical segment from v to L(P ⋒ M ) intersecting L(P ⋒ M )transversely, so the dimension of L(P ) is at least one greater than the dimension of L(P ⋒ M ). This proves Item 2. Now suppose P is both ξ-unbounded and ι(ξ)-unbounded. By Lemma 3.3, find u ∈ L(P ) − L(ξ)and v ∈ L(P ) − L(ι(ξ)). By convexity, the limit set L(P ) contains a spherical line segment from u to v. This segment intersects the ( n − 2)-sphere ∂L (ξ) transversely inside L(P ), so 

L(P ) ∩ ∂L (ξ) has codimension 1 inside L(P ). Since L(P ⋒ M ) contains both L(P ) ∩ ∂L (ξ) and 

v, it follows that the rank of P ⋒ M is equal to (rk( P ) − 1) + 1, proving Item 3. □

3.2. Irreducibles. The first step in defining a space on which P I (∆) acts is to define a set of classes of certain polyhedral sets on which P I (∆) acts. Because a piecewise isometry may not have a well-defined associated isometry on a given convex polyhedral set, the polyhedral sets we consider will be ‘small’ in a sense that we define in Definition 3.5 and alternatively characterize in Lemma 3.7. 

Definition 3.5. A convex polyhedral set P is irreducible if, for any finite decomposition P1, . . . , P m

of P , exactly one of the sets Pi has rank equal to the rank of P .

It follows from Equation (2) by induction that a convex polyhedral set P is irreducible if and only if for each M ∈ H , exactly one of P ⋒ M and P ⋒ ι(M ) has rank equal to the rank of P .We will often use this characterization of irreducibility in what follows. 

> 8

Definition 3.6. A nonempty convex polyhedral set P is thin if for all ξ ∈ Ξ with the property that P is both ξ-bounded and ι(ξ)-bounded, for any M ∈ ξ either P ⋒ M = P or P ⋒ M = ∅.

To understand this another way, define a ξ-layer to be a nonempty polyhedral set of the form 

M ⋒ M ′ some M ∈ ξ and M ′ ∈ ι(ξ). The set of ξ-layers is a directed poset ordered by inclusion. Then a convex polyhedral set P is thin if, for each ξ ∈ Ξ such that P is contained in an ξ-layer, 

P is contained in a minimal ξ-layer. Note that an ξ-layer is thin if and only if it is minimal. 

Lemma 3.7. For a nonempty convex polyhedral set P , the following are equivalent: 

(1) P is irreducible. 

(2) P is thin and for each ξ ∈ Ξ, P is ξ-bounded or ι(ξ)-bounded. 

(3) P is thin and L(P ) is a closed cell in the spherical complex L(∆) .Proof. To see that irreducibility implies the second condition, suppose P is irreducible. First suppose there exists ξ ∈ Ξ such that P is both ξ-unbounded and ι(ξ)-unbounded. Then for any 

M ∈ ξ, both P ∩ M and P ∩ ι(M ) have rank equal to the rank of P by Proposition 3.4, while 

P = ( P ∩ M ) ∪ (P ∩ ι(M )) is a finite decomposition, contradicting irreducibility of P .Now suppose P ⊂ M ∩ M ′ where M ∈ ξ and M ′ ∈ ι(ξ), and there is M ′′ ∈ ξ such that both 

P ⋒ M ′′ and P ⋒ ι(M ′′ ) are nonempty. Then both P ∩ M ′′ and P ∩ ι(M ′′ ) have rank equal to the rank of P by Proposition 3.4, while P = ( P ∩ M ′′ ) ∪ (P ∩ ι(M ′′ )) is a finite decomposition, contradicting irreducibility of P .To see that the second condition irreducibility, suppose P is reducible, so that there is a finite decomposition P = ( P ∩ M ) ∪ (P ∩ ι(M )) for some M ∈ ξ, where both P ∩ M and P ∩ ι(M )have the same rank as P . Suppose that P is ξ-bounded or ι(ξ)-bounded. By Proposition 3.4, P

must be both ξ-bounded and ι(ξ)-bounded. But since both P ∩ M and P ∩ ι(M ) are nonempty, 

P cannot be thin. To finish the proof, we assume P is thin and show that P is ξ-bounded or ι(ξ)-bounded for each 

ξ ∈ Ξ if and only if its limit set is a closed cell in L(∆). Let Ξ P be the set of ξ ∈ Ξ for which P is 

ξ-bounded. Consider Ξ P ∩ ι(Ξ P ), the set of ξ for which P is both ξ-bounded and ι(ξ)-bounded. Consider the subsphere 

S = \  

> ξ∈ΞP∩ι(Ξ P)

L(ξ).

Now, L(P ) is the intersection of S with a closed half-space for each β ∈ Ξ for which P is β-bounded but not ι(β)-bounded. The desired result now follows because the resulting set is a closed cell in S precisely when this intersection includes exactly one half-space M ∈ β ∪ ι(β) for each β ∈ Ξ − (Ξ P ∩ ι(Ξ P )). □

3.3. Rank and height. We define here the notion of rank and height of a general polyhedral sets that will be used to define a normal series in the piecewise isometry group P I (∆) and allow for inductive arguments. 

Proposition 3.8. Every nonempty polyhedral set X admits a finite decomposition into irre-ducibles. 

> 9

Proof. It suffices to show every convex polyhedral set P admits a finite decomposition into irreducibles. We make the following reduction: Fix hyperplanes H1, . . . , H n ∈ Ω representing each parallelism class of hyperplane. It suffices to decompose the essential intersection of P with the closure of each connected component of V − S 

> i=1 ,...,n

Hi. To that end, we will suppose that for each ξ ∈ Ξ, our set P is ξ-bounded or ι(ξ)-bounded. Let Q be the collection of nonempty pieces formed by intersecting P with every thin ξ-layer, as defined following Definition 3.6, for which P is both ξ- and ι(ξ)-bounded. That is, we ‘chop up’ P as much as possible while slicing only in directions that intersect P in finitely many hyperplanes. That is, Q is the collection of all minimal nonempty polyhedral sets of the form 

P ∩ \  

> ξ∈ΞP∩ι(Ξ P)

Mξ ∩ M ′ 

> ξ

where Mξ ∈ ξ and M ′ 

> ξ

∈ ι(ξ),

where Ξ P is the set of ξ ∈ Ξ such that P is ξ-bounded. Clearly Q forms a finite decomposition of P . We claim that each Q ∈ Q is irreducible. To that end, consider any Q ∈ Q . To see that Q is irreducible, we check the two conditions of Lemma 3.7. The first condition of Lemma 3.7 follows immediately from the fact that Q is a subset of P , which satisfies the condition by the reduction at the start of the proof. To see that 

Q is thin, suppose Q is both ξ-bounded and ι(ξ)-bounded for some ξ ∈ Ξ. By Lemma 3.3 we know L(Q) = L(P ), so Q and P shared the same boundedness properties, so ξ ∈ ΞP ∩ ι(Ξ P ). Thinness of Q now follows from minimality of its defining intersection. □

Definition 3.9. The rank of a polyhedral set X, denoted rk( X), is the maximal rank among all convex polyhedral subsets P ⊂ X.

Proposition 3.10. Suppose a polyhedral set X ⊂ V has rank k. Then the number of irreducible convex polyhedral sets of rank k in a finite decomposition of X into irreducibles is independent of choice of finite decomposition into irreducibles. Proof. Suppose X has two finite decompositions into irreducible convex polyhedral sets P1, . . . , P m

and Q1, . . . , Q n, where the rank-k irreducibles in the former are P1, . . . , P d for d ≤ m. For each i = 1 , . . . , d , we know that Pi ∩ Q1, . . . , P i ∩ Qn is a finite decomposition of Pi, so by irreducibility there exists a unique index 1 ≤ ji ≤ n such that rk (Pi ∩ Qji ) = k. Since rk( Pi ∩ Qji ) ≤ rk( Qji ) ≤ k, we conclude that rk( Qji ) = k. Therefore the assignment i 7 → ji is a well-defined map from {1, . . . , d } to the set of indices j for which rk( Qj ) = k. An inverse function is determined by assigning to each such index j the unique index ij such that rk (Qj ∩ Pij ) = k,so the proof is complete. □

Definition 3.11. The height of a polyhedral set X ⊂ V , denoted ht( X), is the number of convex polyhedral sets of rank rk( X) in any finite decomposition of X into irreducibles. 

3.4. Alcoves. Here we define irreducible convex polyhedral sets of particularly nice form. Recall that a tile is a top-dimensional cell of the tessellation ∆. That is, a tile is a connected component of V − S 

> H∈Ω

H.

Definition 3.12. Given a tile τ ∈ ∆ and a spherical cell σ ∈ L(∆) , the alcove A[τ, σ ] is the intersection of all half-spaces M ∈ H such that τ ⊂ M and σ ⊂ L(M ).

Note that every tile τ is itself an alcove, τ = A[τ, ∅]. 

> 10

Lemma 3.13. For any tile τ ∈ ∆ and open cell σ ∈ L(∆) , the alcove A[τ, σ ] has limit set equal to the closure of σ and is irreducible. Proof. Clearly σ ⊂ L(A[τ, σ ]), and certainly L(A[τ, σ ]) is closed, as it is the intersection of closed hemispheres. On the other hand, for any point p ∈ ∂V not in the closure of σ, by definition of the cells of the spherical complex L(∆) there is a half-space M ∈ H such that L(M ) contains 

p in its interior and is disjoint from σ. We may choose M to be disjoint from τ , so that the half-space V − M contains τ . Since p is in the interior of L(M ), it does not belong to L(V − M ), and so p / ∈ L(A[τ, σ ]). To see that A[τ, σ ] is irreducible, by Lemma 3.7 it remains only to check that it is thin. This is clear; if A[τ, σ ] is contained in an ξ-layer M ∩ M ′, where M ∈ ξ and M ′ ∈ ι(ξ), then it is contained in the thin ξ-layer bτ (ξ) ∩ bτ (ι(ξ)). □

Proposition 3.14. Every polyhedral set P admits a finite decomposition into alcoves. Proof. Proceed by induction on the rank of P . Every polyhedral set of rank 0 is a finite union of tiles, which are themselves alcoves, so the base case is immediate. Now suppose P has rank k. By Proposition 3.8, it suffices to consider the case that P is irreducible. Fix a tile τ ⊂ P and consider the alcove A[τ, L (P )], which is well-defined by Lemma 3.7. Cutting P along the hyperplanes bounding τ produces a finite decomposition of P , which by Proposition 3.8 can be refined into a finite decomposition into irreducibles 

Q1, Q 2, . . . , Q ℓ where Q1 = A[τ, L (P )]. By Proposition 3.10, each Qi has rank less than k when 

i > 1, so we are done by induction. □

3.5. Canonical translations. Let P ⊂ V be a convex polyhedral set. An edge-ray of P is a ray in V that is contained in a 1-dimensional face of P . If r is an edge-ray of P , then L(r)is a vertex of the complex L(∆) that is an extremal point in the spherical convex set L(P ). Conversely, if v ∈ L(P ) is an extremal point, then there is an edge-ray r in P with L(r) = v.It follows from the standard characterization of a polyhedron as the sum of a polytope and its recession cone [19, 1.12.ii] that each edge-ray r of P is parallel to an extreme ray of its recession cone cone( P ), and conversely for each extreme ray of cone( P ) there is a parallel edge-ray of P .For each edge-ray r of P , by Corollary 2.11 there is a nontrivial translation in T stabilizing the line ⟨r⟩ spanned by r. Let tr ∈ T be the unique element of stab T (⟨r⟩) of minimal translation length such that rt r ⊂ r. (Recall that T acts on the right.) Since tr is translation by a vector 

vr in cone( P ), we see P t r ⊂ P . Now let Ξ + 

> r

be the set of all ξ ∈ Ξ such that r has nontrivial intersection with every half-space M ∈ ξ. Equivalently, Ξ + 

> r

is the set of ξ ∈ Ξ such that 

L(r) /∈ L(ι(ξ)). For each ξ ∈ Ξ+ 

> r

, there is a strict containment bP t r (ξ) ⊊ bP (ξ). On the other hand, for each β ∈ Ξ − (Ξ + 

> r

∪ ι(Ξ + 

> r

)), we have bP t r (β) = bP (β). 

Definition 3.15. For each irreducible convex polyhedral set P , the associated canonical trans-lation tP ∈ T is the composition of all tr as r runs over representatives of each parallelism class of edge-rays of P .

Since the limit set of an irreducible convex polyhedral set P is a cell L(P ) in the spherical complex L(∆) by Lemma 3.7, its canonical translation tP is the composition of one translation 

> 11

tr for each vertex of the cell L(P ). In particular, the canonical translation tP depends only on the limit set L(P ). The canonical translation sends P ‘deeply into itself’ in the following sense: 

Lemma 3.16. Suppose P ⊂ V is an irreducible convex polyhedral set with canonical translation 

tP ∈ T . For each convex polyhedral set Q ⊂ P such that L(P ) = L(Q), there is a natural number 

N such that tNP (P ) ⊂ Q.Proof. Since L(Q) = L(P ), for each ξ ∈ Ξ we know P is ι(ξ)-unbounded if and only if Q is 

ι(ξ)-unbounded. For each ξ ∈ Ξ such that Q is ι(ξ)-unbounded, it follows from Lemma 3.3 that there is an edge-ray r of P such that ξ ∈ Ξ+ 

> r

. We therefore have a descending sequence 

bP (ξ) ⊋ bP t r (ξ) ⊋ bP t 2 

> r

(ξ) ⊋ · · · , from which we conclude there is a descending sequence 

bP (ξ) ⊋ bP t P (ξ) ⊋ bP t 2 

> P

(ξ) ⊋ · · · 

Since there are finitely many half-spaces between bP (ξ) and bQ(ξ), there is a natural number 

nξ such that bP t nξr

(ξ) ⊂ bQ(ξ). Let N be the maximum value of nξ where Q is ι(ξ)-unbounded. Then by construction we have P t NP ⊂ Q, which completes the proof. □

3.6. Germs. In this section we will define the equivalence classes of irreducible convex polyhe-dral sets, called germs, and prove that the piecewise isometry group acts on the set of germs. 

Definition 3.17. Suppose P and Q are nonempty irreducible convex polyhedral sets. Say that 

P and Q are commensurable , written P ∼ Q, if P ⋒ Q̸ = ∅ and L(P ) = L(Q).

The following alternative characterizations of commensurability will prove useful. Recall that the rank of the empty polyhedral set is −1. 

Lemma 3.18. Given nonempty irreducible convex polyhedral sets P and Q , the following are equivalent: 

(1) P and Q are commensurable, 

(2) L(P ) = L(P ⋒ Q) = L(Q),

(3) rk (P ) = rk (P ⋒ Q) = rk (Q).Proof. We prove the first two conditions imply each other, and the latter two conditions imply each other. Clearly the second condition implies the first. On the other hand, suppose P and Q are com-mensurable. We clearly have L(P ⋒ Q) ⊂ L(P ). Conversely, any direction in L(P ) is represented by a ray r contained in P originating at a point in P ⋒ Q. Since L(P ) = L(Q) this ray is also contained in Q, hence in P ⋒Q. This proves L(P ) = L(P ⋒Q), and the equality L(P ⋒Q) = L(Q)follows analogously. Now for the latter two conditions. Since rk (P ) = dim (L(P )) + 1, clearly the equalities L(P ) = 

L(P ⋒ Q) = L(Q) imply rk (P ) = rk (P ⋒ Q) = rk (Q). On the other hand, suppose rk (P ) = 

rk (P ⋒ Q) = rk (Q). Since L(P ⋒ Q) is a subcomplex of the single cell L(P ) ⊂ L(∆) whose codimension is equal to the corank of P ⋒ Q ⊂ P , the condition that rk (P ) = rk (P ⋒ Q) directly implies L(P ) = L(P ⋒ Q). We analogously see that L(P ⋒ Q) = L(Q), completing the proof. □

Lemma 3.19. Commensurability is an equivalence relation on the set of irreducible convex polyhedral sets. 

> 12

Proof. Symmetry and reflexivity are clear. To see that transitivity holds, we use the second char-acterization of commensurability in Lemma 3.18. Suppose that irreducible convex polyhedral sets P, Q, R satisfy L(P ) = L(P ⋒ Q) = L(Q) = L(Q ⋒ R) = L(R). Since L(P ) = L(Q) = L(R), the canonical translations tP , tQ, and tR as defined in Section 3.5 are all equal to the same translation t ∈ T . By Lemma 3.16, there are natural numbers m and n such that tm(P ) ⊂ Q

and tn(Q) ⊂ R. It follows that tm+n(P ) ⊂ P ∩ R, so L(P ) = L(P ⋒ R). Similarly noting 

L(P ⋒ R) = L(R), the proof is complete. □

Definition 3.20. A germ is a commensurability class of irreducible convex polyhedral sets. The commensurability class of an irreducible convex polyhedral set C is written [C].

• The set of all germs is Γ.

• For each k ≥ 0, the set of all equivalence classes of irreducibles of rank k is Γk.

• For any polyhedral set P , let Γk(P ) be the set of germs [C] where C is an irreducible convex polyhedral subset of P .

Lemma 3.21. Let P be a polyhedral set and f : P → V an essentially injective map. Then f

is a piecewise isometric embedding if and only if for each irreducible convex polyhedral subset 

C ⊂ P , there is some natural number m such that the restriction of f to Ct mC is isometric. Proof. Suppose f is a piecewise isometric embedding, and let C ⊂ P be irreducible. Choose a finite decomposition of P into irreducibles Q1, . . . , Q k such that the restriction of f to each 

Qi is isometric. There is a unique index j such that C ∩ Qj has rank equal to that of C. By Lemma 3.16 there is some m such that Ct mC is a subset of Qj , so f is isometric on Ct mC .Conversely, suppose for each irreducible C ⊂ P there is some m such that f is isometric on Ct mC .We prove that f is piecewise isometric by induction on the rank of P . When P has rank 0, each irreducible C ⊂ P is a single tile and so tC is trivial. Therefore f is piecewise isometric. For the inductive step, let Q1, . . . , Q k be any finite decomposition of P into irreducibles. For each irreducible Qj of top rank, find mj such that f is isometric on Qj tmj 

> Qj

. The complement of the union of these translations in P is a sub-polyhedral set of lower rank by Proposition 3.10, so we are done by induction. □

There is a natural action of P I (∆) on Γ preserving rank: Given a germ γ ∈ Γ and f ∈ P I (∆), choose a representative irreducible P such that γ = [ P ] and by Lemma 3.21 a natural number 

m such that f is isometric on P t mP . Define the right action 

γf ∗ = [ P t mP f ].

Lemma 3.22. The action of P I (∆) on Γ is well-defined. Proof. Fix any f ∈ P I (∆) and γ ∈ Γ. First note that, for a given representative γ = [ P ], the germ [ P t mP f ] is independent of choice of m, since if m < n then P t nP f is a subset of P t mP f with the same limit set. Now suppose irreducibles P and Q both represent γ. Then L(P ) = L(Q)by definition, so P and Q have the same canonical translation t ∈ T . Find m, n such that f is isometric on both P t m and Qt n. By Lemma 3.16 there are m′, n ′ such that P t m+m′

⊂ Qt n and 

Qt n+n′

⊂ P t m. We then have 

γf ∗ = [ P t mf ] = [ P t m+m′

f ] = [ Qt nf ].

□

> 13

3.7. A normal series in the piecewise isometry group. The action of P I (∆) on the set of germs of irreducible pieces is used to define a normal series in P I (∆), in Proposition 3.26 below. 

Definition 3.23. For a piecewise isometry f ∈ P I (∆) ,

(1) The support of f is the union of all convex polyhedral sets P such that f restricts to a nontrivial isometry on the interior of P , denoted supp( f );

(2) the rank of f is the greatest rank of a convex polyhedral set P ⊂ supp( f ), denoted rk( f );

(3) the height of f is the number of irreducible pieces of rank rk( f ) in any finite decompo-sition of supp( f ) into irreducibles, denoted ht( f ).

Given any finite decomposition P1, . . . , P n of V into subsets on which f is isometric, each Pi is either contained in supp( f ) or contained in the closure of V − supp( f ), so the support of f is a polyhedral set. The rank and height of f are by definition the rank and height of its support. For each r = 0 , 1, . . . , dim( V ) define 

Gr = {f ∈ P I (∆) | rk( f ) ≤ r}

and 

Cr = {f ∈ P I (∆) | γf ∗ = γ for all γ ∈ Γr} .

It is straightforward to see that each Gr and each Cr is a normal subgroup of P I (∆). 

Lemma 3.24. Gr is the group of all f ∈ P I (∆) such that each irreducible convex polyhedral set 

P of rank strictly greater than r is commensurable with an irreducible convex polyhedral set Q

on which f is trivial. Proof. This follows from Lemma 3.16 and Lemma 3.21. □

Clearly Gr−1 ≤ Cr: if f ∈ Gr−1 then, for any γ ∈ Γr, by Lemma 3.24 there is an irreducible Q

representing γ such that f is trivial on Q, so γf ∗ = γ.

Lemma 3.25. For each 0 < r ≤ dim( V ) we have Cr ≤ Gr.Proof. Suppose f ∈ P I (∆) − Gr. This means that there is an irreducible piece P of rank 

r + 1 such that f is a nontrivial isometry on P . We may take P to be an alcove P = A[τ, σ ]. Consider the image of the base tile τ . There are two cases. First, if τ f ̸ = τ , then there is a hyperplane parallel to a face of P separating the two tiles. Cutting along a hyperplane in this family produces a corank-1 sub-convex set of P which is moved by f , so f /∈ Cr. Second, if 

τ f = τ then f has nontrivial differential df , which we consider as a linear map V → V . Use this to find a corank-1 sub-convex set Q ⊂ P whose recession cone contains a nonzero vector v

and does not contain ±df (v). Then [ Q]f∗̸ = [ Q], so f / ∈ Cr. □

We now further refine the normal series 1 ≤ C0 ≤ G0 ≤ C1 ≤ G1 ≤ · · · ≤ P I (∆). For each germ 

γ ∈ Γ define the subgroup 

C(γ) = {f ∈ P I (∆) | γf ∗ = γ} ≤ P I (∆) ,

so that Cr is the intersection C(γ) over all γ ∈ Γr.For each ξ ∈ Ξ, let vξ be the positively-oriented unit vector normal to the boundary of M .Let O( V, Ξ) be the finite subgroup of O( V ) preserving the set of vectors {vξ}ξ∈Ξ. If f is an 

> 14

isometry of V preserving ∆, then its differential dxf lies in O( V, Ξ) for any point x ∈ V , and is independent of x. It follows that for each γ ∈ Γ, there is a well-defined homomorphism ¯φγ : C(γ) → O( V, Ξ) determined by choosing any irreducible convex polyhedral set P representing γ on which f is isometric, and setting ¯ φγ (f ) = df P .For each γ ∈ Γ define C+(γ) = ker( ¯ φγ ), so that C+(γ) ≤ C(γ) is a subgroup of finite index. Further define C+ 

> r

≤ Cr to be the intersection of C+(γ) over all γ ∈ Γr. If f ∈ Gr−1 and γ ∈ Γr

then by Lemma 3.24 there is an irreducible Q representing γ such that f is trivial on Q, so 

Gr−1 ≤ C+ 

> r

. It is straightforward to see that each C+ 

> r

is normal in P I (Ξ). We summarize this discussion: 

Proposition 3.26. For each 0 ≤ r ≤ dim( V ), the subgroups Gr, C r, C + 

> r

defined above are normal in P I (∆) , and for each r > 0 there are containments 

Gr−1 ≤ C+ 

> r

≤ Cr ≤ Gr.

□

3.8. Stabilizer quotients. We now study the successive quotients of the normal series given in Proposition 3.26. 

Lemma 3.27. There is an exact sequence 

1 → Cr → Gr → Perm f (Γ r).

Proof. For each r, the action of piecewise isometries on germs determines a homomorphism 

Gr → Perm f (Γ r) whose kernel is Cr ∩ Gr, which is equal to Cr by Lemma 3.25. □

Lemma 3.28. There is an exact sequence 

1 → C+ 

> r

→ Cr → M

> γ∈Γr

O( V, Ξ) .

Proof. The product of the homomorphisms ¯ φγ is the rightmost homomorphism. The codomain is a direct sum since any f ∈ Cr is an element of Gr by Lemma 3.25, and its support contains finitely many germs of rank r. The kernel is C+ 

> r

by definition. □

Lemma 3.29. There is an exact sequence 

1 → Gr−1 → C+ 

> r

→ M

> γ∈Γr

T

Proof. Given f ∈ C+ 

> r

and γ ∈ Γr, choose an irreducible convex polyhedral set C representing γ

on which f is isometric by Lemma 3.21. The restriction of f to C is a translation in T ≤ Isom(∆) since it extends to an isometry of V with trivial differential. The element of T is independent of choice of representative C since any two choices have intersection with nonempty interior by definition, and it is similarly easy to see that this defines a homomorphism. The kernel is Gr−1

by Lemma 3.24. □

Theorem 3.30. The group P I (∆) is elementary amenable. 

> 15

Proof. The quotients Gr/C r and Cr/C + 

> r

are locally finite by Lemma 3.27 and Lemma 3.28, therefore elementary amenable. The quotients C+ 

> r

/G r−1 are abelian by Lemma 3.29, and there-fore elementary amenable. It follows then from Proposition 3.26 that P I (∆), which is equal to Gdim( V ), is an iterated extension of elementary amenable groups by elementary amenable groups, and is therefore elementary amenable. □

Future work will identify the images of the rightmost maps in the above exact sequences, and use this to prove finite generation and other finiteness properties of P I (∆). 4. Examples 

4.1. Tessellations associated to affine Weyl groups. Suppose Φ is a crystallographic root system in Rn with inner product ( u, v ) = u · v. For our notation and conventions we follow Humphreys [12]. For each root α ∈ Φ and integer k ∈ Z, consider the hyperplane Hα,k =

{v ∈ Rn | (v, α ) = k}. The set Ω of all such hyperplanes determines a cocompact tessellation ∆ of V satisfying our standing assumption. Suppose the simple roots are α1, . . . , α n ∈ Φ. This determines a set of positive roots Φ + ⊂ Φ. The affine Weyl group W aff , which is generated by reflections over the hyperplanes in Ω, acts simply transitively on tiles of ∆, so that every convex polyhedral set contains a tile in the orbit of the fundamental tile 

τ0 := v ∈ Rn 0 < v · α < 1 for all α ∈ Φ+ .

The set of germs Γ admits a nice description in this case, which we give in Corollary 4.2 and Corollary 4.3. For each subset I ⊂ { α1, . . . , α n}, let VI ⊂ Rn be the linear span of I and set ΦI = Φ ∩ VI , so that Φ I is a crystallographic root system in VI . For each such I, define the 

standard convex polyhedral set 

PI = v ∈ Rn v · αi ≥ 0 for i = 1 , . . . , n and v · α ≤ 1 for α ∈ Φ+ 

> I

.

Then each set PI is irreducible of rank n − | I|, and the limit set L(PI ) is a closed simplex in the geometric realization of the Coxeter complex associated to Φ. For example, P{α1,...,α n} is equal to the fundamental tile τ0, and P∅ is equal to the fundamental alcove for the action of the finite Weyl group W . The sets PI are precisely the alcoves A[τ0, σ ] where σ is a cell of the Coxeter complex which is a face of the simplex corresponding to the fundamental alcove for the finite Weyl group. Let W be the finite Weyl group associated to Φ, and WI and W aff  

> I

the finite and affine Weyl groups of the root system Φ I in Vi. Each group acts on the set of irreducible convex polyhedral sets and induces an action on the spherical complex L(∆). Each closed cell of the Coxeter complex L(∆) is of the form L(PI )w for some w ∈ W and I ⊂ { α1, . . . , α n}.

Proposition 4.1. Suppose irreducible convex polyhedral sets C and D satisfy L(C) = L(D) = 

L(PI )w. Then there is a unique element ρ ∈ W aff  

> I

such that Cw −1ρw is commensurable with D.Proof. We prove this in the case that w is trivial; the general case follows. Let TC and TD be the orthogonal projections of C and D to VI . From the assumption that L(C) = L(D) = L(PI )we know that TC and TD are bounded subsets of VI , and by irreducibility of C and D it follows that TC and TD are each the closure of a tile of the tessellation of VI . Then there is a unique 

> 16

element ρ ∈ W aff  

> I

such that TC ρ = TD. It follows that Cρ ∩ D has nonempty interior. Since 

L(Cρ ) = L(C) = L(D), we conclude that Cρ is commensurable with D. □

Corollary 4.2. For any r ≥ 0 we have 

Γr = [ 

> I⊂{ α1,...,α n}
> dim( VI)= n−r

 [

> [w]∈W/W I

 [ 

> ρ∈Waff
> I

[PI ρw ]



Moreover, each of these unions is disjoint. Proof. Suppose P is an irreducible convex polyhedral set. Since the limit set of an irreducible is a simplex in the Coxeter complex, we know L(P ) = L(PI )w for some I ⊂ S and w ∈ W .By Proposition 4.1 we conclude there is some ρ ∈ W aff  

> I

such that P ∼ PI ρw . To see that the unions are disjoint, suppose Q1 ∼ Q2 where Q1 = PI ρ1w1 and Q2 = PJ ρ2w2 for w1, w 2 ∈ W ,

I, J ⊂ { α1, . . . , α n}, ρ1 ∈ W aff  

> I

, and ρ2 ∈ W aff  

> J

. Then L(PI )w1 = L(Q1) = L(Q2) = L(PJ )w2,and so it follows from the structure of the Coxeter complex that I = J and w1w−12 ∈ WI .Disjointness now follows from the uniqueness statement in Proposition 4.1. □

Since each simplex of the Coxeter complex is identified with L(PI )w for some w ∈ W and 

I ⊂ { α1, . . . , α n}, and the stabilizer of L(PI )w under the action of W aff is equal to w−1W aff  

> I

w,we have the following classification of germs in terms of the action of the affine Weyl group on the Coxeter complex L(∆): 

Corollary 4.3. The set of germs can be written as a disjoint union 

Γ = [ 

> σ:= wL (PI)⊂L(∆)

[  

> ρ∈stab Waff (σ)

[PI ρw ]



For example, each top-dimensional simplex of L(∆) has trivial stabilizer under the action of 

W aff , so the top-rank germs Γ n are in bijection with top-dimensional simplices of L(∆), which are in bijection with the finite Coxeter group W . At the other extreme, the empty simplex is trivially stabilized by all of W aff , and the fact that the germs of rank 0 are in bijection with 

W aff is simply a reflection of the fact that the affine Weyl group acts simply transitively on tiles. Germs of rank r are organized into parallel families, one family for each cell L(PI )w in the Coxeter complex, where I ⊂ { α1, . . . , α n} is a subset of size n − r. The number of such families associated to I is |W | / |WI | by the orbit-stabilizer theorem. The argument in the proof of Proposition 4.1 shows that an irreducible polyhedral convex set with limit set L(PI )w has cross-sections isometric to a tile in the induced tessellation of VI . This shows that o in general that there are irreducible convex polyhedral sets that are not commensurable to isometric irreducibles. 

Canonical translations. Consider a given edge-ray r of the cone P∅. Then r lies transverse to a unique facet of P∅ lying in a hyperplane Hαi,0 for some αi. The translation tr along r is given by the fundamental coweight ω∨ 

> i

, determined by ω∨ 

> i

· αj = δij . Since every vertex in L(∆) is obtained from a vertex of the base simplex by applying an element of the finite Weyl group, every edge-ray translation translates by a coweight ω∨ 

> i

w for some w ∈ W and fundamental coweight ω∨ 

> i

.

> 17

Irreducible root systems. Every crystallographic root system is a product of irreducible root systems, which are classified by type Xn belong to one of the families An, Bn, Cn or Dn, or one of five exceptional cases. Suppose Xn is irreducible with simple roots α1, · · · , α n and n × n

Cartan matrix 

C = C(Xn) = 

 2αi · αj

αj · αj



= [ cij ] with inverse C−1 = D = [ dij ].

The finite Weyl group is W (Xn), and the associated affine Weyl group is W (X+ 

> n

), where X+ 

> n

is the affine root system obtained from the associated affine Kac-Moody algebra. There is a unique highest root θ ∈ Xn, and the fundamental tile is given by 

τ0 = {v ∈ Rn | 0 < v · αi for i = 1 , . . . , n and v · θ < 1} .

In this case, the closure of τ0 is a simplex whose vertices are 0 and multiples of λ1, . . . , λ n, the fundamental weights of Xn given by 

λj =

> n

X

> i=1

dij αi, for 1 ≤ j ≤ n. 

4.2. Equilateral triangle tessellation of R2 from root system of type A2. The irreducible root system A2 has two simple roots α1 and α2 of length √2 at angle 2 π/ 3. Associated to A2

is the tessellation ∆ of R2 by equilateral triangles. The associated affine Weyl group W (A+2 ) is the triangle group, T (3 , 3, 3), generated by the reflections in the three sides satisfying |r1r2| = 3, 

|r1r3| = 3, |r2r3| = 3 so each pair generates a permutation group, S3.The spherical complex L(∆) on the circle at infinity consists of six vertices, one antipodal pair for each of the three families of parallel lines, and six 1-cells. Those 1-cells are the limit sets of the six alcoves for the action of the finite Weyl group S3, each of which is an irreducible convex polyhedral set of rank 2 in ∆. By Corollary 4.3, each vertex in L(∆) corresponds to a D∞-family of rank 1 germs, each of which can be represented by a beam in the direction of a ray, bounded by a pair of adjacent parallel lines. We use this example to illustrate examples of piecewise isometries exhibiting a variety of place-ments in the normal series described in Section 3.8. 

• An example of an element f1 ∈ G2 − C2 is a piecewise isometry which isometrically exchanges two alcoves of the finite Weyl group, P∅ and P∅w, and is the identity outside of P∅ ∪ P∅w.

• An example of an element f2 ∈ C2 − C+2 is the piecewise isometry which isometrically sends P∅ to itself by an internal reflection, and is the identity outside of P∅.

• An example of an element f3 ∈ C+2 − G1, shown in Fig. 4.1, is the piecewise isometry which, for a fixed nontrivial element w ∈ W ,(1) translates P∅ into itself by the fundamental coweight ω∨ 

> 1

,(2) translates P∅w − P{1}w isometrically onto P∅w by −ω∨ 

> 1

w,(3) isometrically maps P{1}w to P{1} via w−1, and (4) is the identity outside of P∅ ∪ P∅w.

> 18

P∅

P{1}w

P∅w + ω∨ 

> 1

w

α1α2 ω∨

> 1

P∅ + ω∨

> 1

P{1}

P∅w

α1α2 ω∨

> 1

Figure 4.1. The domain and codomain finite decompositions of the plane for the piecewise isometry f3 ∈ C+2 − G1 when w ∈ W (A2) is rotation by 2 π/ 34.3. Tetrahedron tessellation of R3 from the affine Weyl group of type A3. Next we examine the tessellation of R3 by a tetrahedron which is the fundamental domain for the affine Weyl group, W (A+3 ). In this example, the fundamental tile τ0 is a tetrahedron with one pair of opposite edges of length 1 and the other four edges of length √3/2. There are 24 copies of τ0

meeting at each vertex of the tessellation, corresponding to the finite subgroup, S4, the Weyl group W (A3). The union of the 24 copies meeting at the origin forms a rhombic dodecahedron, whose boundary is a polygonal complex isomorphic to the Coxeter complex L(∆). See Fig. 4.2. 

Figure 4.2. Affine A3 rhombic dodecahedron of 24 tetrahedral tiles, and the associated spherical complex at infinity As in Corollary Corollary 4.3, there are three W (A+3 )-orbits of rank-2 germs, corresponding to the standard convex polyhedral sets P1, P2, and P3. The sets P1 and P3 are isometric by the order-2 isometry of P∅ given by the linear map fixing α2 and exchanging roots α1 and α3. The 

> 19

set P2 is isometric to neither, as its recession cone has angle π/ 2, while the others have angle 

π/ 3. There are similarly three W (A+3 )-orbits of rank-1 germs, corresponding to P1,2, P1,3, and P2,3.The sets P1,2 and P2,3 are isometric, and look like beams whose cross-section are equilateral triangles, corresponding to a tile in the tessellation of V1,2 which has type A2. The set P1,3 is a beam whose cross-section is a square, corresponding to a tile in the tessellation of V1,3 which has type A1 × A1.

Figure 4.3. A rank-3 alcove in orange, with a translate in yellow. The rank-1 alcoves along the edges of the translate are colored purple, blue, and green. 4.4. 2D and 3D kagome tessellations. Our results apply to tessellations that are not directly induced from affine Weyl groups. Two such examples are the 2-dimensional kagome tessellation, also known as the trihexagonal tiling, and its 3-dimensional generalization, also known as a quar-ter cubic honeycomb. Both the 2- and 3-dimensional kagome tessellations may be constructed in the following way. Consider a regular Euclidean simplex T in Rn where n = 2 or n = 3, so that T is either a triangle or tetrahedron. Let H0, H 1, . . . , H n be the hyperplanes bounding its faces. For each Hi, form a family of parallel hyperplanes Ω i regularly spaced at distance 23

times the height of T . The collection of all such hyperplanes Ω = Ω 0 ∪ · · · ∪ Ωn determines a tessellation of Rn, called the kagome tessellation .

> 20

Figure 4.4. 2D kagome tessellation Fig. 4.4 shows the 2D kagome tessellation K2 which is made from two kinds of tiles, equilateral triangles and regular hexagons. The 2D kagome tessellation can be refined to the affine A+2

tessellation by adding a line halfway between each pair of adjacent parallel lines. In particular, the cell structure on the sphere at infinity is the same as that of the A+2 tessellation, and there is a similar classification of germs. Fig. 4.5 shows the 3D kagome tessellation K3 which is made from two kinds of tiles, regular tetrahedra and truncated tetrahedra. In contrast to the 2D kagome lattice, the 3D kagome lattice is not related to the tessellation associated with the affine Weyl group W (A+3 ) in an obvious way. For example, the cell structure on the sphere at infinity is significantly different, with six triangular 2-cells and six square 2-cells formed by the four circles corresponding to parallelism families of hyperplanes, which intersect at twelve vertices. See Fig. 4.6. Note that the square 2-cells show that cells in the spherical tessellation at infinity L(∆) are not necessarily simplices. 

References          

> [1] L. Anderson, Oriented matroids , Cambridge Studies in Advanced Mathematics, 216, Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, 2025; MR4880415 [2] J. Aramayona, K-U. Bux, H. Kim, C. Leininger, Surface Houghton groups, Math. Ann. 389 (2024), no. 4, 4301–4318; MR4768726 [3] Robert Bieri and Heike Sach, Groups of piecewise isometric permutations of lattice points, or Finitary rearrangements of tessellations , J. London Math. Soc. (2) 2022;106:1663–1724. [4] A.J. Feingold and I.B. Frenkel, A hyperbolic Kac–Moody algebra and the theory of Siegel modular forms of genus 2 , Math. Ann. 263 (1983), 87–144. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01457086. [5] A.J. Feingold, A. Kleinschmidt and H. Nicolai, Hyperbolic Weyl groups and the four normed division algebras ,in Vertex operator algebras and related areas , Contemporary Mathematics, vol. 497, Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI (2009), 53–64.
> 21

Figure 4.5. 3D kagome tessellation 

Figure 4.6. 3D kagome sphere at infinity 

[6] A.J. Feingold, A. Kleinschmidt and H. Nicolai, Hyperbolic Weyl Groups and the Four Normed Division Algebras , J. Algebra 322 (2009), 1295–1339. 

> 22

[7] A.J. Feingold, A. Kleinschmidt and H. Nicolai, Corrigendum to “Hyperbolic Weyl Groups and the Four Normed Division Algebras” [J. Algebra 322 (2009) 1295-1339] , J. Algebra 489 (2017), 586-587. [8] A.J. Feingold, Daniel Valli` eres, Weyl Groups of Some Hyperbolic Kac-Moody Algebras , Journal of Algebra 

500 (2018), 457–497. [9] L. Funar, C. Kapoudjian and V. Sergiescu, Asymptotically rigid mapping class groups and Thompson’s groups, in Handbook of Teichm¨ uller theory. Volume III , 595–664, IRMA Lect. Math. Theor. Phys., 17, Eur. Math. Soc., Z¨ urich, 2012; MR2952772 [10] A. Genevois, A. Lonjou and C. Urech, Asymptotically rigid mapping class groups, I: Finiteness properties of braided Thompson’s and Houghton’s groups, Geom. Topol. 26 (2022), no. 3, 1385–1434; MR4466651 [11] P. Greenberg, Projective aspects of the Higman-Thompson group, in Group theory from a geometrical view-point (Trieste, 1990) , 633–644, World Sci. Publ., River Edge, NJ, ; MR1170379 [12] J. E. Humphreys, Reflection Groups and Coxeter Groups , Cambridge Studies in Advanced Mathematics 29, Cambridge University Press (1990). [13] M. Imbert, Sur l’isomorphisme du groupe de Richard Thompson avec le groupe de Ptol´ em´ ee, in Geometric Galois actions, 2 , 313–324, London Math. Soc. Lecture Note Ser., 243, Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, 1997; MR1653017 [14] A. Kupers, E. Lemann, C. Malkiewich, J. Miller, R.J. Sroka Scissors automorphism groups and their homol-ogy. arXiv , arXiv:2408.08081v2 [math.KT], 2024. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2408.08081 

[15] W. Magnus , Non-Euclidean Tesselations and Their Groups , Pure Appl. Math, Vol. 61, New York, London, Academic Press, 1974. [16] Tobias J. Osborne and Deniz E. Stiegemann, Dynamics for holographic codes , J. High Energ. Phys. 2020 

(2020), 154. [17] Robert C. Penner, The universal Ptolemy group and its completions , in Geometric Galois Actions ,London Mathematical Society Lecture Note Series, Cambridge University Press, eds. Schneps, Leila and Lochak, Pierre, Cambridge, (1997), 293–312. [18] I. Zakharevich, The K-theory of assemblers, Adv. Math. 304 (2017), 1176–1218; MR3558230 [19] G. M. Ziegler, Lectures on polytopes , Graduate Texts in Mathematics, 152, Springer, New York, 1995; MR1311028 

Department of Mathematics and Statistics, The State University of New York, Binghamton, New York 13902-6000 

Email address : rbieri@binghamton.edu 

Email address : feingold@binghamton.edu 

Email address : dstudenm@binghamton.edu