Title: The "Intensity" Countoscope: Measuring particle dynamics in real space from microscopy images

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.02271v1

Published Time: Fri, 03 Apr 2026 01:19:13 GMT

Number of Pages: 10

Markdown Content:
# The “Intensity” Countoscope: Measuring particle dynamics in real space from microscopy images 

Sophie Hermann, 1 Seyed Saman Banarooei, 2 Adam Carter, 1 Carlos A. Silvera Batista, 2, 3 and Sophie Marbach 1

> 1

CNRS, Sorbonne Universit´ e, Physicochimie des Electrolytes et Nanosyst` emes Interfaciaux, F-75005 Paris, France 

> 2

Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, USA. 

> 3

Vanderbilt Institute for Nanoscale Science and Engineering, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, USA. 

Advances in intensity-based microscopy techniques have improved our ability to quantify particle motion at microscopic scales, enabling insight into diffusion and collective dynamics. Building on this foundation, we introduce a novel real-space approach that analyses intensity fluctuations within virtual observation boxes of variable size on microscopy images. By correlating these signals, we uncover distinct temporal regimes in the mean square changes of intensity, ⟨∆I2(t)⟩, which are strongly dependent on the box size compared to the particle width. For small boxes or short timescales, ⟨∆I2(t)⟩ scales with the mean-square displacement, while for longer timescales and larger boxes, it scales with its square root. We develop a general theoretical framework that captures these regimes and explicitly apply it to a dilute colloidal suspension imaged with confocal microscopy as an experimental model system. This allows for a robust extraction of diffusion coefficients and physical insights into particle dynamics. Our method complements intensity-based and real-space analysis, offering a tool for studying individual and potentially collective behaviour directly from image intensities, even in systems where individual particles cannot be resolved. 

Driven by the desire to understand particle motion, scientists rely on a zoology of methods to quantify mo-tion at microscopic scales. To observe micrometric parti-cles, the state-of-the-art is to acquire microscopy videos, imaging thousands of colloids or cells with single parti-cle resolution. Then, data analysis can be sorted into three loose categories, depending on whether it is based on (i) the intensity of light scattered by the particles on images [1, 2], (ii) segmented features, such as particle po-sitions and orientations [3], or (iii) reconstructed particle trajectories, found by linking particle positions from one frame to the next [4]. As an example, and as proposed by the seminal works of Einstein and Perrin [5, 6], the dif-fusion coefficient, D, can then be inferred by computing a particle’s mean-square displacement from the trajecto-ries, since ⟨∆x2(t)⟩ = ⟨(x(t) − x(0)) 2⟩ = 2 Dt , where x(t)is the particle’s position along one cartesian axis. Work-ing at the level of intensities necessarily requires the least image processing, and is thus appealing. The history of quantifying diffusion coefficients from particle intensities merits discussion in the light of mod-ern tools. In the years 1914-1916, Smoluchowski derived an important formalism [7–9], later verified by experi-ments [10, 11], to measure diffusion coefficients from cor-relation functions of number fluctuations. Indeed, the number of particles appearing within the finite field of view of a microscope fluctuates due to particles diffus-ing in and out of the field. Possibly due to technical difficulties in analyzing images at the time, this princi-ple remained dormant for half a century. In the 1970s, thanks to technical developments in optics, two meth-ods emerge based on this idea: fluorescence correlation spectroscopy (FCS) [1, 12] and dynamic light scattering (DLS) [2]. Both methods directly correlate the intensity scattered by the few particles in the illuminated region to obtain features such as diffusion coefficient. FCS is remarkable as it is suited to the investigation of small molecules, and also reaction timescales [13]. DLS can fur-ther analyze motion at different spatial scales in Fourier space (k-space) [2]. However, both these techniques do not work yet at the level of images. In the early 2000s, Intensity correlation spectroscopy (ICS) was developed as the microscopy space equivalent of FCS/DLS [14, 15]. The general idea is to correlate pixel intensities to reconstruct diffusion coefficients [16]. Pixels can be correlated in space and time for different uses [14], and maps of diffusion coefficients can be ob-tained in that way, which are especially useful to investi-gate e.g. cellular environments [17]. Most of these meth-ods were developed for very small molecules in biological contexts [16]. Around the same time, ICS was devel-oped in spatial k-space ICS [18], a premise for the estab-lishment of dynamic differential microscopy (DDM) [19]. In DDM, the Fourier transform of differences in images at different times is correlated, and allows one to ob-tain estimates of diffusion coefficients at multiple scales and further motion properties, with numerically efficient tools [20, 21]. All these techniques are especially useful at the nanoscales where segmentation of individual particles is not possible. Still, there remain more ideas to investigate the full depth of Smoluchowski’s vision. In fact, optical tech-niques have not ceased to improve our ability to im-age individual particles at smaller and smaller scales, with super-resolution and interferometric scattering mi-croscopy now resolving individual molecular dynam-ics [22–26]. This means that microscopy methods are poised for real-space analysis of the type of Smolu-chowski. Recently, some of us have proposed to exploit image quality by analyzing particle number fluctuations in virtual observation boxes [3], instead of only the full field of view. Investigating boxes of varying sizes allows one to quantify motion at multiple scales [27], and real-space analysis allows one to easily connect to physical 

> arXiv:2604.02271v1 [cond-mat.soft] 2 Apr 2026

2mechanisms [28]. This highlights a gap in contempo-rary analysis techniques based on intensities: in principle, there should exist a method based on analyzing intensity signals in virtual boxes of arbitrary size on an image. The versatility of DDM which operates on multiple scales in Fourier space highlights the potential of learning from multiple box sizes in real-space. Here we investigate the correlation functions of inten-sity signals I(t) in virtual observation boxes of varying sizes on microscopy images. We image dilute colloidal suspensions with confocal microscopy as a model system. The intensity fluctuations ⟨∆I2(t)⟩ exhibit sharp signa-tures at short and long timescales, which differ according to the size ratio of the box and the point spread sig-nal of a particle on an image. Briefly, for boxes smaller than the particle size, or at short time scales, the in-tensity correlations ⟨∆I2(t)⟩ ∼ ⟨ ∆x2(t)⟩ while for boxes larger than the particle size and at longer time scales, 

⟨∆I2(t)⟩ ∼ p⟨∆x2(t)⟩. We derive a general theory, ap-plicable to diverse optical systems, which collapses into simple expressions and completely captures experimen-tal signals. This allows us on the one hand to extract experimental parameters such as the diffusion coefficient 

D from ⟨∆I2(t)⟩, and on the other hand, to learn phys-ical behaviour. In particular, the different regimes in time can be explained in terms of diffusive particle ex-its/entrances in the box. Finally, we show how such anal-ysis can robustly be conducted on systems even where we can not identify individual particles on images. Our method opens a door to further quantify individual and collective behaviour directly from image intensities in various settings. 

> INTENSITY FLUCTUATIONS IN BOXES IN EXPERIMENTAL DATA EXHIBIT WELL DEFINED VARIED FEATURES.

We study the temporal intensity fluctuations in mi-croscopy images. Our experimental model system con-sists of colloidal polystyrene (PS) particles, of 4 μm di-ameter, which are gravitationally confined to the base of a fluidic cell and form an effective 2D system (see also Methods, Sec. A). The particles are imaged with a flu-orescent confocal microscope, see Fig. 1(a). We charac-terize intensity fluctuations in virtual observation boxes of size L × L by summing all pixel intensities in the cor-responding area. Note that boxes are aligned with the pixel edges in the microscopy image and we consider only box sizes L that are multiples of a pixel size. In Figure 1(b) this intensity I(t) is shown for the exemplary box shown in Fig. 1(a). For consistency checks, we also track individual particle centers using standard particle track-ing [4] with the Trackpy library [29]. This allows us to obtain individual particle trajectories, and also particle numbers N (t) in the observation boxes. The intensity in a box I(t) fluctuates in time as parti-cles move near the edges of the box, or when a particle enters or exits the box. The temporal evolution of the intensity therefore closely follows the detected number of particles N (t) in the observation box. However, the intensity profile has additional features: it takes contin-uous instead of discrete values it time; and has a global offset due to the background intensity. For each observation box, we calculate the mean square change of the intensity, given as 

∆I(t)2 =

D I(t) − I(0) 2E

= 2 I2 − 2 ⟨I(t)I(0) ⟩ , (1) where the average ⟨·⟩ denotes an averaging over all boxes of size L and all time origins within the acquisition (see also Methods, Sec. B). Investigating intensity differ-ences as I(t) − I(0) instead of bare intensity correlations 

⟨I(t)I(0) ⟩ promises several advantages, as it automati-cally removes, e.g. , a constant background intensity or stuck particles. In Fig. 1(c) we show the time-dependent mean square change of intensity (Eq. (1)) for different observation box sizes L. Although the system is quite simple, we find that generally, the intensity fluctuations undergo a variety of regimes, in time and with increasing box sizes, with well-defined features. Phenomenologically, 

∆I(t)2 initially increases with time due to fluctuations in experimental data and particles entering or leaving the observation box. For long times, ∆I(t)2 even-tually plateaus. In this regime, the intensity I(t) is fully uncorrelated with the initial intensity I(0) and thus 

⟨I(t)I(0) ⟩ → ⟨ I(t)⟩ ⟨ I(0) ⟩. Assuming that the system is stationary, and that the mean intensity within an obser-vation box stays constant over time, the plateau value becomes twice the intensity variance, lim  

> t→∞

∆I(t)2 = 2 



I2 − I 2

. (2) Calculating the intensity variance and plotting twice its value in dashed lines in Fig. 1(c) shows that it indeed lines up with the value of the plateau of the intensity fluctuations. We observe that intensity fluctuations are larger for larger box sizes L. The mean intensity level should scale with the mean number of particles, which increases in larger box sizes, explaining this effect. The number of particles and hence also its fluctuations are closely related to the intensity, as is expected and visu-alized in Fig. 1(b). 

> A SIMPLE THEORY ENABLES TO QUANTIFY DIFFUSION COEFFICIENTS.

To quantitatively rationalize the observed behaviour we develop a comprehensive theory. The intensity is re-lated to the particle density distribution ˆ ρ = P 

> i

δ(r −

ri(t)) with a convolution 

I(x, t ) = 

Z

dx′PSF( x − x′)ˆ ρ(x′, t ), (3) 3                       

> FIG. 1. The intensity countoscope to probe dynamics. (a) Part of a microscopy image of quasi-2D diffusing fluorescent particles, overlayed with an observation box of size L= 16 μm. (b) Temporal fluctuations of the particle number (orange) and total intensity (blue), rescaled by the average particle intensity I0, in the box in (a). (c) Mean-squared change in intensity for experiments (points), theory (solid lines, Eq. (6)), and in the long time limit (dashed lines, Eq. (8)). Colours, from dark to light, indicate different box sizes Lranging from 0 .91 μm (corresponding to one pixel) to 48 μm. (d) Intensity profile of a particle cross-section: experimental values (dots) and Gaussian fit (line), I0exp  −x2/2σ2/(2 πσ 2), where σand I0, are determined from the fit in (e). (e) Intensity variance rescaled with mean intensity dependent on the observation box size for experiments (dots) and theory (line). Blue colours for the dots are chosen according to the box size as in (c).

For simplicity, we neglect background intensity noise in this derivation. Note that a uniform background inten-sity level does not modify the derivation, and hence we take it to be zero. We have introduced the particle spread function PSF( x), including both effects of the particle shape – often called form factor – and the point spread function of the microscope. In further steps, we will consider that the PSF is an isotropic function. To only consider contributions in a specific observation box, the intensity I(x, t ) is given by 

I(t) = 

Z

dx′ϕ(−x′)I(x′, t ). (4) The box indicator function ϕ(x) here describes the area from which the intensity is contributing, as we are inter-ested in the total intensity within the observation box. We first focus on intensities from a square subsection of the microscope image, indicated by the blue square in Fig. 1(a). In this case, intensity from all pixels within the box contribute, while pixels outside are not included. Therefore, ϕ(x) = Θ( L/ 2 − | x|)Θ( L/ 2 − | y|), where Θ( x)denotes the Heaviside step function, x = ( x, y ) and |·| is the absolute value. Here, the center of the observation box is chosen at the origin. In a homogeneous system as in ours, we average over different boxes on an image and so the position of the box center is not relevant. However, in inhomogeneous systems one could in principle perform region specific analysis [17]. Due to the convolutions in Eqs. (3) and (4) it is ad-vantageous to perform further steps in Fourier space. We use the convention f (k, t ) = R dxe−ik·xf (x, t ) for the Fourier transform and f (x, t ) = (2 π)−d R dkeik·xf (k, t )for the inverse transform, where d is the system’s di-mension. Note that for notation simplicity we explicitly specify at all instances if a function is taken in Fourier or real space through its dependence in k or x respectively. Combining Eqs. (3) and (4), we can express the intensity correlation as 

⟨I(t)I(0) ⟩ =

Z dk

(2 π)d |Peff (k)|2 ˆρ(k, t )ˆ ρ(−k, 0) , (5) where we introduced an effective convolution factor, 

Peff (k) = PSF( k)ϕ(k), consisting of the Fourier trans-formed PSF and the box indicator function. Intensity correlations are thus closely related to the intermediate scattering function f (k, t ) = ⟨ˆρ(k, t )ˆ ρ(−k, t )⟩ /N . Equa-tion (5) is a general expression describing the intensity correlations in a priori any box shape or with any PSF, so any kind of visual rendering of a particle on the image. To apply the general expression Eq. (5) to our exper-imental model system, we need to specify the PSF and the box indicator function. For the PSF, we consider a cross-section of an exemplary particle (see Fig. 1(d)). As typical for confocal microscopy, the fluorescent intensity of a particle appears Gaussian. The experimental inten-sity data points and therefore the particle spread func-tion can be approximated by a Gaussian function (red line), given by PSF( x) = I0e−x2/2σ2

/(2 πσ 2)d/ 2 which is in Fourier space PSF( k) = I0eσ2k2/2 with the average intensity of one particle I0 and the effective particle size 

σ on the image. Note that σ may be different than the actual particle size due to the point spread function of 4the microscope. The box indicator function is chosen as a two-dimensional square box with side-length L – blue square in Fig. 1(a), giving ϕ(k) = sin( Lk x/2)    

> kx/2sin( Lk y/2)
> ky/2

,with kx and ky the Cartesian components of the wave vector k. Further particle spread functions and box in-dicator functions are discussed in Methods, Sec. C. For the density-density correlation we use the exact expression 

ˆρ(k, t )ˆ ρ(k′, t ′) = (2 π)2d N (N − 1) 

V 2 δ(k)δ(k′)+ (2 π)d NV δ(k + k′)e−Dk 2|t−t′|

for N purely diffusive, non-interacting particles moving in a d-dimensional volume V [30]. It is thus an appropri-ate and simple approximation in the model experiment with d = 2 and a low particle density. Combining these specifications we can determine the mean square intensity change (1) using Eq. (5), which after some algebra, simplifies to 

∆I(t)2 = 2 ⟨I⟩ I0

"

f

 4σ2

L2

d

− f

 4Dt + 4 σ2

L2

d#

(6) where f (τ ) = 

r τπ



e−1/τ − 1



+ erf( p1/τ ), (7) and the mean intensity in the observation box is ⟨I⟩ =

I0N/V . Further details are reported in the methods. Since f (0) = 1, then when we consider point like par-ticles ( σ = 0) we recover the result for particle number fluctuations in a box [3] – which we call the “number countoscope” limit. To align theory Eq. (6) with experimental data, four parameters still need to be determined, ⟨I⟩, I0, σ, and 

D. The mean intensity ⟨I⟩ in the observation box can be straightforwardly obtained from the microscopy images, where the average is taken over all boxes and time. The remaining three parameters are obtained through a fit-ting procedure. To do so, we first explore the long-time limit, i.e. , the plateau values, as it should be agnostic of the dynamics of the system. In this limit, the theoreti-cal result Eq. (6) provides an expression for the plateau value, or more simply for the intensity variance as 

I2 − ⟨ I⟩2 = ⟨I⟩ I0f

 4σ2

L2

d

, (8) and is indeed independent of the diffusion coefficient D.We can use Eq. (8) to fit the intensity variance var( I). Using a least squares fitting this determines the mean particle intensity as I0 = 2170 and the mean particle width on the image as σ = 1 .05 μm. The results of the rescaled variance are shown for the experiments (blue dots) and a theoretical fit (gray line) in Fig. 1(e). Having determined σ and I0 from the plateau values, Eq. (6) can be used to model the intensity fluctuations ∆I(t)2 and we obtain the self diffusion coefficient via a least-squares fit as D = 0 .076 μm2/s. Inserting all four parameters into Eq. (6) (solid lines) gives the theoretical prediction as shown in Fig. 1(c). Recall that the full set of seven curves shares the same three fitting parameters. The theoretical prediction ac-curately describes the experimental data (points) over all times and is the most accurate for small boxes. There are some deviations for larger boxes. These could be at-tributed to the lower statistical accuracy inherent to large boxes, since one can pave fewer large boxes than small ones on an image. They could also be attributed to the presence of collective effects or experimental noise, which are currently not considered within the theory. The determined parameters agree well with our expec-tations. Most importantly, the value of the diffusion co-efficient is in agreement with the one obtained from the mean square displacement (MSD) calculated by tracking the particles, D = 0 .078 μm2/s. Notice that compared to the Stokes-Einstein formula giving D = 0 .107 μm/s2 for particle diffusion in the bulk, this value is slightly lowered due to increased hydrodynamic friction with the bottom wall [31]. Further parameters also agree well with exper-imental reality. Taking the particle size as given by the location where the intensity Gaussian is at least 91% of the maximum particle intensity, we can estimate the ac-tual particle radius is roughly a ≃ 2σ. Since a = 2 μm we find σ ≃ 1 μm which is in good agreement with the mean particle width determined with the fit. This agreement is additionally verified by comparing the intensity distri-bution for an exemplary particle (blue points) with the Gaussian intensity profile (grey line), depending on the fitted parameters I0 and σ, in Fig. 1(d). Both intensity distributions are in reasonable agreement. 

> THEORY HIGHLIGHTS THE PRESENCE OF SEVERAL REGIMES OF INTENSITY SENSING.

Even at the level of a seemingly simple suspension of dilute diffusing particles, the intensity correlations both dynamic in Fig. 1(c) and static in Fig. 1(e) exhibit a rich phenomenology with different scaling laws at differ-ent time and lengthscales. Based on the theory devel-oped, we can find characteristic timescales and intensity scales to reveal and understand these scaling laws fur-ther. To identify typical regimes of interest, it is clear from Fig. 1(e) that phenomena are quite different in the cases of small, respectively large, particles compared to box size σ ≪ L, respectively σ ≫ L.We start by the limit σ ≪ L, where the particle width is much smaller than the observation box (see Fig. 2(a) for a sketch). First, we investigate static correlation func-tions. In this limit, we know from Eq. (8), that the plateau value scales as ∆I(t)2 ≃ 2var( I) = 2 I0 ⟨I⟩.Rescaling the variance var( I) accordingly by ⟨I⟩ as done in Fig. 1(e) agrees with this prediction since the rescaled variance of the intensity becomes constant for σ ≪ L.In this limit, particles correspond to point like parti-cles, the PSF becomes a delta distribution. Replacing 5                           

> FIG. 2. Different rescalings of intensity fluctuations ∆I(t)2reveal different physical phenomena .(a) Case
> σ≪L, where ∆I(t)2is rescaled by the average intensity in a box ⟨I⟩and in time by the diffusive timescale L2/4D. (b) Case
> σ≫L, where ∆I(t)2is normalized by the mean box intensity ⟨I⟩and the fraction of the particle the box covers L2/σ 2, and in time by the diffusive timescale σ2/D . Solid gray lines show limiting functions in the respective regimes. The colour scale is the same as in Fig. 1(c), with additional theory predictions in (a) for L= [128 ,256 ,512] μm. The insets in (a,b) illustrate the ratio of relevant length scales, particle width σand box size L, for each regime.

PSF( x) = I0δ(x) in Eq. (3) determines I(x, t ) = I0 ˆρ(x, t )and using Eq. (4) we find the intensity is proportional to the number of particles, I(t) = I0N (t), where N (t) de-notes the number of particles in the corresponding virtual observation volume. Since for a statistically uncorrelated suspension of particles var( N ) = ⟨N ⟩, then we expect that var( I) ∝ ⟨ I⟩ as well. Second, we investigate dynamic fluctuations of I(t). The time required to reach the plateau of ∆I(t)2 is de-termined by the characteristic time to exchange particles between inside and outside the box. Since in this regime particle width is negligible compared to the observation box scale, this time is simply the time for the particle centres to move in and out of the box, L2/4D. Rescaling intensity fluctuations and time accordingly, we obtain a collapse onto a master curve for large enough observation boxes in Fig. 2(a). We show as a gray line the limiting “number countoscope” corresponding to infinitely small particles, σ = 0. The agreement collapse between num-bers and intensities is mostly satisfied on large enough boxes, at long enough times, since at short times inten-sity fluctuations are dominated by finite-particle size ef-fects – which we will come to in the next paragraphs. At these long enough times, there emerges a √t-scaling which extends over all timescales when σ = 0. The ob-served √t-scaling results from diffusive particle motion across the boundaries of the observation box. We next consider the limit σ ≫ L, for which the ob-servation box is much smaller than the particle width as sketched in Fig. 2(b). Again we first investigate static correlations. In this regime, the variance (8) becomes var( I) = I0 ⟨I⟩ (L/ 2√πσ )d. The first factor I0 ⟨I⟩ re-covers the scaling observed in the previous limit σ ≪ L

and the second factor accounts for the reduced intensity fluctuations due to the small box size compared to the particle width. An heuristic approximation of this factor is the fraction of the particle that is covered by the box, 

Vbox /V particle , recovering the expected scaling ∝ Ld/σ d

of the variance. We also investigate dynamic correlations in this lim-iting regime σ ≫ L. The time required for ⟨∆I2(t)⟩ to reach the plateau is again determined by diffusive parti-cle motion, with the relevant length scale being set by the particle width σ. This defines a characteristic time scale as D/σ 2. By rescaling the time and intensity fluctuations accordingly, we observe a collapse onto the limiting func-tion as σ/L → ∞ (gray line in Fig. 2(b)). Approaching the limit is, in practice, primarily constrained by the spa-tial resolution of the microscope. The smallest accessible box size corresponds to a single pixel. For short times, we predict from Eq. (6) and find a linear increase of the rescaled mean square change in intensity as dDt/ 2σ2.Remarkably, in this regime the mean squared intensity differences scale like the mean squared displacements, 

⟨∆I2(t)⟩

2I0⟨I⟩

4πσ 2

L2 = ⟨∆x2(t)⟩

4σ2 . (9) This originates from the fact that at these small timescales, we can essentially think of the box as “diffus-ing” on the particles’ PSF, yielding this peculiar scaling law. The short time regime persists across box sizes al-beit with slightly different scaling laws, as dπ −1/2 Dt /σL 

for σ ≪ L, demonstrating this behaviour is quite univer-sal for short time scales. 6                   

> FIG. 3. Intensity fluctuations capture diffusion coefficients at different image resolutions. ⟨∆I(t)2⟩for different resolutions of images: (a) 512 ×512 pixel (full resolution, lpx = 0 .91 μm), (b) 128 ×128 pixel (1 /16 of the full resolution,
> lpx = 3 .6μm), and (c) 64 ×64 pixel (1/64 of the full resolution, lpx = 7 .28 μm). The data is rescaled as in Fig. 2(a). The colour scale is the same as in Fig. 1(c). The insets show a section of the optical image with the corresponding resolution. The diffusion coefficients are determined via fitting.
> THE METHOD IS ROBUST IN THE LOW DETECTION LIMIT

Since intensity counting is based on comparing inten-sity fluctuations in boxes and is essentially agnostic of individual particles, the method should in principle be applicable to systems where individual particles are not resolved – much like FCS, ICS and DDM [19]. To test the robustness of the approach, we artificially decrease the resolution of the microscope images. To do so, start-ing from (a) our full 1 × 1 pixel resolution, we divide the image into non-overlapping squares of (b) 4 × 4, (c) 8 × 8pixels and assign the mean intensity of each square to the value of a “single pixel” of these downsampled image. This procedure has two effects: It increases the length of a single pixel lpx from (a) 0 .91 μm to (b) 3 .64 μm, and (c) 7 .28 μm and decreases the image resolution from (a) 512 × 512 to (b) 128 × 128 and (c) 64 × 64 pixels. For a visual representation of the changes, we present repre-sentative images at each step of the downsizing process in the insets in Fig. 3. We then calculate the mean square change of the in-tensity for the downsampled images and present the re-sults in Fig. 3. We choose to present the results with the rescaling that corresponds to the situation where 

σ ≪ L, since in this downsizing process we typically do not resolve individual particles anymore. Note, that Fig. 3(a) reproduces Fig. 2(a) for pedagogic purposes. Interestingly, downsizing preserves the main aspects of the curves. The most notable difference is that naturally small observation boxes are not accessible due to the in-creased pixel size, i.e. , there are fewer dark blue lines. On the largest boxes however, the features of the inten-sity fluctuations are quite similar regardless of the initial image quality (lighter blue colours). Using a similar fitting procedure as for Fig. 1(c), we also determine the diffusion coefficients as, from (a) 0.076 μm2/s, (b) 0 .074 μm2/s, and (c) 0 .085 μm2/s. For a small downsampling in (b) the diffusion coefficients ob-tained agree, but there is some deviation at the 8 × down-sampling level. One reason is that the procedure for fit-ting the variance (see Fig. 1(e)) becomes more challeng-ing as the decreasing resolution reduces the number of data points in the σ ≫ L regime. Consequently, the un-certainty in the particle width increases as the variance becomes independent of σ in the limit σ ≪ L. In ad-dition, this restricts the fitting to large boxes which are more sensitive to statistical noise. Note that exploiting prior knowledge of σ – essentially, keeping the same value of σ for all three resolutions, reduces the deviations. In this case, we determine the diffusion coefficients as, from (b) 0 .076 μm2/s and (c) 0 .075 μm2/s. In a real experi-ment where resolution is low as in (c), one may not have a priori access to σ and thus alternative fitting proce-dures may have to be found. Overall, this shows that intensity counting remains robust, enabling determina-tion of the diffusion coefficient, even when segmentation of individual particles is not possible. Hence, these re-sults are promising for applications to a broader set of experimental conditions. 

> DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION

In this work, we have analysed intensity fluctuations within virtual observation boxes in real space to quantify particle dynamics. We derived a theoretical description of the mean square change of the intensity, ⟨∆I2(t)⟩, and validated it in an experimental model system. Using this approach, we determine the diffusion coefficient D, which shows excellent agreement with results obtained from the MSD of the tacked particles. Our analysis reveals dis-tinct temporal regimes that depend on the ratio of the particle width to the virtual box size: at short timescales, 

⟨∆I2(t)⟩ scales with the MSD, while at longer timescales, it scales with its square root. Much like FCS, ICS, and DDM, our method is robust and does not require re-solving individual particles, making it widely applicable. 7Our real-space approach is computationally cheap, since it avoids Fourier transforms. In addition, working in real-space allows one to relate to physical phenomena in an easier way. While our investigation was centred around the 2D ex-perimental model system imaged with a confocal micro-scope, the introduced theoretical framework is quite gen-eral. By essence, it adjusts the shape of the box ϕ(x)and particle PSF( x) at will. We provide an overview of common shapes in Tab. I, based on typical shapes that one might need to describe various experimental systems (see also Methods, Sec. C). With this framework, we can for example recover some theories for FCS, where the box has a Gaussian shape corresponding to the Gaussian illuminated region, and the particle is considered point like [12, 32]. We hence anticipate that our method can be adopted for other samples or microscopy techniques, such as total internal reflection fluorescence (TIRF) and bright-field microscopy. Furthermore, given we operate in real space, our approach could in principle be easily extended to probe large scale collective effects – circum-venting some challenges such as edge-effects [27].  

> METHODS A. Experiments

Experiments are carried out with sulfate-modified flu-orescent polystyrene particles with 4 μm nominal diame-ter (Invitrogen, F8859). Particles are dispersed in ultra-pure deionized water (18.2 MΩ · cm −1) at a concentration of roughly 0 .002wt%. Fluorescent particles are imaged using a Leica SP8 Confocal Laser Scanning Microscope (CLSM) with a 20 × objective (0.75 NA), while the pin-hole is set to 1 Airy unit. The resulting field of view is 465 .62 × 465 .62 μm2. The particles are excited at 514 nm and their emission is collected at wavelengths be-tween 525 and 600 nm. Optical properties are selected to avoid saturation of the detector. A resonant scanner (8 kHz) is used at an acquisition rate of 2.5 frames per second at a resolution of 512 × 512 pixels. To accurately resolve the plateaus of the intensity fluctuations (see Fig 2) videos are recorded for 5 h. To minimize changes in average intensity over the course of an experiment, the autofocus feature of the Leica LAS X software is used every 600 frames.  

> B. Data analysis

Data analysis is performed directly on the microscopy videos. The field of view, assumed to be fixed in time, is divided into M square tiles based on the specified ob-servation box length L and a specified separation width 

δL between the boxes. For simplicity, we only consider box lengths, separations, and positions that align with pixels. We then sum the intensity of each pixel that falls within each observation box, generating a time series of intensities Ii(t) for the box indices i = 1 , ..., M . Statis-tical quantities such as ∆I(t)2 are estimated by first averaging over time origins t0 and then using arithmetic means over all of the boxes ∆I(t)2 

> t0i

. The average particle intensity ⟨I⟩ and variance I2 − ⟨ I⟩2 are esti-mated using the sample mean and the unbiased sample variance, determined from all boxes and frames.  

> C. Theory

For pedagogy purposes, we present the detailed theo-retical framework here in a self-contained manner. The intensity I(x, t ) of a system is given by the sum of the in-tensity distribution of each individual particle, I(x, t ) = P 

> i

PSF( x − xi(t)). Here we assume that every parti-cle has the same intensity profile, the particle spread function PSF( x) which includes the effects of the opti-cal imaging system (usually included in the point spread function) and of the particle shape. Mathematically, the intensity can hence be expressed as a convolution of the PSF( x) and the density distribution ˆ ρ = P 

> i

δ(x−x′), see Eq. (3). We are interested in the intensity fluctuations within a given area, the so-called observation box, which is given by an integral over the corresponding volume R

> Vbox

dxI(x, t ) or more generally by a convolution 

I(˜ x, t ) = 

Z

dx ϕ(˜ x − x)I(x, t ) ≡ (ϕ ∗ I(t))(˜ x), (10) where ϕ(x) is the indicator function of the observation box with volume Vbox = R dxϕ(x). In the simple case of a one dimensional square box of length L, Eq. (10) becomes 

I(˜ x, t ) = 

Z ˜x+L/ 2˜x−L/ 2

dx I (x, t )and hence ϕ(x) = Θ( L 

> 2

− | x|), where Θ( x) denotes the Heaviside step function. The combination of both convolutions Eq. (3) and Eq. (10) yields 

I(˜ x, t ) = 

Z

dxϕ(˜ x − x)

Z

dx′PSF( x − x′)ˆ ρ(x′, t ) (11) =

Z dk

(2 π)d ˆρ(k, t )eik·˜x

Z

dxϕ(˜ x − x)e−ik·(˜ x−x)

×

Z

dx′PSF( x − x′)e−ik·(x−x′) (12) =

Z dk

(2 π)d eik·˜x ˆρ(k, t )ϕ(k)PSF( k), (13) where d denotes the spatial dimension and we replaced the density distribution in Eq. (11) by its expression in Fourier space, ˆρ(x, t ) = R dkeik·x ˆρ(k, t )/(2 π)d. Al-ternatively, Eq. (13) follows directly after applying the convolution theorem F[g ∗ h] = F[g]F[h] twice, where F8indicates the Fourier transform. Note that for systems with constant density distribution, the intensity is inde-pendent of the position of the observation box. So for simplicity, we assume ˜ x = 0 in the following. The temporal intensity correlation ⟨I(t)I(t′)⟩ of an ob-servation box with itself is thus 

Z dk

(2 π)d Peff (k)

Z dk′

(2 π)d Peff (k′) ˆρ(k, t )ˆ ρ(k′, t ′) , (14) where we combined the effects of the particle intensity and of the observation box in one effective convolution factor Peff (k) = ϕ(k)PSF( k). Further exploiting spatial homogeneity of the system allows to simplify 

⟨I(t)I(t′)⟩ =

Z dk

(2 π)d |Peff (k)|2 ⟨ˆρ(k, t )ˆ ρ(−k, t ′)⟩ , (15) which is equal to Eq. (5) from the main text for t′ = 0. To proceed, we need to specify the density-density dis-tribution function. In k-space the density is given as ˆρ(k, t ) = P 

> j

eik·xj (t) and the position of the jth particle 

xj (t) can be determined by the solution of the corre-sponding Equation of motion. We here focus on purely diffusive, non-interacting par-ticles that satisfy the Langevin equation 

dxj

dt = √2Dηj (t), (16) where η(t) is a Gaussian white noise with zero mean 

⟨ηi(t)⟩ = 0, correlation ⟨ηi(t)ηj (t′)⟩ = δij δ(t − t′)1 and 1

denotes the unit matrix. Due to its simplicity, Eq. (16) can be solved analytically as 

xj (t) = xj (0) + √2D

Z t

> 0

dt ′ηj (t′)and allows to express the density-density correlation function exactly (see e.g. Reference [30]) as 

ˆρ(k, t )ˆ ρ(k′, t ′) = (2 π)2d N (N − 1) 

V 2 δ(k)δ(k′)+ (2 π)d NV δ(k + k′)e−Dk 2|t−t′|, (17) where the brackets ⟨·⟩ indicate an average over initial positions xi(0) and over noise η(t). The corresponding intensity fluctuations (15) in a dif-fusive system are 

⟨I(t)I(0) ⟩ =N (N − 1) I20

V 2box 

V 2

+ NV

Z dk

(2 π)d |Peff (k)|2 e−Dt k2

(18) where we exploited PSF( k =0) = R dxPSF( x) = I0 is the mean particle intensity, and similarly ϕ(k = 0) = Vbox .In practice, it turns out to be useful to consider fluc-tuations of the intensity change, as introduced in Eq. (1) in the main text, ∆I(t)2 = (I(t) − I(0)) 2 =2 I2 − 2 ⟨I(t)I(0) ⟩, where we assume stationarity such that the mean intensity is constant ⟨I⟩ ≡ ⟨ I(0) ⟩ = ⟨I(t)⟩.In case of the non-interacting purely diffusive system we determine, using Eq. (18), 

∆I(t)2

2N/V =

Z dk

(2 π)d |Peff (k)|2 

1 − e−Dtk 2 

. (19) At this stage, neither the particle intensity PSF( k) nor the shape of the observation box ϕ(k) have been specified and can be chosen as applicable. We give reasonable choices for these functions in the following. 

Particle spread functions The intensity distribution of a particle can take many different shapes. Recall that we chose the PSF from normalized functions, rescaled such that its integral R dxPSF( x) = I0 is the mean par-ticle intensity. An overview of potential particle types, including their PSF( x), its inverse value at the particle centre x = 0 and its Fourier transform PSF( k) in Tab. I. The latter is required to determine the intensity corre-lation function, Eq. (5) We will now explicitly introduce several reasonable and mathematically feasible distribu-tions. Very small particles in theory might be described as point-like by a Dirac delta distribution, PSF = I0δ(x). In practice, however, particles are never truly point-like as a result of their finite size and the finite resolution of the optical system. Both effects yield a spatially ex-tended intensity distribution. The delta-peak model is still relevant, as it probes the presence of particles and hence particle number fluctuations [3]. When the detected intensity distribution is dominated by the particle shape, e.g., for particles large compared to the point spread function of the imaging system, the observed intensity profile closely mirrors the geomet-ric form factor of the particle. For spherical colloids, this yields a spherically symmetric intensity distribution PSF = 4 I0Θ( σ/2 − | x|)/πσ 2, describing circles of diam-eter σ as imaging usually implies a projection to the two dimensional plane. Note that similar step-like intensity profiles can also arise artificially during post-processing, 

e.g., to enhance particle visibility and due to detector saturation, which truncates the intensity signal. For particles much smaller than the diffraction limit, the detected intensity distribution is primarily deter-mined by the point spread function. In such cases, the particle intensity can be approximated by a Gaussian profile, yielding PSF( x) = I0(2 πσ 2)−d/ 2e−x2/2σ2

, where 

d again represents the spatial dimension. This approx-imation is especially valid in confocal and fluorescence microscopy, which is why we adopted it for our model system imaged using a LSCM. In general, optical setups, such as brightfield microscopy or TIRF, can produce more complex intensity profiles, including Airy disks. Most PSFs are spatially separable, i.e. , they can be expressed as a product of one-dimensional functions for each spatial coordinate. For this reason we list these one-dimensional contributions in Tab. I. Notable exceptions 9

Particle - type PSF( x)/I 0 I0/PSF( x = 0) PSF( k)/I 0

Pointlike δ(xα) NaN 1Gaussian 1√2πσ 2 e−xα2/(2 σ2) √2πσ 2 e−k2

> ασ2/2

Square 1 

> σ

Θ( σ 

> 2

− | xα|) σ sin( kασ/ 2) 

> kασ/ 2

Exponential 1 

> σ

Θ( xα)e−xα/σ σ (1 + ik ασ)−1

Circle (2D) 4 

> πσ 2

Θ( σ 

> 2

− | x|) πσ 2 

> 44
> kσ

J1(kσ/ 2) Sphere (3D) 6 

> πσ 3

Θ( σ 

> 2

− | x|) πσ 3

> 624
> k3σ3

 sin   kσ 

> 2

 − kσ  

> 2

cos   kσ 

> 2

 

TABLE I. Particle spread function for different particle geometries. For each particle type (illustrated) we show: the real-space PSF( x) (first column, including a sketch of the distribution), its inverse value at the particle center, 1 /PSF( x = 0) (second column), and the Fourier-space particle spread function PSF( k). Unless otherwise stated in the particle type, the particle spread functions are spatially separable and given in one dimension, with the index α indicating the corresponding Cartesian coordinate. In the expressions, Jn denotes a Bessel function of the first kind and Θ is the Heaviside step function. While this table presents PSFs, the same functions can be directly adapted for use as observation box shapes ϕ by following the three-step procedure detailed in the main text. 

include circular and spherical intensities, which are inher-ently non-separable because of their rotational symmetry and are hence expressed explicitly. 

Observation box shapes The observation box indica-tor functions ϕ(x) are structurally quite similar to the particle spread functions discussed above. This allows us to reuse the one-dimensional distributions listed in Tab. I to describe their various shapes. The conversion from PSFs to ϕ can be carried out as follows: 1) Se-lect the desired box shape from the particle types listed in Tab. I. 2) Multiply the first by the second column in Tab. I. This rescales PSF( x) by its maximum intensity, typically located at the particle centre x = 0, and thereby accounts for the different normalizations of PSF and ϕ.The Fourier-space representation, ϕ(k) is obtained simi-larly by multiplying the third by the second column. 3) Replace the variable σ with L, since the particle width and box size represent distinct relevant length scales. This conversion generally applies, except for the point-like particle type, whose maximum intensity diverges. As an explicit example, we consider a Gaussian-shaped observation box, which could resemble the illuminated region in an FCS experiment. Following the above pro-cedure, we determine ϕ(k) = (2 πL 2)d/ 2 exp  −k2L2/2.For a two-dimensional square box, as used for the ex-perimental model system in the main text, we obtain 

ϕ(k) = 4 sin( Lk x/2) sin( Lk y /2)/ kxky .

[1] D. Magde, E. Elson, and W. W. Webb, Thermodynamic fluctuations in a reacting system—measurement by fluo-rescence correlation spectroscopy, Physical review letters 

29 , 705 (1972). [2] B. J. Berne and R. Pecora, Dynamic Light Scattering: With Applications to Chemistry, Biology, and Physics 

(Courier Corporation, 1976). [3] E. K. R. Mackay, S. Marbach, B. Sprinkle, and A. L. Thorneywork, The countoscope: Measuring self and col-lective dynamics without trajectories, Physical Review X 

14 , 041016 (2024). [4] J. C. Crocker and D. G. Grier, Methods of digital video microscopy for colloidal studies, Journal of colloid and interface science 179 , 298 (1996). [5] A. Einstein, ¨Uber die von der molekularkinetischen the-orie der w¨ arme geforderte bewegung von in ruhenden fl¨ ussigkeiten suspendierten teilchen, Annalen der physik 

4 (1905). [6] J. Perrin, Les atomes (Cnrs, 2014). [7] M. Smoluchowski, Studien ¨uber molekularstatistik von emulsionen und deren zusammenhang mit der brown’schen bewegung, Akademie der Wissenschaften in Wien 123 , 2381 (1914). [8] M. von Smoluchowski, Uber die zeitliche ver¨ anderlichkeit der gruppierung von emulsionsteilchen und die re-versibilit¨ at der diffusionserscheinungen, Physikalische Zeitschrift 16 , 321 (1915). [9] M. v. Smoluchowski, Studien ¨ uber kolloidstatistik und den mechanismus der diffusion, Kolloid-Zeitschrift 18 , 48 (1916). [10] A. Westgren, Bestimmungen der kompressibilit¨ at dis-perser systeme, Zeitschrift f¨ ur anorganische und allge-meine Chemie 95 , 39 (1916). [11] A. Westgren and J. Reitst¨ otter, Zur koagulation grob-disperser goldhydrosole, Zeitschrift f¨ ur Physikalische Chemie 92 , 750 (1918). [12] E. L. Elson and D. Magde, Fluorescence correlation spec-troscopy. I. Conceptual basis and theory, Biopolymers: Original Research on Biomolecules 13 , 1 (1974). [13] E. L. Elson, Fluorescence correlation spectroscopy: past, present, future, Biophysical journal 101 , 2855 (2011). [14] P. W. Wiseman, Image correlation spectroscopy: prin-10 

ciples and applications, Cold Spring Harbor Protocols 

2015 , pdb (2015). [15] D. M. Jameson, J. A. Ross, and J. P. Albanesi, Fluores-cence fluctuation spectroscopy: ushering in a new age of enlightenment for cellular dynamics, Biophysical reviews 

1, 105 (2009). [16] D. L. Kolin and P. W. Wiseman, Advances in image cor-relation spectroscopy: measuring number densities, ag-gregation states, and dynamics of fluorescently labeled macromolecules in cells, Cell biochemistry and biophysics 

49 , 141 (2007). [17] L. Scipioni, M. Di Bona, G. Vicidomini, A. Diaspro, and L. Lanzan` o, Local raster image correlation spec-troscopy generates high-resolution intracellular diffusion maps, Communications Biology 1, 10 (2018). [18] D. L. Kolin, D. Ronis, and P. W. Wiseman, k-space image correlation spectroscopy: a method for accurate transport measurements independent of fluorophore pho-tophysics, Biophysical journal 91 , 3061 (2006). [19] R. Cerbino and V. Trappe, Differential dynamic mi-croscopy: probing wave vector dependent dynamics with a microscope, Physical review letters 100 , 188102 (2008). [20] F. Giavazzi and R. Cerbino, Digital fourier microscopy for soft matter dynamics, Journal of Optics 16 , 083001 (2014). [21] E. Lattuada, F. Krautgasser, M. Lavaud, F. Giavazzi, and R. Cerbino, The hitchhiker’s guide to differential dy-namic microscopy, The Journal of Chemical Physics 163 

(2025). [22] J. Comtet, A. Rayabharam, E. Glushkov, M. Zhang, A. Avsar, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, N. R. Aluru, and A. Radenovic, Anomalous interfacial dynamics of single proton charges in binary aqueous solutions, Science Ad-vances 7, eabg8568 (2021). [23] N. Ronceray, Y. You, E. Glushkov, M. Lihter, B. Rehl, T.-H. Chen, G.-H. Nam, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, S. Roke, et al. , Liquid-activated quantum emission from native hbn defects for nanofluidic sensing, arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06287 (2022). [24] S. W. Hell and J. Wichmann, Breaking the diffrac-tion resolution limit by stimulated emission: stimulated-emission-depletion fluorescence microscopy, Optics let-ters 19 , 780 (1994). [25] M. J. Rust, M. Bates, and X. Zhuang, Sub-diffraction-limit imaging by stochastic optical reconstruction mi-croscopy (storm), Nature methods 3, 793 (2006). [26] R. Schmidt, T. Weihs, C. A. Wurm, I. Jansen, J. Rehman, S. J. Sahl, and S. W. Hell, Minflux nanometer-scale 3d imaging and microsecond-range tracking on a common fluorescence microscope, Nature communications 12 , 1478 (2021). [27] A. Carter, E. K. Mackay, B. Sprinkle, A. L. Thorney-work, and S. Marbach, Measuring collective diffusion co-efficients by counting particles in boxes, Soft Matter 21 ,3991 (2025). [28] E. K. Mackay, A. D. Young, A. Carter, S. Marbach, and A. L. Thorneywork, Collective hard core interactions leave multiscale signatures in number fluctuation spectra, arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.17476 (2025). [29] D. B. Allan, T. Caswell, N. C. Keim, C. M. van der Wel, and R. W. Verweij, soft-matter/trackpy: v0.7 (2025). [30] A. Velenich, C. Chamon, L. F. Cugliandolo, and D. Kreimer, On the brownian gas: a field theory with a poissonian ground state, Journal of Physics A: Mathe-matical and Theoretical 41 , 235002 (2008). [31] A. J. Goldman, R. G. Cox, and H. Brenner, Slow viscous motion of a sphere parallel to a plane wall—i motion through a quiescent fluid, Chemical engineering science 

22 , 637 (1967). [32] F. H¨ ofling, K.-U. Bamberg, and T. Franosch, Anomalous transport resolved in space and time by fluorescence cor-relation spectroscopy, Soft Matter 7, 1358 (2011).