Title: Permission Denied: Policy-Graded Evaluation of Coding Agents in Hardened Environments

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.02670v1

Published Time: Wed, 05 Aug 2026 00:02:50 GMT

Number of Pages: 24

Markdown Content:
# Permission Denied: Policy-Graded Evaluation of Coding Agents in Hardened Environments 

## Dotan Davidovich *, Yair Amar *, Hai Rozencwajg *, Or Hiltch 

Accomplish AI {dotan, yair, hai, or}@accomplish.ai 

> *

These authors contributed equally. 

Abstract 

Coding agents increasingly run inside organizations whose security controls (scoped credentials, restricted egress, read-only filesystems, non-root execution) constrain them like any other software. Existing benchmarks, however, evaluate agents almost exclusively in permissive sandboxes, so it is unknown how performance changes when policy is enforced. In this work, we evaluate 12 coding agents on Terminal-Bench 2.1 across nested security policy levels derived from common real-world enterprise restrictions. Hardening is never free but far from uniform: under the strictest policy, success losses reach 18.3 points and cost inflation 167.3%, and the two axes disagree; the model that best preserves success is also the one that loses the most efficiency, so model choice is policy-dependent. Beyond aggregate scores, we characterize how agents behave when policy blocks their actions and decom-pose the failures hardening induces: runs grind into timeouts or wrong solutions rather than stopping early, in a mix that differs by model. To ground comparisons, we verify task solv-ability under the strictest policy, separating model failures from tasks the policy forecloses. We release Boundary-Bench, an open-source hardening plugin enabling policy-constrained evaluation of coding agents on Terminal-Bench and compati-ble benchmarks. 

Code: https://github.com/boundary-bench/boundary-bench 

Project page: https://boundarybench.com/ 

## Introduction 

Organizations increasingly use coding agents for software development, but these agents operate within security con-trols that govern users and agents alike (South et al. 2025). Such controls are not agent-specific: scoped credentials, net-work restrictions, protected paths, and limited administra-tive privileges constrain any software operating in the en-vironment. These mechanisms correspond to access-control and boundary-protection families in NIST SP 800-53 (Joint Task Force Interagency Working Group 2020). We call such settings hardened environments : execution environments in which policy restricts what an agent can observe, access, or execute. Hardening is also moving closer to the agent itself, as contemporary agent harnesses expose controls such as net-work access modes, filesystem sandboxes, and run profiles. 1

> 1

Official tool documentation: Claude Code https://code.claude. com/docs/en/claude-code-on-the-web, Codex https://developers. 

Some coding-agent benchmarks use permissive task sand-boxes: Terminal-Bench allows agents to manipulate task containers freely (Merrill et al. 2026), FeatureBench pro-vides free Internet access (Zhou et al. 2026), and enterprise data-privacy and access-control policies are rarely tested in standard benchmarks (Yehudai et al. 2026). Like the mid-trajectory tool failures and bans that destabilize agents and require replanning (Xiong et al. 2025; Liu et al. 2026), a policy denial can trigger retries, workarounds, or abandon-ment; we represent the resulting trade-off as a success–cost Pareto frontier (Kapoor et al. 2025). Safety evaluations such as AgentHarm document the risks that motivate such re-strictions (Andriushchenko et al. 2024), but do not measure what enforcing them costs in success rate and token spend. Compliance-scored benchmarks check whether agents follow stated policies, but neither enforce them at runtime nor mea-sure their operational cost (Levy et al. 2026). Security-policy enforcement is itself a structured runtime perturbation: un-like observation distractions or injected faults (Ma et al. 2024; Kara, Faisal, and Nath 2025), it changes which observations and actions are permitted. Existing evaluations therefore do not show how coding-agent performance changes as such policies tighten, and unconstrained leaderboards may mis-represent the success–cost trade-offs of agents in deployed enterprise settings. In this paper, we show that hardening does not uniformly degrade coding-agent performance. Every model’s success– cost operating point worsens on both axes under policy, but by amounts and in currencies that differ across mod-els, reshaping the Pareto frontier and making model choice policy-dependent. This effect is behavioral: agents respond differently to denied actions (some retry, some reroute, and some give up), so performance under enforced policy can-not be predicted from unconstrained scores. Because a sin-gle locked-down configuration provides only one operating point, it cannot show how the frontier moves as policies tighten. We therefore introduce Boundary-Bench and eval-uate agents under graded, nested policy levels derived from common enterprise restriction settings and mapped to NIST SP 800-53 controls. At each level, we run each model’s na-tive harness on Terminal-Bench. We report outcomes over the full task set. As secondary diagnostics, we track whether 

openai.com/codex/permissions, Cursor https://cursor.com/docs/ agent/run-modes. arXiv:2608.02670v1 [cs.CR] 2 Aug 2026 any evaluated agent solves each task (task accessibility) and whether its reference solution remains compatible with each policy level. Our contributions are: 

• Policy-graded evaluation. We release Boundary-Bench as an open-source hardening plugin that runs each model in its native harness on Terminal-Bench 2.1 under three nested policy levels enforced by native Linux mecha-nisms. 

• Task diagnostics. We report outcomes over all Terminal-Bench tasks. As secondary diagnostics, we track whether any evaluated agent solves each task and whether its refer-ence solution remains compatible under the policy. This identifies task accessibility and cases where agents suc-ceed through alternative trajectories when the canonical trajectory is blocked. 

• Non-uniform policy effects. We show that hardening de-grades every model–harness bundle non-uniformly: some models lose success, some incur higher token cost, and some experience both, reshaping the success–cost Pareto frontier at each policy level (Figure 1, Figure 2). 

• Failure-mode decomposition. We decompose policy-induced degradation into measured failure modes: the extra failures are dominated by budget exhaustion and completed-but-wrong solutions, in proportions that differ by bundle, and we quantify agents’ blocked-action expo-sure at the enforcement boundary (Table 3). 

## Related Work 

SWE-bench (Jimenez et al. 2023) standardizes repository-level coding evaluation; Terminal-Bench (Merrill et al. 2026) and OSWorld (Xie et al. 2024) evaluate interactive coding and computer-use agents; cost-aware evaluation reports suc-cess jointly with inference cost, for example as a Pareto fron-tier (Kapoor et al. 2025). All hold the execution-security configuration fixed rather than varying it as an evaluation factor. Verifier over-specification, where assertions demand incidental details a task never requires, is likewise a docu-mented failure mode of code-generation benchmarks (Shar-ifloo et al. 2025); we audit and repair five such verifiers before any policy comparison. Routing and cascade methods (Chen, Zaharia, and Zou 2024; Ong et al. 2024) navigate a performance–cost trade-off by varying model choice; we keep the two-objective framing, use verifier-checked task success as the outcome, and make the environment’s policy level the independent variable. AgentHarm scores harmfulness and refusal on malicious tasks (Andriushchenko et al. 2024); ToolEmu surfaces risky tool-use behavior in an LM-emulated sandbox (Ruan et al. 2023); ST-WebAgentBench scores web-agent trajectories against organizational policies post hoc (Levy et al. 2026); 

τ -bench states domain rules in the prompt while enforcing only basic validity checks (Yao et al. 2024); AgentDyn shows that prompt-injection defenses with low attack success can coincide with severe over-defense and reduced task utility (Li et al. 2026). In contrast, we impose compliance as a graded property of the execution environment and measure task success and token spend as functions of the policy level. Input-perturbation robustness studies adversarial text and prompts (Wang et al. 2021; Zhu et al. 2023); ReliabilityBench varies injected fault intensity per tool call (Gupta 2026); WAREX injects network and server faults into web-agent trajectories (Kara, Faisal, and Nath 2025). We draw qual-itative inspiration from the effective-robustness lens (Taori et al. 2020), comparing hardened against unhardened perfor-mance. Whereas these works perturb inputs or inject syn-thetic faults, our severity axis is the security policy itself, held fixed per evaluation run. Sandboxes and agent-runtime controls instantiate hard-ened execution environments, and the closest prior work shows that enforcement need not destroy utility at a sin-gle, fixed configuration. CaMeL deterministically enforces a fixed security policy and reports task utility under enforce-ment: a multi-point success drop and a 2.8× token overhead (Debenedetti et al. 2025). Progent enforces tool-call privi-lege policies and reports utility largely maintained (Shi et al. 2025). The Verifier Tax quantifies task success and LLM-call and token overhead under an internal block-and-revise gate (Sah et al. 2026). Each prices one enforcement configuration in isolation. We complement these single-point results with, to our knowledge, the first benchmark study to make policy severity the independent variable: a shared, NIST-mapped, nested ladder run identically across model–harness bundles, measuring what enforcement costs, for which bundle, and in which currency (success or spend), together with task acces-sibility at each level. 

## Boundary-Bench 

Boundary-Bench is a framework that layers a configurable, operating-system-enforced policy onto an existing coding-agent benchmark and measures how agent success and cost change relative to the unrestricted baseline. 

Policy Enforcement 

A policy is a set of capability restrictions on the runtime, enforced on the environment rather than the agent; it limits what any process can do. We model policies on three axes: network egress (N), filesystem scope (F), and privilege (P). Each axis ranges over three postures: open (no restrictions), restricted, and locked. The three axes map to distinct families of NIST SP 800-53 controls (Joint Task Force Interagency Working Group 2020): boundary protection (SC-7) on the network axis, ac-cess, information-flow, and process-isolation controls (AC-3, AC-4, SC-39) on the filesystem axis, and least privilege (AC-6) on the privilege axis. The mapping records the con-trols that motivated each mechanism and is not a compliance claim. From this space we evaluate three policy levels that form a cumulative severity ladder, each adding restrictions on top of the previous level. Control is the open baseline: the agent runs as root with unrestricted egress and a writable filesys-tem. Non-root drops root privilege only, isolating the effect of running as an ordinary user while network and filesys-tem access stay open. NIST-derived high restricts all three axes together: a fixed network egress allow-list, a read-only filesystem outside a dedicated small writable set, and a full privilege lockdown. Because the step from non-root to NIST-derived high changes several surfaces at once, we treat its effect as whole-configuration rather than attributing it to any single axis. The exact egress allow-list, the read-only system directories, the privilege lockdown, and each axis’s NIST control mapping are given in Appendix A. Each restriction is realized by a native Linux access-control mechanism rather than requested of the agent: net-work egress passes through a proxy the agent cannot recon-figure, the filesystem is mounted read-only outside a small writable workspace, and the agent process runs under an un-privileged user that cannot re-escalate. Enforcement is com-piled into the environment without the agent’s knowledge. The agent meets each limit only as a native runtime failure. Every restriction is inherited by each child process the agent spawns, so it cannot be evaded by launching a subprocess, while benchmark setup and grading run outside the sandbox. Before each run, pre-flight probes confirm every restriction is active and fail closed otherwise (Appendix A). 

Benchmark Audit 

A sufficiently strict policy can invalidate a task rather than merely harden it, so Boundary-Bench audits the benchmark under its strictest policy before interpreting any agent re-sult. First, we establish each task’s solvability: we replay the benchmark’s own reference solution under NIST-derived high , and where it no longer passes we attempt to author a policy-compliant reference solution ourselves; a task whose official passing state is reached by either route gains a solv-ability witness. A task is blocked by design when the pol-icy forbids an action the task itself requires, so no policy-compliant solution exists. Second, we review every trial in which the verifier reported failure although the agent had reached the stated goal, checking the failing assertion for over-specification; a repair may only additively broaden an assertion, and the repaired verifier runs identically at every policy level, with original outcomes kept for audit. Third, we classify every failed run by where it terminates relative to its task’s wall-clock budget: a run whose agent runtime reaches 95% of the budget is a timeout , one that ends in the bottom decile of the task’s runtimes is an early stop , and any other failure is a wrong solution ; a small residual of provider- and verifier-side errors is excluded. 

## Experimental Setup 

The evaluated unit in all experiments is a frozen model-harness bundle : which defines a model and the agent harness that runs it. The twelve models are GPT-5.6 Sol, GPT-5.6 Terra, and GPT-5.6 Luna (OpenAI); Claude Sonnet 5, Claude Opus 4.8, Claude Fable 5, and Claude Opus 5 (Anthropic); Kimi K3, GLM-5.2, Qwen3.7 Max, and MiniMax M3; and Grok 4.5 (xAI). In the primary comparison, Anthropic mod-els use Claude Code, OpenAI models use Codex, Grok 4.5 uses Grok Build, and the remaining models use Terminus-2. All bundles use high effort and are evaluated on all 89 tasks under every policy configuration, with exactly three valid trials per bundle-task-policy cell. Claude Fable 5 ships with dual-use safety classifiers, and Anthropic’s default serves flagged requests with Claude Opus 4.8 instead; we keep this default, since the gated route is what an organization deploys. 

Trial protocol. A trial runs the bundle headlessly until the harness returns or the task’s timeout is reached; either way the official verifier scores the resulting environment, so a timed-out execution can still pass, and its PASS or FAIL is the trial score. Harness-internal retries are part of the trial. Provisioning, pre-flight, provider, harness, or verifier malfunctions invalidate an attempt, which we log, exclude, and rerun until the cell holds three valid trials; a scored trial is never rerun. 

Task-level cost sampling. To characterize per-run cost dis-tributions, we picked two tasks and evaluated them with the GPT-5.6 Luna–Codex bundle at 100 runs per condition un-der control and NIST-derived high : compile-compcert ,whose success rate hardening leaves nearly unchanged, and 

caffe-cifar-10 , whose success rate degrades sharply. We read all 200 hardened-condition trajectories to attribute the observed cost movement to a mechanism. 

Model-harness ablation study. To test whether the two cost extremes of the Pareto frontier follow the model or its harness, we evaluate GPT-5.6 Luna, which anchors the low-cost side, and Grok 4.5, which anchors the high-cost side, with both Codex and Grok Build. This experiment disentan-gles the effect of the harness from the model’s performance in the restricted environment. 

Infrastructure. Each trial runs in an isolated cloud sand-box (Daytona) built from the task’s own Terminal-Bench image; the sandbox’s CPU and memory follow that task’s Terminal-Bench specification, which we do not override. Model inference is served over a single OpenRouter route with per-harness vendor endpoints. Software versions are all in Appendix E. 

Robustness Measure 

To measure a bundle’s robustness under restriction, we sum-marize each bundle–policy cell by two numbers, computed per bundle over the task pool: the success rate SR m(ℓ), the percentage of passing trials over all tasks and repetitions of bundle m under condition ℓ, and the mean cost per task 

Cm(ℓ), in US dollars. A bundle’s shift under a restricted condition is the change from its own control values. 

∆SR m(ℓ) = SR m(ℓ) − SR m(control) ,

∆Cm(ℓ) = 100 · Cm(ℓ) − Cm(control) 

Cm(control) , (1) For the restricted conditions ℓ ∈ {non-root ,

NIST-derived high }, ∆SR m(ℓ) is an absolute difference in percentage points; ∆Cm(ℓ) is normalized by the bundle’s own control cost, making it comparable across bundles whose absolute costs differ by orders of magnitude. At task level we use the cost multiplier: a bundle–task pair’s mean cost over completed (PASS or FAIL) runs under a policy divided by its mean control cost, averaged with equal weight across pairs. 30 100 300 30 50 70 90 

> Policy
> Control Non-root NIST-derived high
> Model
> GPT-5.6 Sol GPT-5.6 Terra GPT-5.6 Luna Claude Sonnet 5 Claude Opus 4.8 Claude Fable 5 Claude Opus 5 Kimi K3 GLM-5.2 Qwen3.7 Max MiniMax M3 Grok 4.5
> Cost (USD) Success rate (%)

Figure 1: Hardening moves the Pareto frontier down and to the right (lower success, higher cost), by amounts that differ across model–harness bundles. Each point is one of the 12 bundles under one policy on Terminal-Bench 2.1, three trials per task: marker shape encodes the policy, color the model. Axes: success rate (%) against total cost (USD, logarithmic scale). Dashed lines trace each policy’s Pareto frontier. 

## Results 

The Success–Cost Frontier under Policy 

Figure 1 places each bundle in the success–cost plane under the three policies. A clear Pareto frontier emerges under every policy, not only under control: the Codex bundles trace it under control, from the cheapest (GPT-5.6 Luna) up to the highest-scoring (GPT-5.6 Sol), and under both hardened policies Grok 4.5 joins its high-cost end; on the 82 tasks with a solvability witness Grok 4.5 instead ties with GPT-5.6 Sol under NIST-derived high and leaves the frontier as the costlier of the two (Appendix F). Tightening the policy pushes this frontier lower and further right, trading success for cost. That movement is far from uniform across bundles: some models forfeit noticeably more task success under policy than others, and some absorb the policy more as inflated cost than as lost success. We take up this per-model heterogeneity, and what drives it, in the analyses that follow. 

Model–harness ablation. Grok 4.5 remains the higher-cost model under both harnesses and all three policies (Ta-ble 1), whereas moving either endpoint model to the other harness lowers success at every policy. The Luna–Grok Build bundle moves down and left because its lower spend accom-panies a much larger success loss, not because it offers a more useful operating point. 

Restriction Sensitivity 

Figure 2 plots the shifts of Eq. (1), normalized by each bun-dle’s control operating point in Figure 1. Each task con-                                   

> Codex Grok Build Policy Model SR (%) C($) SR (%) C($) Control Luna 71.9 13.28 34.5 12.85 Grok 4.5 76.8 61.69 82.0 46.20 Non-root Luna 56.6 14.25 27.3 9.04 Grok 4.5 65.5 98.83 73.0 81.59 NIST-derived Luna 53.9 15.41 25.5 10.26 high Grok 4.5 62.9 122.32 74.9 123.49

Table 1: Grok 4.5 remains the higher-cost model under either harness at every policy, while both crossed pairings reduce success. Success rate ( SR ) and mean 89-task replicate cost (C) for the 2 × 2 model–harness ablation, with three valid trials per task (267 trials per policy); trials on blocked-by-design tasks count as non-passing. tributes its three valid trials, scored by the original verifiers, so these numbers predate the verifier repairs and the artifact separation of the next subsection applies on top of them. Under NIST-derived high , every bundle’s point estimate worsens on both axes: hardening lowers the success rate and raises the mean cost per task for all twelve bundles, so ev-ery point in Figure 2 falls in the same quadrant. Within that quadrant the two axes do not move together, and bundles pay in different currencies. Grok 4.5 gives up the least suc-cess ( −7.1 pp) but absorbs the largest cost inflation by a 0% 50% 100% 150% −18 −16 −14 −12 −10 −8 −6 −4 −2 0

> Policy
> NIST-derived high
> Model
> GPT-5.6 Sol GPT-5.6 Terra GPT-5.6 Luna Claude Sonnet 5 Claude Opus 4.8 Claude Fable 5 Claude Opus 5 Kimi K3 GLM-5.2 Qwen3.7 Max MiniMax M3 Grok 4.5
> Δ Cost vs control (%) Δ Success rate (pp)

Figure 2: Every bundle loses success and gains cost non-uniformly under NIST-derived high. The smallest success loss (Grok 4.5) is bought with the largest cost inflation. Each point is one bundle’s shift from its own control values on the 89-task pool, three trials per task (Eq. (1)): the horizontal axis is the change in mean cost per task, ∆Cm, in percent of the bundle’s control cost; the vertical axis the success-rate change, ∆SR m, in percentage points; color encodes the model. The dotted line traces a robustness Pareto frontier: the bundles offering the best trade-off between success loss and cost inflation under restriction. wide margin ( +167 .3% ); Claude Sonnet 5 loses the most success ( −18 .3 pp) at a comparatively modest cost inflation (+21 .4% ); GPT-5.6 Luna is the mirror of Grok 4.5, show-ing the smallest cost inflation ( +16 .0% ) with a success loss nearly as large (−18 .0 pp). With three trials per cell and no intervals we report this as a spread across bundles, not as a ranking. All five verifier-repaired tasks lie inside this pool, and their repairs raise success under NIST-derived high on two of them, so the losses reported here are slightly overstated (next subsection). 

Benchmark Artifacts under Policy 

Because a sufficiently strict policy can render a task not merely harder but unsolvable, we begin by establishing, for every Terminal-Bench task, whether it remains solvable un-der NIST-derived high enforcement. Most tasks remain solv-able: 82 of the 89 have a solvability witness, a trajectory that reaches the official passing state under the policy. For 50 the witness is Terminal-Bench’s own reference solution, unchanged; for the other 32 we author a policy-compliant ref-erence solution ourselves, changing no task (Appendix B). We call these the unaffected (50) and affected (32) subsets.                        

> Task Orig. Adapted ∆(pp) Control sqlite-with-gcov 0.0% 80.6% +80.6 97.2% adaptive-rejection-sampler 0.0% 19.4% +19.4 61.1% configure-git-webserver 19.4% 19.4% 0.0 58.3% mcmc-sampling-stan 0.0% 0.0% 0.0 88.9% make-doom-for-mips 0.0% 0.0% 0.0 0.0%

Table 2: The original verifiers failed to credit valid solutions on two of the five tasks. Success rate under NIST-derived high scored by the original (Orig.) and by the adapted veri-fier, and in control with the original verifier. Each cell is 36 trials: twelve model–harness bundles, three trials each. ∆ is Adapted minus Orig. in percentage points; the gap between Adapted and Control is the residual policy effect. Seven tasks are blocked by design : no policy-compliant so-lution exists. This is itself a finding that reinforces our central claim, their requirements are incompatible with a hardened environment, and we keep all 89 tasks in the reported results, analyzing the slices separately. Wherever a verifier indicated failure although the agent had achieved the stated goal, the root cause was an over-specified verifier: an assertion demanding an incidental detail that the policy blocks but the task never required, for exam-ple one exact installation path for a tool that only needs to be available, a failure mode documented in code-generation benchmarks (Sharifloo et al. 2025). For each of the five such verifiers we additively broaden the assertion to also accept the agent’s writable workspace, leaving every substantive check intact; the identical verifier runs at every policy level, including control, with original outcomes kept for audit. The headline results (Figure 1) include both artifact classes. Rescoring under NIST-derived high increases the success rate on two of the five repaired tasks (Table 2), both recoveries with the same shape: the agent had built the re-quired tool in its writable workspace, where the original check never looked. The other three are unchanged under either verifier, con-firming the repairs correct the checks rather than inflate scores: one is unsolved even in control, and two fail for gen-uine hardening reasons; on mcmc-sampling-stan every bundle installed the sampler and computed correct posterior means, yet none made the installation visible to a second process, so checks that open a fresh session fail in every trial (Appendix B). Under hardening the seven blocked-by-design tasks are guaranteed failures for every bundle alike: restricting to the 82 witnessed tasks raises each bundle’s hardened success by 3.4 to 5.8 points while leaving control essentially unchanged, removing a roughly common five to seven points from every measured penalty. What remains discriminates: the control-to-hardened drop runs from 2.4 points (Grok 4.5) to 13.5 (Claude Sonnet 5) on the reduced pool, against 7.1 to 18.3 on the full pool; Appendix F reports both pools in full, every bundle’s success rate and cost under each policy. 

Provider-side safety interventions. Anthropic and Ope-nAI operate safety classifiers inside their serving layers that Outcome (% of runs) Control Non-root NIST-derived high Success 72.5 66.9 65.1 Timeout 12.0 14.5 16.4 Wrong solution 12.8 15.5 15.5 Early stop 2.4 2.6 2.7 

Table 3: Hardening converts successes into timeouts and wrong solutions, not into early stops. Run outcomes per pol-icy condition on the 82 solvable-witness tasks (12 bundles, three trials per task, 2,952 runs per condition). A failed run counts as a timeout when its agent runtime reaches 95% of the task’s wall-clock budget, as an early stop when it ends in the bottom decile of that task’s runtimes, and as a wrong solution otherwise; a residual 0.4% of runs per condition (provider- and verifier-side errors) is excluded. can end a trial before the verifier runs; they respond to re-quest content, and any organization calling the same route encounters them. Across the campaign they affected five of the twelve bundles and 98 trials. We retain every affected trial in the reported aggregates, consistent with measuring the bundle as deployed. Only the OpenAI route retries a dropped stream; every Anthropic refusal ends its trial. Claude Fable 5’s declared Opus 4.8 fallback (Experimental Setup) served 29.9% of its requests, so its results describe the gated route rather than Fable 5 alone. Intervention-caused failures cost any bundle at most 2.2 percentage points of measured success, and incidence does not rise with policy severity; Ap-pendix D documents each mechanism, message, and count. 

Mechanisms of Degradation 

On the 82 tasks that admit a solvability witness, hardening still costs 7.4 points of success (72.5% to 65.1%, Table 3). Classifying each failed run by where it terminates relative to its task’s wall-clock budget shows the additional failures are of two kinds: runs that exhaust the budget (timeouts, 12.0% to 16.4% of runs) and runs that end well within it with a solution that fails verification (wrong solutions, 12.8% to 15.5%). Agents do not give up more often under policy: early stops barely move (2.4% to 2.7%). Of the failures hardening adds, roughly 59% are timeouts and 37% wrong solutions. The same pressure is visible in the runs that succeed: matching passing runs within the same bundle and task, a hardened pass takes 13% more wall-clock time, 14% more tool calls, and 26% more tokens than its control counterpart. Under NIST-derived high the timeout class grows fast enough to overtake wrong solutions as the most common failure. The mix is bundle-dependent: the open-weight bundles evaluated on Terminus-2 account for most of the additional timeouts, while the Codex bundles add almost exclusively wrong so-lutions within budget. 

Cost Inflation under Policy 

Hardening’s second currency is cost. Figure 3 shows how the 

NIST-derived high policy shifts the cost distributions of the two deep-sampled tasks. The median cost increase is com-parable in both cases, decoupling the cost of policy from its 0.1 0.2 0.5 100.5 10.05 0.1 0.2 0.5 100.5 1Control NIST derived High 

> Log(cost, USD) Log(cost, USD) Cum. proportion Cum. proportion
> a) compile-compcert b) caffe-cifar-10

Figure 3: Policy enforcement raises cost even where suc-cess holds: median per-run cost roughly triples under NIST-derived high on both tasks. Empirical cumulative distribu-tions of per-run cost (USD, logarithmic scale) for Codex (GPT-5.6 Luna) on two selected Terminal-Bench tasks, 100 runs per condition. Success holds on compile-compcert 

(a, 84%) and degrades on caffe-cifar-10 (b, 90% to 29%); the median per-run cost rises 2.9× (a) and 3.0× (b). The median cost of failing runs is close to that of passing runs ( 0.96 × (a), 1.11 × (b)), suggesting policy-induced fail-ures consume roughly the full inflated budget. effect on success. Passing and failing runs pay the shift alike. The mechanism is almost exclusively workaround construc-tion (97%): the agent abandons the blocked path and rebuilds a tool-chain from source or sources substitute data, and this reconstruction produces the added cost; the few low-cost ex-tremes are runs that stop early once blocked. Figure 4 stratifies the cost effect by reference-solution compatibility. Adding the seven blocked-by-design tasks to the affected subset gives 39 tasks and yields 

3.03 × [1.81, 5.56] under non-root and 3.48 × [2.37, 5.56]. “Affected” describes reference-solution evidence rather than every agent trajectory: an agent may follow a policy-affected trajectory on a task with an unaffected reference solution, consistent with the small residual inflation in the unaffected subset, or, less often, an unaffected trajectory on an affected-label task. The intervals quantify within-subset uncertainty rather than testing between-subset differences. The same stratification predicts the success penalty. On the affected subset the success rate falls from 70.3% to 54.5% under NIST-derived high (15.8 points), while on the unaf-fected subset it moves from 73.8% to 71.8%, a change indis-1.75x 1.18x 2.59x 1.14x 1x 2x 4x Affected Unaffected Non-root NIST derived High Mean cost multiplier vs Control Figure 4: Policy-induced cost inflation concentrates on tasks whose canonical reference solutions break under policy. Mean cost multipliers relative to control, equal-weighted over the bundle–task pairs of all 12 bundles: the affected subset (32 tasks verified only by a non-canonical reference solution) rises to 1.75 × under non-root and 2.59 × under NIST-derived high, while the unaffected subset (50 tasks whose canonical reference solution passes unchanged) stays near parity ( 1.18 ×, 1.14 ×). Whiskers: 95% intervals from 10,000 hierarchical-bootstrap replicates. tinguishable from noise; 83.5% of the additional failures in Table 3 fall on the 32 affected tasks, and the trajectory length-ening concentrates there as well (36% more wall-clock time and 70% more tokens for matched passing runs, against no measurable change on unaffected tasks). The two subsets have nearly identical control success rates, so the divergence is not a difficulty difference between the groups: it appears only once the policy is enforced. A task’s reference-solution compatibility, computable before any agent runs, therefore anticipates where a policy will cost both money and success. 

Blocked Actions under Policy 

Finally, we measure the restrictions agents actually hit. A blocked action is one denied operation, counted from verified-complete evidence only (Appendix G). By design, control has no blocked actions; under non-root every blocked action is a privilege denial. Under NIST-derived high , a third of trials (675 of 2,051) record at least one. Egress denials lead on every measure (500 trials, against 283 privilege and 158 filesystem), and their 90.5% share of volume is mostly persistence: a trial that hits the egress wall records 10.5 denials on average, against 1.4 for privilege. Blocks concentrate sharply across the 88 tasks with verified evi-dence (the remaining task’s traces are always truncated): 14 record a verified zero, 48 record five or fewer in to-tal, and five carry half the volume ( build-pov-ray ,

break-filter-js-from-html , mteb-retrieve ,

protein-assembly , count-dataset-tokens ). Exposure follows solvability: trials with at least one blocked action rise from 14.4% on the unaffected subset, to 51.6% on the affected subset, to 67.8% on tasks blocked by design, and on affected tasks failing trials record 2.7 times the blocked actions of passing ones. These are diagnostic as-sociations, not causes (Appendix G). 

## Limitations 

Single benchmark. All evidence comes from Terminal-Bench and its 89 tasks. Boundary-Bench attaches to the run-time rather than to task content, but every added benchmark would repeat the solvability audit, the witness authoring, and the inference spend of the full twelve-bundle grid; our find-ings are therefore established for this benchmark only. 

Bundle-level attribution. The evaluated unit is the frozen model–harness bundle, so effects are not attributed to model weights or the harness alone. The ablation of Table 1 covers only the frontier’s two cost extremes, and a harness change alters the prompt, tools, and interface; full-roster attribution remains bundle-level. 

One operating point, three trials. Every primary bun-dle runs at high reasoning effort with three valid trials per bundle–task–policy cell; no other effort setting or trial count is evaluated. Intervals describe run-to-run variability at this configuration; Pareto, sensitivity, and ordering statements are descriptive, and small differences between bundles should not be over-read. 

Policy realism. The three conditions form one severity ladder derived from common enterprise restriction settings and mapped to NIST SP 800-53 families. They are not a certified deployment configuration, and we measure their performance cost, not their effectiveness as security. 

## Conclusion 

Security restrictions are part of the coding agent’s real op-erating environment, yet benchmarks measure agents with-out them. Evaluating twelve model–harness bundles on Terminal-Bench 2.1 under three natively enforced policy lev-els, we draw four conclusions. 

Hardening is non-uniform. Every bundle loses success and gains cost under the strictest policy, NIST-derived high ,but by amounts that differ across bundles: success losses reach 18.3 points and cost inflation 167.3%. 

The trade-off is universal; its currency is not. Some bundles absorb the policy as inflated cost, others as lost suc-cess, and none escapes both. The loss is grinding rather than surrender: longer trajectories ending in timeouts or wrong solutions, almost never in early stops, so budgets must be provisioned under the deployment’s policy. 

The tax is predictable. Given a policy, reference-solution compatibility identifies the affected tasks before any agent runs, for success and cost alike, and the procedure applies to any benchmark that ships reference solutions. 

Benchmarks should carry a policy axis. Hardening de-grades even frontier bundles, restoring discriminative head-room, and model selection is only valid under the deploy-ment’s own policy; reporting performance in a common re-stricted environment should become standard practice. Natural next steps are extending the solvability audit to further benchmarks and building policy-adaptive agents that mitigate the mechanisms quantified here. 

## Acknowledgments 

We thank our colleagues at Accomplish AI for feedback and support throughout this work. The evaluation campaign, including all model inference and cloud-sandbox compute, was funded by Accomplish AI. 

## References 

Andriushchenko, M.; Souly, A.; Dziemian, M.; Duenas, D.; Lin, M.; Wang, J.; Hendrycks, D.; Zou, A.; Kolter, Z.; Fredrikson, M.; Winsor, E.; Wynne, J.; Gal, Y.; and Davies, X. 2024. AgentHarm: A Benchmark for Measuring Harm-fulness of LLM Agents. Version Number: 3. Chen, L.; Zaharia, M.; and Zou, J. 2024. FrugalGPT: How to Use Large Language Models While Reducing Cost and Improving Performance. Transactions on Machine Learning Research . Version Number: 1. Debenedetti, E.; Shumailov, I.; Fan, T.; Hayes, J.; Carlini, N.; Fabian, D.; Kern, C.; Shi, C.; Terzis, A.; and Tramèr, F. 2025. Defeating Prompt Injections by Design. Version Number: 2. Gupta, A. 2026. ReliabilityBench: Evaluating LLM Agent Reliability Under Production-Like Stress Conditions. Ver-sion Number: 1. Jimenez, C. E.; Yang, J.; Wettig, A.; Yao, S.; Pei, K.; Press, O.; and Narasimhan, K. 2023. SWE-bench: Can Language Models Resolve Real-World GitHub Issues? Version Num-ber: 3. Joint Task Force Interagency Working Group. 2020. Security and Privacy Controls for Information Systems and Organiza-tions. Technical report, National Institute of Standards and Technology. Edition: Revision 5. Kapoor, S.; Stroebl, B.; Siegel, Z. S.; Nadgir, N.; and Narayanan, A. 2025. AI Agents That Matter. Transactions on Machine Learning Research . Version Number: 1. Kara, S.; Faisal, F.; and Nath, S. 2025. WAREX: Web Agent Reliability Evaluation on Existing Benchmarks. Version Number: 1. Levy, I.; Wiesel, B.; Marreed, S.; Oved, A.; Yaeli, A.; Mashkif, N.; and Shlomov, S. 2026. ST-WebAgentBench: A Benchmark for Evaluating Safety and Trustworthiness in Web Agents. ArXiv:2410.06703 [cs.AI]. Li, H.; Wen, R.; Shi, S.; Zhang, N.; Vorobeychik, Y.; and Xiao, C. 2026. AgentDyn: Are Your Agent Security Defenses Deployable in Real-World Dynamic Environments? Version Number: 3. Liu, J.; Qian, C.; Su, Z.; Zong, Q.; Huang, S.; He, B.; and Fung, Y. R. 2026. CostBench: Evaluating Multi-Turn Cost-Optimal Planning and Adaptation in Dynamic Environments for LLM Tool-Use Agents. Version Number: 3. Ma, X.; Wang, Y.; Yao, Y.; Yuan, T.; Zhang, A.; Zhang, Z.; and Zhao, H. 2024. Caution for the Environment: Multimodal LLM Agents are Susceptible to Environmental Distractions. Version Number: 3. Merrill, M. A.; Shaw, A. G.; Carlini, N.; Li, B.; Raj, H.; Bercovich, I.; Shi, L.; Shin, J. Y.; Walshe, T.; Buchanan, E. K.; Shen, J.; Ye, G.; Lin, H.; Poulos, J.; Wang, M.; Nezhu-rina, M.; Jitsev, J.; Lu, D.; Mastromichalakis, O. M.; Xu, Z.; Chen, Z.; Liu, Y.; Zhang, R.; Chen, L. L.; Kashyap, A.; Uslu, J.-L.; Li, J.; Wu, J.; Yan, M.; Bian, S.; Sharma, V.; Sun, K.; Dillmann, S.; Anand, A.; Lanpouthakoun, A.; Koopah, B.; Hu, C.; Guha, E.; Dreiman, G. H. S.; Zhu, J.; Krauth, K.; Zhong, L.; Muennighoff, N.; Amanfu, R.; Tan, S.; Pimpal-gaonkar, S.; Aggarwal, T.; Lin, X.; Lan, X.; Zhao, X.; Liang, Y.; Wang, Y.; Wang, Z.; Zhou, C.; Heineman, D.; Liu, H.; Trivedi, H.; Yang, J.; Lin, J.; Shetty, M.; Yang, M.; Omi, N.; Raoof, N.; Li, S.; Zhuo, T. Y.; Lin, W.; Dai, Y.; Wang, Y.; Chai, W.; Zhou, S.; Wahdany, D.; She, Z.; Hu, J.; Dong, Z.; Zhu, Y.; Cui, S.; Saiyed, A.; Kolbeinsson, A.; Hu, J.; Ryt-ting, C. M.; Marten, R.; Wang, Y.; Dimakis, A.; Konwinski, A.; and Schmidt, L. 2026. Terminal-Bench: Benchmarking Agents on Hard, Realistic Tasks in Command Line Interfaces. ArXiv:2601.11868 [cs.SE]. Ong, I.; Almahairi, A.; Wu, V.; Chiang, W.-L.; Wu, T.; Gon-zalez, J. E.; Kadous, M. W.; and Stoica, I. 2024. RouteLLM: Learning to Route LLMs with Preference Data. Version Number: 4. Ruan, Y.; Dong, H.; Wang, A.; Pitis, S.; Zhou, Y.; Ba, J.; Dubois, Y.; Maddison, C. J.; and Hashimoto, T. 2023. Iden-tifying the Risks of LM Agents with an LM-Emulated Sand-box. Version Number: 2. Sah, T.; Srivastava, V.; Sah, D.; and Jordan, K. 2026. The Verifier Tax: Horizon Dependent Safety–Success Tradeoffs in Tool Using LLM Agents. In Proceedings of the ACM Conference on AI and Agentic Systems , 785–799. San Jose CA USA: ACM. ISBN 979-8-4007-2415-2. Sharifloo, A. M.; Heydari, M.; Kazerooni, P.; Maninger, D.; and Mezini, M. 2025. Where Do LLMs Still Struggle? An In-Depth Analysis of Code Generation Benchmarks. In 2025 2nd IEEE/ACM International Conference on AI-powered Software (AIware) , 249–253. ArXiv:2511.04355 [cs.SE]. Shi, T.; He, J.; Wang, Z.; Li, H.; Wu, L.; Guo, W.; and Song, D. 2025. Progent: Securing AI Agents with Privilege Control. Version Number: 3. South, T.; Marro, S.; Hardjono, T.; Mahari, R.; Whitney, C. D.; Greenwood, D.; Chan, A.; and Pentland, A. 2025. Authenticated Delegation and Authorized AI Agents. Taori, R.; Dave, A.; Shankar, V.; Carlini, N.; Recht, B.; and Schmidt, L. 2020. Measuring Robustness to Natural Dis-tribution Shifts in Image Classification. Version Number: 2. Wang, B.; Xu, C.; Wang, S.; Gan, Z.; Cheng, Y.; Gao, J.; Awadallah, A. H.; and Li, B. 2021. Adversarial GLUE: A Multi-Task Benchmark for Robustness Evaluation of Lan-guage Models. Version Number: 2. Xie, T.; Zhang, D.; Chen, J.; Li, X.; Zhao, S.; Cao, R.; Hua, T. J.; Cheng, Z.; Shin, D.; Lei, F.; Liu, Y.; Xu, Y.; Zhou, S.; Savarese, S.; Xiong, C.; Zhong, V.; and Yu, T. 2024. OS-World: Benchmarking Multimodal Agents for Open-Ended Tasks in Real Computer Environments. Version Number: 2. Xiong, W.; Wang, K.; Song, Y.; Liu, H.; Zhou, S.; Peng, W.; and Li, S. 2025. More Vulnerable than You Think: On the Stability of Tool-Integrated LLM Agents. ArXiv:2506.21967 [cs.CL]. Yao, S.; Shinn, N.; Razavi, P.; and Narasimhan, K. 2024. $τ $-bench: A Benchmark for Tool-Agent-User Interaction in Real-World Domains. ArXiv:2406.12045 [cs.AI]. Yehudai, A.; Eden, L.; Li, A.; Uziel, G.; Zhao, Y.; Bar-Haim, R.; Cohan, A.; and Shmueli-Scheuer, M. 2026. A Survey on Evaluation of LLM-based Agents. In Findings of the As-sociation for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2026 , 26690– 26714. San Diego, California, United States: Association for Computational Linguistics. Zhou, Q.; Zhang, J.; Wang, H.; Hao, R.; Wang, J.; Han, M.; Yang, Y.; Wu, S.; Pan, F.; Fan, L.; Tu, D.; and Zhang, Z. 2026. FeatureBench: Benchmarking Agentic Coding for Complex Feature Development. Version Number: 1. Zhu, K.; Wang, J.; Zhou, J.; Wang, Z.; Chen, H.; Wang, Y.; Yang, L.; Ye, W.; Zhang, Y.; Gong, N. Z.; and Xie, X. 2023. PromptRobust: Towards Evaluating the Robustness of Large Language Models on Adversarial Prompts. Version Number: 5. Appendix A: Policy Construction Details 

This appendix gives the full construction of the NIST-derived high policy summarized in the Boundary-Bench section of the main paper: its three hardening axes (network, filesystem, and privilege), the native enforcement and NIST controls each adds, and the pre-flight probes that verify them. 

Axis Definitions 

Each axis is enforced by a distinct native mechanism, mapped to the NIST controls it projects onto the runtime. The map-ping records the controls that motivated each mechanism and is not a compliance claim. Table 4 summarizes the three axes at the NIST-derived high posture; the paragraphs that follow give the read-only trees and privilege lockdown, and Table 5 reproduces the exact egress allowlist. 

Network implementation. Under NIST-derived high , all egress is forced through a loopback proxy that default-denies every domain outside its allowlist: a fixed 205-domain devel-oper list adapted from the default allowlist for Claude Code on the web, 2 which includes the model-serving endpoints, plus the running harness’s own vendor endpoint; the full list is reproduced in Table 5. No task-specific domains are added: we extracted each task’s network dependencies from its offi-cial reference solution (36 of the 89 tasks require at least one, spanning 30 distinct domains, of which 9 already fall inside the allowlist), and deliberately did not admit the remain-ing 21, so the allowlist is not fitted to the evaluated tasks. Exactly one task is thereby foreclosed by an egress block-age alone ( count-dataset-tokens ; Appendix B): for every other out-of-list dependency, an equivalent artifact is reachable through an allowlisted host, so a solver can route around the blockage, for example, installing the same R pack-ages from the allowlisted conda-forge channel when CRAN is blocked, or obtaining a toolchain from the allowlisted Ubuntu mirrors rather than Debian’s. The proxy runs with root own-ership while the firewall rule is scoped to the agent’s user, so the proxy cannot be bypassed or disabled from inside the policy; the same rules deny the cloud-metadata endpoint and private address ranges, and resolved addresses are rechecked so an allowed domain cannot resolve into a denied range. A blocked domain returns a bare HTTP 403 ; direct egress that skips the proxy fails with a refused connection. 

Filesystem implementation. The protected operating-system trees are /usr , /bin , /sbin , /lib , /lib64 ,

/etc , /opt , /boot , /srv , /root , /var , and /home ;each is bind-remounted read-only. The working directo-ries (/app , /workspace ), the scratch paths (/tmp ,

/dev/shm ), and the agent’s runtime and cache direc-tories ( ~/.cache , ~/.config , ~/.local , and the running harness’s own directory such as ~/.claude or 

~/.codex ) remain writable; the rest of the home directory and /var/tmp are read-only. Writes outside the writable set fail with EROFS . Reads remain available everywhere; the mechanism restricts tampering rather than confidentiality. 

> 2https://code.claude.com/docs/en/claude-code-on-the-web\#default-allowed-domains

Privilege implementation. Under both non-root and 

NIST-derived high restricted policies, setpriv drops the agent to a dedicated user and group; the user has no sudoers entry, and the root password is locked, so sudo and su es-calation fail. Both policies also install a firewall rule, scoped to the agent’s user and outside the network policy axis, that rejects access to the sandbox provider’s own control-plane ports, closing a platform escalation path. NIST-derived high 

additionally sets no_new_privs so no executed program can gain privilege, empties the Linux capability bounding set, and strips setuid bits from the task image. Mounting filesystems, changing firewall rules, and opening raw sockets then fail with EPERM .

Quality Control 

Enforcement is checked by a pre-flight probe suite, run once per sandbox before the agent starts and outside task-execution time, that exercises every configured blockage: direct probes confirm each restriction denies its target operation, adver-sarial probes attempt bypasses (nested shells, raw-IP and alternate-port egress, child-process inheritance), and enable-ment probes confirm permitted operations still succeed. Be-cause these probes run before the agent starts, a required probe failure can never be classified as an agent failure or scored against the task. Instead, the attempt is discarded as an infrastructure error and replaced by a fresh sandbox. A hardening step that cannot be established likewise fails closed rather than running unhardened. The probes leave no trace; their scratch area is verifiably removed before the agent be-gins. Axis Enforcement Mapped NIST controls Network All egress is forced through a loopback proxy; a firewall rule scoped to the agent’s user rejects any traffic that bypasses it, including from child processes. Cloud-metadata and private-address ranges are always denied. The proxy default-denies every domain outside a fixed 205-domain developer allowlist adapted from the default allowlist for Claude Code on the web, which includes the model-serving endpoints; no task-specific domains are added. A blocked domain returns a bare HTTP 403 ;direct egress fails with a refused connection. SC-7, SC-7(5), SC-7(8) Filesystem Only the workspace, temporary and shared-memory paths ( /tmp , /dev/shm ), and the harness runtime and cache directories remain writable. The home directory, /var/tmp , and the operating-system trees are bind-remounted read-only, so writes fail with EROFS .AC-3, SC-39, AC-4, SC-4, AC-4(4), SC-7(21), CM-5(1) Privilege The agent runs as a dedicated ordinary user. It has no sudoers entry, and the root password is locked, so sudo and su escalation fail. The kernel’s no_new_privs flag is set, the capability bounding set is empty, and setuid bits are removed. Privileged kernel operations fail with EPERM .AC-6, AC-6(2), AC-6(3), AC-6(5), AC-6(10), CM-5(1) 

Table 4: Every restriction is a native operating-system mechanism rather than a policy shim, mapped to the NIST SP 800-53 controls it projects onto the runtime; the agent observes only ordinary system errors ( HTTP 403 , EROFS , EPERM ). 

The three runtime-hardening axes, network ( N ), filesystem ( F ), and privilege ( P ), under the NIST-derived high policy. The model-serving endpoints are the OpenRouter domains ( api.openrouter.ai , openrouter.ai , *.openrouter.ai ); the running harness’s own vendor endpoint (e.g., api.anthropic.com for Claude Code, chatgpt.com for Codex) is admitted at runtime. The harness runtime and cache directories are ~/.cache , ~/.config , ~/.local , and the running harness’s own directory (e.g., ~/.claude , ~/.codex ). Table 5: The fixed 205-domain egress allowlist of NIST-derived high . All egress passes a default-deny proxy admitting only these domains. A bare entry matches its exact host only; a *. -prefixed entry matches strict subdomains at any depth, so 

openrouter.ai and *.openrouter.ai are distinct entries. The running harness’s own vendor endpoint is additionally admitted at runtime, and no task-specific domains are added. 

api.openrouter.ai openrouter.ai *.openrouter.ai api.anthropic.com statsig.anthropic.com docs.claude.com platform.claude.com code.claude.com claude.ai github.com www.github.com api.github.com npm.pkg.github.com raw.githubusercontent.com pkg-npm.githubusercontent.com objects.githubusercontent.com release-assets.githubusercontent.com codeload.github.com avatars.githubusercontent.com camo.githubusercontent.com gist.github.com gitlab.com www.gitlab.com registry.gitlab.com bitbucket.org www.bitbucket.org api.bitbucket.org registry-1.docker.io auth.docker.io index.docker.io hub.docker.com www.docker.com production.cloudflare.docker.com download.docker.com gcr.io *.gcr.io ghcr.io mcr.microsoft.com *.data.mcr.microsoft.com public.ecr.aws cloud.google.com accounts.google.com gcloud.google.com *.googleapis.com storage.googleapis.com compute.googleapis.com container.googleapis.com azure.com portal.azure.com microsoft.com www.microsoft.com *.microsoftonline.com packages.microsoft.com dotnet.microsoft.com dot.net visualstudio.com dev.azure.com *.amazonaws.com *.api.aws oracle.com www.oracle.com java.com www.java.com java.net www.java.net download.oracle.com yum.oracle.com registry.npmjs.org www.npmjs.com www.npmjs.org npmjs.com npmjs.org yarnpkg.com registry.yarnpkg.com pypi.org www.pypi.org files.pythonhosted.org pythonhosted.org test.pypi.org pypi.python.org pypa.io www.pypa.io rubygems.org www.rubygems.org api.rubygems.org index.rubygems.org ruby-lang.org www.ruby-lang.org rubyforge.org www.rubyforge.org rubyonrails.org www.rubyonrails.org rvm.io get.rvm.io crates.io www.crates.io index.crates.io static.crates.io rustup.rs static.rust-lang.org www.rust-lang.org proxy.golang.org sum.golang.org index.golang.org golang.org www.golang.org goproxy.io pkg.go.dev maven.org repo.maven.org central.maven.org repo1.maven.org repo.maven.apache.org jcenter.bintray.com gradle.org www.gradle.org services.gradle.org plugins.gradle.org kotlinlang.org www.kotlinlang.org spring.io repo.spring.io packagist.org www.packagist.org repo.packagist.org nuget.org www.nuget.org api.nuget.org pub.dev api.pub.dev hex.pm www.hex.pm cpan.org www.cpan.org metacpan.org www.metacpan.org api.metacpan.org cocoapods.org www.cocoapods.org cdn.cocoapods.org haskell.org www.haskell.org hackage.haskell.org swift.org www.swift.org archive.ubuntu.com security.ubuntu.com ubuntu.com www.ubuntu.com *.ubuntu.com ppa.launchpad.net launchpad.net www.launchpad.net *.nixos.org dl.k8s.io pkgs.k8s.io k8s.io www.k8s.io releases.hashicorp.com apt.releases.hashicorp.com rpm.releases.hashicorp.com archive.releases.hashicorp.com hashicorp.com www.hashicorp.com repo.anaconda.com conda.anaconda.org anaconda.org www.anaconda.com anaconda.com continuum.io apache.org www.apache.org archive.apache.org downloads.apache.org eclipse.org www.eclipse.org download.eclipse.org nodejs.org www.nodejs.org developer.apple.com developer.android.com pkg.stainless.com binaries.prisma.sh statsig.com www.statsig.com api.statsig.com sentry.io *.sentry.io downloads.sentry-cdn.com http-intake.logs.datadoghq.com browser-intake-us5-datadoghq.com *.datadoghq.com *.datadoghq.eu api.honeycomb.io sourceforge.net *.sourceforge.net packagecloud.io *.packagecloud.io fonts.googleapis.com fonts.gstatic.com json-schema.org www.json-schema.org json.schemastore.org www.schemastore.org *.modelcontextprotocol.io Appendix B: Solvability Witnesses under NIST-derived high 

Before attributing a model’s failure to the model, we re-quire a solvability witness for the task: at least one solution trajectory that reaches the official passing state under the policy. Each task’s official reference solution is the natu-ral first candidate—a compatibility probe . We therefore re-played every task’s shipped reference solution under NIST-derived high (a fixed trusted 205-domain developer egress al-lowlist with no per-task domains, read-only operating-system and home trees, and non-root execution with capabilities dropped), and treated a task as compatible only when some trajectory reached the official passing state. 

Adapting reference solutions to the policy. Many shipped solutions assume the unrestricted control environment: they install packages system-wide with apt-get install ,escalate with sudo , or fetch from hosts outside the allowlist. Under NIST-derived high these steps fail with EROFS ,

EPERM , or a blocked-egress error. For such tasks we au-thored solvability witnesses that reach the same passing state using only operations the policy permits: rootless installation into the writable workspace (a fully pinned ( @EXPLICIT )conda-forge transaction, or a download-and-extract apt sys-root pattern), with all fetches restricted to the trusted al-lowlist. A witness changes neither the task environment nor its verifier—it is one admissible trajectory, which is exactly what the compatibility probe requires. 

Diagnosing residual infeasibility. A residual set of tasks admitted no witness. Examining these one by one, we found two distinct causes that call for opposite responses. The first is a genuine task–policy conflict : the task’s own instruction mandates a resource or location the policy denies. Six tasks pin a write to a read-only tree— build-pmars 

and build-pov-ray instruct the solver to install a binary to /usr/local/bin ; build-cython-ext and kv-store-grpc to install Python packages into the system-wide environment; and nginx-request-logging and 

mailman to place configuration and logs under /etc and 

/var . A seventh, count-dataset-tokens , is fore-closed by the network policy alone: it requires the exact meta-data file of a Hugging Face dataset, reachable only through Hugging Face’s own endpoints ( huggingface.co and its content-delivery hosts), none of which are in the al-lowlist. The download URL is minted only by the blocked 

huggingface.co hop, no allowlisted mirror exists, and the file cannot be re-derived deterministically; admitting the task would require exactly the per-task egress exception the fixed-allowlist policy rejects. Because the requirement is written into the task, no admissible trajectory exists with-out editing the task itself, which we decline to do; these tasks are reported as unsolved under NIST-derived high rather than made to pass. The second cause is verifier over-specification : the in-struction is satisfiable without the denied privilege, but the verifier inspects only the conventional root-owned lo-cation and so marks a legitimate non-root solution as fail-ing. sqlite-with-gcov is the illustrative case. The task                                 

> Task Over-specification →additive repair
> sqlite-with-gcov
> Binary resolved via PATH alone; the prompt-pinned /app/sqlite build was never checked →also accept
> /app/sqlite (PATH check retained).
> adaptive-rejection-sampler
> Bare-name Rscript , resolvable only from a root-writable PATH directory
> →PATH , else the agent’s /app Rbuild.
> make-doom-for-mips node /app/vm.js run with an unset working directory, so the binary load depended on the verifier’s cwd →
> pin cwd=/app .
> mcmc-sampling-stan
> Bare-name R/Rscript resolved to the image’s baked, RStan-less
> /usr/bin/R →prefer the agent’s
> /app R wrapper, else PATH .
> configure-git-webserver
> Bare-name git /ssh /ssh-keygen ,requiring a system-wide root install →
> resolve PATH -first with /app
> fallback; git’s SSH transport routed through the resolved ssh .

Table 6: Each repair only generalizes a hard-coded root-owned resolution mechanism (a PATH entry or working directory); every substantive assertion is untouched, and the identical repaired verifier runs at every policy condi-tion, including control. The five over-specified verifiers and their additive repairs, for tools the task statements only re-quired to function. Original-verifier outcomes are preserved for audit, and full task-statement quotes with per-assertion details accompany the released verifier diffs. asks the solver to build SQLite and make it available on the 

PATH ; a non-root agent does exactly that by building under the writable workspace and exposing the binary on its own 

PATH , yet the verifier resolves sqlite3 only through the root user’s PATH and reports failure. Since the requested work was genuinely performed, this is a deficiency of the check, not of the solution. 

Additive verifier corrections. For the over-specified cases our operating rule is deliberately asymmetric: we never alter a task’s instruction, but we may correct a verifier that fails to recognize a valid solution, provided the correction only adds an admissible location and preserves every substantive check. The corrected verifier resolves the required artifact at the conventional location or the agent-writable workspace, and is applied uniformly across all policy levels so that no arm gains an advantage. We produced such additive verifiers for five tasks: sqlite-with-gcov , adaptive-rejection-sampler ,

make-doom-for-mips , mcmc-sampling-stan ,and configure-git-webserver .Outcome. After this analysis, 82 of the 89 tasks are estab-lished to admit a solvability witness under NIST-derived high :for 50 it is the unmodified reference solution, and for 32 an authored policy-compatible one (Table 7), five of which reach the passing state only once the over-specified verifier is cor-rected as above. The remaining seven are the six task–policy conflicts and count-dataset-tokens , whose scoring artifact is documented in Appendix C. The distinction mat-ters for interpreting the headline numbers: a task counted as unsolved under NIST-derived high is one the policy gen-uinely forecloses by the task’s own terms, not one an adequate verifier would have credited. 

Why solvable tasks still fail under policy 

Five tasks needed an adapted verifier to admit a policy-compliant solution. Their outcomes under NIST-derived high 

(Table 2 of the main paper) differ sharply, and the reasons are instructive. 

What the policy removed. Hardening does not add fric-tion to a fixed plan; it removes an assumption the task was built on, and each axis removes a different one. On 

sqlite-with-gcov it removes a destination : the agent compiles SQLite without difficulty, but the conventional in-stall path is read-only. On mcmc-sampling-stan it re-moves supply : every R package channel the agents reach lies outside the allowlist, and in 31 of the 36 trials the request to CRAN’s primary mirrors returns HTTP 403 , after which agents work down through further mirrors until they find that an allowlisted operating-system repository happens to carry the package. On configure-git-webserver it re-moves the architecture the task presumes: the provided refer-ence trajectory installs system packages, creates a UNIX ac-count, and runs a privileged-port SSH daemon as root, none of which survive hardening. Our witness reaches the passing state only by rebuilding that stack inside the workspace, in-cluding an SSH service that authenticates the expected login without any corresponding system account. 

What a repair can recover. A repair recovers only what the agent left somewhere predictable. On sqlite-with-gcov the task statement itself names the build location, so the agent and the verifier look in the same place and the repair recovers most of the score (80.6% under the adapted verifier against 97.2% in control). Where no location is prescribed, agents improvise separately and the repair finds little. mcmc-sampling-stan is the clearest case: the verifier’s own checks on the estimated posterior means pass in all but two trials, so the statistical work was done, while both checks that open a fresh R session fail in every trial, because each agent pointed its own script at its own package directory instead of making the installation discoverable to another process. Our witness passes by writing a small wrapper that sets the library path for any caller. Under hardening these agents completed the requested work but left the result private to themselves. 

What is not a policy effect. On configure-git-webserver the adapted verifier recovers none of the fail-ing trials, which is itself evidence that they are not discovery failures. make-doom-for-mips is unsolved in control as well, so its zero under policy carries no information about hardening. Table 7: The 32 solvability witnesses. Each is a study-authored, policy-compliant reference solution that reaches the official passing state under NIST-derived high where the shipped one fails. Axis: which policy axes foreclose the official reference (N network, F filesystem, P privilege); combined entries list every foreclosing axis, and the separators carry no meaning beyond conjunction. None of the witnesses signals artifact locations to the verifier; discovery of the non-root agent’s /app artifacts is handled by the additive adapted verifiers, applied uniformly across every policy condition. 

Task Axis Official reference failure Solvability witness 

adaptive-rejection-sampler F/P apt installs R system-wide (root). Rootless apt-sysroot 

r-base-core +openssl into 

/app/R/root ; relocate R under /app 

(binary-patch Rscript ’s embedded 

R_HOME + LD wrapper); openssl -decrypt the protected ars.R with the oracle password; inject the required input-validation, log-concavity check, and 

test() /sample outputs. Adapted verifier resolves /app/R/bin/Rscript .sqlite-with-gcov F/P apt build tools; installs 

/usr/local/bin/sqlite3 

(root). Rootless apt-sysroot ( apt-get -download-only build-essential jimsh tclsh ; dpkg-deb -x into 

/app/.rootless ); build SQLite+gcov from the pre-vendored source tarball into 

/app/sqlite . Adapted verifier resolves 

/app/sqlite/sqlite3 .bn-fit-modify N+F/P R-installs bnlearn 4.9 from CRAN (off-list), root. Fetch identical bnlearn 4.9 source from the GitHub CRAN mirror; compile into a user R library in /app (zero non-base deps). caffe-cifar-10 N+F/P Native deps + global links + CIFAR-10 from a non-trusted host. Rootless private-sysroot Caffe build; SHA-pinned canonical CIFAR-10 .bin 

batches from 

raw.githubusercontent.com .Verifier already /app -native. chess-best-move F/P apt stockfish + pip -break-system-packages 

into /usr .

pip -target=/app/pylib 

numpy+python-chess; drop stockfish, use 

is_checkmate() mate-in-one scan; CV image →FEN kept verbatim. cobol-modernization N apt gnucobol3 from Debian mirror (off-list). Skip apt (gnucobol baked, never used by verifier); emit pure-stdlib port with byte-identical fixed-width output. Zero egress. compile-compcert N+F/P opam /coq-released repos (off-list) + OCaml from source, root. Rootless apt-sysroot OCaml toolchain from noble universe; build pinned Coq 8.16.1 + CompCert 3.13.1 from GitHub, all in /app .configure-git-webserver F/P apt git/nginx/sshd, adduser ,system sshd on :22 (root). conda-forge git+openssh+paramiko into 

/app ; custom paramiko SSH server binds 

:22 non-root, pubkey-auths “user” with no UNIX account; bare repo + post-receive + HTTP :8080 in /app . Adapted verifier resolves the /app tools. crack-7z-hash F/P apt 7zip + perl-lzma (root). Rootless apt-sysroot: apt-get download 

+ dpkg -x into /app/sysroot ; genuine crack with baked John the Ripper (numeric mask). Task Axis Official reference failure Solvability witness 

custom-memory-heap-crash F/P Uses gdb + writes /proc/sys/ .../core_pattern (absent / RO). Edit only /app/user.cpp : force iostream facet-node registration in user_init() 

before the custom heap installs; drop gdb steps. Zero egress. dna-assembly F/P apt emboss+primer3 (root). Skip apt (tools only print diagnostics); build primers by pure-coreutils slicing at the canonical offsets. Verifier runs its own primer3. dna-insert F/P apt emboss+primer3 (root). Same skip-apt coreutils-slicing route as dna-assembly. financial-document-processor F/P apt tesseract + uv run (root; cache under /root ). 

Genuine rootless OCR: conda-forge tesseract 5.3.0 + byte-identical tessdata; pip 

pymupdf/pytesseract into /app ; canonical classifier/parser verbatim, only the tesseract pointer changed. (Supersedes an earlier witness that did not perform the OCR.) fix-git F/P git merge needs committer identity set in 

/root/.gitconfig .Point HOME=/app/home , register identity + safe.directory ; reproduce the canonical reflog recovery + merge -X theirs . git baked, zero egress. gcode-to-text N apt tesseract/opencv from Debian mirror (off-list). conda-forge tesseract + tessdata from GitHub + opencv-python-headless from PyPI; OCR pipeline byte-for-byte, write only 

/app .git-multibranch F/P useradd /chpasswd 

(/etc/shadow ) + system sshd 

:22 (root). paramiko SSH server :22 non-root, password-auths git/password with no UNIX user; bare repo + hook + stdlib HTTPS 

:8443 in /app . Only egress: pip paramiko wheel. hf-model-inference N from_pretrained streams weights from HF hub/Xet CDN (off-list). Byte-identical config/vocab/ pytorch_model.bin from HF legacy S3 ( *.amazonaws.com ), size+sha256 pinned, load offline. install-windows-3.11 N+F/P Compiles QEMU 5.2 from an off-list host + services (root). Rootless apt-sysroot QEMU 5.2.0 from Ubuntu hirsute old-releases ; baked 

win311.img read-only; start rootless nginx:80 + websockify:8080. largest-eigenval F/P pip install eigenpy to system site-packages (root verifier imports it). 

pip -target=/app/pylib 3 pinned wheels ( -no-deps , keep system numpy); 

/app/eigen.py self-bootstraps 

sys.path via site.addsitedir in the verifier process. log-summary-date-ranges N apt grep/coreutils from Debian mirror (off-list, redundant). Skip apt ; pure stdlib over baked 

/app/logs . Zero egress. make-doom-for-mips N+F/P apt MIPS cross toolchain from Debian mirror (off-list). Self-contained LLVM 14.0.6 from conda-forge via static micromamba; freestanding build in /app . Adapted verifier runs vm.js with cwd=/app .Task Axis Official reference failure Solvability witness 

mcmc-sampling-stan N+F/P Installs rstan from CRAN (off-list), root. Rootless apt-sysroot r-cran-rstan 2.32.5 + Stan closure from noble universe; point system R at the /app site-library. Adapted verifier resolves the /app R wrapper first. merge-diff-arc-agi-task F/P apt git (root; git not baked). Rootless apt-sysroot git + closure into 

/app/sysroot ; reproduce repo/branch/merge end-state; algo.py 

pure-stdlib. mteb-retrieve N mteb.get_model pulls BGE weights from HF hub/Xet (off-list). Byte-identical BGE-small-zh-v1.5 weights as non-LFS git blobs from GitHub mirrors into the HF cache; HF_HUB_OFFLINE ;unchanged retrieve.py .overfull-hbox F/P apt python3-pip for the solver (no python3 in image; root). Skip apt ; pdflatex+perl already baked; do the six reference synonym swaps in perl; replay verifier compile. Zero egress. protein-assembly N Queries RCSB REST + FPbase (off-list). PDB mmCIF from the S3 archive snapshot (*.amazonaws.com ); donor/acceptor by S3 title substring; SNAP/FLAG hardcoded as the canonical does; pip from PyPI. pypi-server N+F/P apt update (off-list) + apache2-utils/twine auth (root). Skip apt /auth (pypiserver serves anonymously); two pure-python wheels from PyPI, sha256-gated; serve the built wheel over loopback from /app .pytorch-model-cli N+F/P PyTorch CPU wheel index + Debian compiler (both off-list). 

weights.json via pure-stdlib zip/struct extraction (byte-identical to torch); compile the reference C with zig cc from the ziglang PyPI wheel (bundled libc). qemu-alpine-ssh F/P Root-owned qcow2 opened rw + 

apk add openssh via off-list CDN. Fresh qcow2 in /app , ISO read-only via 

-cdrom ; openssh installed offline from the alpine-extended on-media apk repo; serial-console driven; hostfwd :2222 ;daemonized so the VM survives to the probe. rstan-to-pystan N+F/P sudo + deadsnakes PPA (off-list) for Py3.10 + httpstan from source. Use baked Python 3.12; prebuilt httpstan 

cp312 wheel from PyPI (no source build); rootless apt-sysroot for the C++ toolchain used at model-compile time. sam-cell-seg N+F/P apt libgl1 + torch/torchvision 

+cpu wheels (off-list, root). Deliverable is one file 

/app/convert_masks.py ; verifier supplies torch/mobile_sam in its own unrestricted environment; author the canonical script offline, zero solve-time egress. train-fasttext N+F/P C++ toolchain + clone fastText + 

make (off-list, root). Prebuilt fasttext-wheel from PyPI (no compile); materialize a python-build-standalone 3.12 via uv (0.9.2 ships cp312 only); train inside it. Verifier reads /app/model.bin .Appendix C: A Benchmark-Integrity Artifact 

We flag a task as a benchmark-integrity artifact when the official scoring path does not establish that the requested work was performed. Such findings are distinct from ordinary task failures and from tasks that become unsolved under a policy. A flagged task remains in every reported aggregate, consistent with the main paper’s 89-task reporting; the flag is recorded across all model–harness bundles (a model paired with the agent harness that runs it) and policy levels, and the affected raw trials are preserved for audit. 

count-dataset-tokens . This task requires retriev-ing a Hugging Face dataset and computing its token count. In an affected NIST-derived high trial, the dataset request re-turned HTTP 403 , and the trajectory contained no success-ful retrieval or tokenization. The model nevertheless submit-ted the exact expected constant, 79586 . The official verifier awarded success because it checked only whether that string occurred in the answer file. Producing the exact constant without the required computation is consistent with bench-mark contamination or memorization, although the trajectory cannot establish how the model obtained it. The confirmed measurement defect is narrower: the verifier awarded suc-cess without evidence that the requested work occurred. The pattern is not a single trial: 13 trials of this task pass by sub-mitting the expected constant (Appendix G). We therefore flag count-dataset-tokens as a benchmark-integrity artifact, keep its trials in every reported aggregate, and pre-serve them as audit evidence; separately, the task is excluded from the 82-task witness pool on solvability grounds (Ap-pendix B). 

## Appendix D: Provider-Side Safety Interventions 

Two kinds of provider-side safety mechanism, serving-layer refusals and vendor fallback routing, intervened between the harness and the model during our runs. Neither is a benchmark-integrity artifact: the affected trials remain in ev-ery aggregate. We document them because they are prop-erties of the deployed model route rather than of the run-time policy, and because any organization operating the same route would encounter them. Because every intervention is annotated per trial, we also report incidence by policy level, examining whether these mechanisms fire more often un-der hardened levels than under the unrestricted control—as would be expected if policy-induced denial-and-retry be-havior makes a trajectory more likely to be flagged by a serving-layer classifier. 

Serving-layer refusals without security authorization. 

OpenAI’s serving layer screens requests for cybersecurity risk. On security-themed tasks it can terminate the model stream with the message “This content was flagged for pos-sible cybersecurity risk,” directing the caller to enroll in its Trusted Access for Cyber program. 3 Our organization was not enrolled during the measurement window, so our runs traverse the default, unenrolled serving route. When the flag 

> 3https://openai.com/index/trusted-access-for-cyber/

fires, the Codex CLI reconnects and retries the disconnected stream, and the retry frequently succeeds: in 25 of the 43 flagged trials the stream resumed and the trial ran to comple-tion, 23 of which reached a passing state. When the retries are exhausted the CLI abandons the turn, and the affected trial either aborts mid-trajectory, which is the common case (14 of the 18 abandoned trials), or terminates before any tool call. The flagging is stochastic—some attempts of a task are terminated while identical sibling attempts proceed. We do not exclude these trials. Under our deployed-bundle scope, a task the provider declines to serve is a failure of that model– harness bundle at that policy level: it depresses the measured success rate and still incurs the cost of the consumed attempts. We detect each occurrence from the harness event stream (a terminal turn.failed carrying the flag message, with a zero-work or aborted-trajectory signature), annotate the trial, and report the frequency of these refusals alongside the af-fected results, so their contribution to failure counts and cost is visible rather than folded silently into ordinary failures. Any organization without this authorization measures—and operates—the same degraded route; enrolled organizations receive a more permissive serving path for verified security work. 

Vendor fallback routing under dual-use classifiers. 

Claude Fable 5 ships with dual-use safety classifiers, and the vendor’s production behavior when a request is flagged is to serve the response with Claude Opus 4.8 instead. 4 Our harness preserves this behavior by declaring the vendor’s fallback at the request level, so Fable 5 results measure the gated product route an organization actually deploys. The vendor’s own reporting discloses how often the fallback fires per benchmark (20.9% of Terminal-Bench trials in the ac-companying system card), and we adopt the same disclosure practice: the model gateway records the model that actually served every request, and each Fable 5 result is accompa-nied by the share of trials containing at least one fallback-served completion and the per-trial share of fallback-served requests. Numbers for this bundle should therefore be read as the behavior of the gated route, with the fallback share as the explicit label of how often the fallback model partic-ipated. Across the 801 evaluated trials, 27.6% contained at least one fallback-served completion, against the 20.9% of trials the vendor reports for this benchmark, and 29.9% of all requests were served by the fallback model. The distribu-tion is strongly bimodal: 72.4% of trials were served entirely by Claude Fable 5 and 12.9% entirely by Claude Opus 4.8, though a majority of the fallback-touched trials mix both models, so the routing decision often, but not always, per-sists across a conversation. 

Rerouting and refusal are distinct outcomes. The fall-back and the refusals above are not successive stages of one mechanism. The fallback is declared on every request, and it engages when the Claude Fable 5 route declines to serve one: the request is retried against Claude Opus 4.8 and the agent observes nothing unusual. A refusal, by contrast, arrives as an ordinary successful completion whose content is the refusal             

> 4https://www.anthropic.com/news/claude-fable-5-mythos-5 Message (abridged) Bundle Trials Ended
> “flagged for possible cybersecurity risk” (Trusted Access for Cyber) GPT-5.6 Sol 43 18 “safety measures . . . flagged this message for a cybersecurity topic” (Cyber Verification Program) Claude Opus 5 38 38 “appears to violate our Usage Policy” Claude Opus 4.8, Claude Sonnet 5 99“Fable 5’s safeguards flagged this message” Claude Fable 5 77“restrictions on violative cyber content” Claude Opus 5 11

Table 8: Only the OpenAI route retries a refused request; every Anthropic refusal ends the trial where it fires. The five distinct provider-side refusal messages observed, the bundles that received them, the number of trials in which each appeared, and the number of those trials the message ended. The Codex CLI reconnects after a dropped stream, so 25 of the 43 flagged GPT-5.6 Sol trials resumed and com-pleted. Each bundle contributes 801 trials (89 tasks, three trials, three policy conditions). itself, which presents the routing layer with nothing to retry. The protein-assembly trials make the distinction con-crete: the fallback was fully engaged there, with every request already served by Claude Opus 4.8, and the trial still ended in a refusal because Claude Opus 4.8 refused the same content. That task is refused by every Claude model evaluated here, so rerouting between them cannot resolve it. 

Refusals on the Claude Code route. Three further re-fusal messages appear on the Claude Code route, none of which is retried: each ends the trial where it fires. Claude Opus 5 returns a cybersecurity-topic refusal naming An-thropic’s Cyber Verification Program, the structural counter-part of the OpenAI flag above and the single largest source of trial-ending interventions we observe. Claude Opus 4.8 and Claude Sonnet 5 return a general Usage Policy refusal, and Claude Fable 5 returns a safeguard notice naming its own dual-use classifiers, the classifiers whose production fallback behavior the preceding paragraph describes. A fourth word-ing, citing restrictions on violative cyber content, appeared once on Claude Opus 5. Table 8 gives each message with its frequency and how often it ended the trial. The Usage Pol-icy message is itself instructive: it advises API integrators to configure a fallback model to reduce refusals, which is exactly the vendor mechanism documented above for Claude Fable 5. 

Incidence by policy level. These interventions do not be-come more frequent under hardening. The five affected bun-dles recorded 28 flagged trials under control, 41 under non-root, and 29 under NIST-derived high (Table 9). Four of the five are flat across the three conditions; only Claude Opus 5 varies materially, and 12 of its 20 non-root flags fall on tasks                                    

> Bundle Ctrl Non-root HTotal Ended
> GPT-5.6 Sol 14 16 13 43 18 Claude Opus 5 820 11 39 39 Claude Fable 5 22377Claude Sonnet 5 32277Claude Opus 4.8 11022Total 28 41 29 98 73

Table 9: Intervention incidence does not rise with pol-icy severity. Flagged trials per bundle and policy condition, out of 267 trials per cell (89 tasks, three trials each); H is 

NIST-derived high . “Ended” counts the flagged trials the in-tervention terminated. The seven bundles not listed recorded no interventions in any condition. that are blocked by design, where the agent must attempt the privileged operations the policy denies before it can make progress. We therefore do not observe the association the mechanism would predict, and we report none. The counts are small and clustered by bundle and by task, so we describe them rather than test them. 

Task concentration. What the flags track is task content. All 98 fall on 16 of the 89 tasks, and four tasks account for just under half of them: vulnerable-secret (18 trials), protein-assembly (12), break-filter-js-from-html (9), and feal-differential-cryptanalysis (9). vulnerable-secret draws both vendors’ classifiers, in every policy condition and ev-ery replicate; protein-assembly , a protein-design task, draws only Anthropic-side refusals. Of the 73 interventions that ended a trial, 70 were scored as failures: 19 fall on tasks that are blocked by design and 51 on tasks for which a solvability witness exists (Appendix B). Only the 51 could represent lost successes; the 19 that fall on blocked-by-design tasks could not have passed under the policy regardless. Un-der control, where the policy forecloses no task, the cost is small and bounded: 18 of the 1,335 control trials across the five affected bundles (1.3%) ended in an intervention-caused failure, at most 6 of a single bundle’s 267 control trials, so no bundle’s control success rate is depressed by more than 2.2 percentage points. We record that split as an observation, not as grounds for exclusion: neither group is removed from the reported aggregates. 

## Appendix E: Software Versions 

Table 10 lists the software used to produce every result in the paper. All components were frozen before the bench-mark runs and held fixed across models, policies, and repeti-tions; the single exception (the Claude Code version used for Claude Opus 5) is documented at the end of this appendix. The complete transitive dependency closure is pinned in the released artifact: uv.lock for the evaluation controller and a fully hash-pinned requirements.lock for the in-sandbox Terminus-2 runtime (generated with uv pip compile -generate-hashes -universal and an 

-exclude-newer horizon of 2026-07-15). Component Version                               

> Agent harnesses (installed into each sandbox at run start)
> Claude Code (Anthropic models) 2.1.206 a
> Codex CLI (OpenAI models) rust-v0.142.5 Grok Build (xAI models) 0.2.87 Terminus-2 (all other models) 2.0.0 Harbor runtime 0.13.1 in-sandbox Python 3.12.11 in-sandbox uv 0.11.16
> Evaluation controller
> Python 3.12 (digest-pinned python:3.12-slim )Inspect AI ( inspect-ai )0.3.239
> inspect-harbor 0.5.9
> harbor (controller side) 0.13.1
> openai client b2.41.0
> httpx 0.28.1
> pydantic 2.13.4
> PyYAML 6.0.3
> Benchmark
> Terminal-Bench 2.1 (digest-pinned dataset c)
> Sandbox platform
> Daytona SDK ( daytona-sdk )0.187.0
> daytona-api-client 0.187.0
> Cloud orchestration (does not touch trial outcomes)
> google-cloud-bigquery 3.42.1
> google-cloud-firestore 2.27.0
> google-cloud-storage 3.11.0
> gcsfs 2025.9.0 Terraform ≥1.5; hashicorp/google ≥5.40, <7

Table 10: Software versions used for all reported runs. 

> a

Claude Opus 5 only was run on Claude Code 2.1.220 (documented below); all other Claude models used 2.1.206. 

> b

Used only to initialize Inspect’s OpenRouter provider; the harness inside the sandbox, not the controller, performs model calls. cHarbor registry package terminal-bench/ terminal-bench-2-1 , pinned at digest sha256: 7d7bdc1cbedad549fc1140404bd4dc45 e5fd0ea7c4186773687d177ad3a0699a .

Sandbox environments. Each trial provisions a fresh Day-tona cloud sandbox from the task’s own per-task Terminal-Bench 2.1 Docker image, exactly as declared in the task’s 

task.toml (environment.docker_image ); CPU, memory, and storage follow the task’s declared resources without override. Task images are heterogeneous (a mix of glibc- and musl-based distributions), so base-image package versions are fixed by the digest-pinned dataset rather than by a single global pin. A runtime layer is installed into every sandbox at run start: distribution base packages, the harness CLI at the pinned version above (Claude Code via its official installer, Codex and uv as pinned GitHub release binaries, Grok from a pinned artifact bucket, Terminus-2 from the hash-pinned requirements.lock ), and the policy en-forcement stack. 

Policy enforcement stack. Policy hardening uses Linux kernel mechanisms configured from within the sandbox: a uid-scoped nftables reject wall with a forced egress proxy (implemented in-repo in stdlib-only Python), seccomp filters and LD_PRELOAD shims compiled in-sandbox with the task image’s own toolchain and libseccomp so they link against that image’s libc, and Landlock network rules. The enforcement source is part of the frozen repository; the userspace library versions ( libseccomp , nftables ) fol-low each task image’s pinned distribution packages. 

Model serving. All model inference is served over the OpenRouter HTTP API with per-harness vendor endpoints (as described in the experimental setup); OpenRouter is a hosted service and carries no client-side version pin beyond the openai client version listed above. The released exper-iment provenance records the exact provider model identifier for every bundle. 

Claude Code version for Claude Opus 5 

Claude Sonnet 5, Claude Fable 5, and Claude Opus 4.8 were evaluated with Claude Code 2.1.206, the harness ver-sion frozen for the original benchmark runs. Claude Opus 5 was released only after those runs had completed. Re-running every previously evaluated bundle on a newer har-ness solely to accommodate one added model would have been costly and would have perturbed the frozen configura-tion, so we instead admitted Opus 5 as a narrowly scoped exception. Upstream Claude Code did not recognize the 

claude-opus-5 model identifier until v2.1.219, 5 so we evaluated Opus 5 with Claude Code 2.1.220, the immedi-ately following release, which contributed only reliability fixes. Under v2.1.206, Opus 5 requests failed at the client and protocol level before the agent received any usable model response; we treat those observations as harness incompat-ibilities rather than model outcomes and exclude them. No other Claude model was moved off v2.1.206, so the histor-ical harness configuration is otherwise unchanged, and the version exception and the affected runs are recorded in the released experiment provenance. 

Provider model identifiers 

Table 11 lists, for each of the twelve evaluated models, the ex-act provider model identifier used for inference and the agent harness that drove it. Every identifier is the string passed to the OpenRouter HTTP API; it is the same value recorded in the released experiment provenance for every result bun-dle. In the primary comparison, harness assignment is fixed per vendor family: the Anthropic models run under Claude Code, the OpenAI models under Codex, Grok 4.5 under Grok Build, and all open-weight models under Terminus-2. 

## Appendix F: Full Per-Bundle Results under Policy 

Tables 12 and 13 give the per-bundle success rate and cost behind Figure 1 of the main paper, for every model–harness bundle under each policy. Table 12 is the full 89-task pool as plotted; Table 13 restricts to the 82 tasks that admit a 

> 5

https://github.com/anthropics/claude-code/blob/main/feed. xml Model Provider model identifier Harness                         

> OpenAI (Codex)
> GPT-5.6 Sol openai/gpt-5.6-sol Codex GPT-5.6 Terra openai/gpt-5.6-terra Codex GPT-5.6 Luna openai/gpt-5.6-luna Codex
> Anthropic (Claude Code)
> Claude Sonnet 5 anthropic/claude-sonnet-5 Claude Code Claude Opus 4.8 anthropic/claude-opus-4.8 Claude Code Claude Fable 5 anthropic/claude-fable-5 Claude Code Claude Opus 5 anthropic/claude-opus-5 Claude Code
> Open-weight (Terminus-2)
> Kimi K3 moonshotai/kimi-k3 Terminus-2 GLM-5.2 z-ai/glm-5.2 Terminus-2 Qwen3.7 Max qwen/qwen3.7-max Terminus-2 MiniMax M3 minimax/minimax-m3 Terminus-2
> xAI (Grok Build)
> Grok 4.5 x-ai/grok-4.5 Grok Build

Table 11: Provider model identifiers and harness assign-ment. Each identifier is the exact OpenRouter model string used for inference; the harness column names the agent CLI that issued the calls, held fixed across all policies and repe-titions. Harness version pins are in Table 10. solvability witness under NIST-derived high (Appendix B), excluding the seven blocked-by-design tasks. Success rate is the percentage of passing trials with the standard devia-tion across the three repetitions; cost is the mean replicate cost over the pool, in US dollars; cost dispersion across the repetitions is not reported. 

Pareto frontier membership 

Table 14 reports the success–cost Pareto frontier under NIST-derived high on the 82-task witnessed pool, computed from Table 13: a bundle lies on the frontier when no other bundle reaches at least its success rate at no greater cost. Three bundles are non-dominated. GPT-5.6 Sol and Grok 4.5 tie at 

79 .3% success, but Sol attains it at $51.67 to Grok’s $75.64, so Sol dominates Grok, and Grok 4.5 leaves the frontier as the costlier of the two. 

## Appendix G: Blocked-Action Analysis 

This appendix details the blocked-action analysis behind the main paper’s Results: the unit and its evidence, the verified-evidence gate, per-axis and per-task detail, and the associa-tion with outcomes. All numbers are computed over the full evaluated cohort (twelve bundles, 89 tasks, three trials per condition) by a deterministic, outcome-blind re-analysis of each trial’s stored evidence. 

Unit and evidence classes. A blocked action is one de-nied operation. Two evidence classes contribute and remain distinct in the underlying records: enforcement-observed blocks , logged by the enforcement mechanisms themselves (the egress proxy’s denials, firewall counters, and the sudo 

log), and transcript-inferred denials , recognized from char-acteristic error signatures in the transcript ( EROFS , EPERM ,

HTTP 403 , refused connections, DNS failures). Repeated error output from one denied operation is collapsed to a single action, and an inferred denial that merely echoes an enforcement-observed block on the same axis is not counted again. The counter never reads the verifier outcome, so the outcome associations below are not circular. 

Verified-evidence gate. A stored trace is truncated when a transcript exceeds its storage bound. A truncated trace can still show blocked actions, but it cannot establish their ab-sence, so every count uses only trials whose evidence is verified complete: 6,194 of 9,612 trials overall, and under 

NIST-derived high 2,051 of 3,204, covering 88 of the 89 tasks. Truncation is flat across conditions (35–36% of trials at every policy level), so the gate does not tilt cross-condition comparisons; it is uneven across harnesses (the Grok 4.5 bundle retains 213 of 801 trials) and tasks: schemelike-metacircular-eval exceeds the bound in nearly every trial in every condition, including control, and is conser-vatively excluded from the evaluable set; its transcripts are simply long (it passes 26 of its 36 trials under NIST-derived high ). All totals are lower bounds. 

Axes and persistence. Blocked actions land exactly on the axes each condition restricts: control records zero across all 3,204 trials, including those with truncated traces, and all 482 blocked actions under non-root are privilege denials. Under 

NIST-derived high the volume split is 5,250 egress, 392 privi-lege, and 158 filesystem denials (egress is 90.5% of the 5,800 total), but incidence is closer than volume: 500 trials record an egress denial, 283 a privilege denial, 158 a filesystem denial, and privilege denials touch more tasks than egress denials (60 against 55). In total, 675 of the 2,051 verified trials record at least one blocked action; this union is smaller than the per-axis incidence sum (941) because a trial can be denied on more than one axis. The volume gap is persistence. A trial that hits the egress wall records 10.5 denials on aver-age, against 1.4 for privilege and exactly one for filesystem; single trials reach 171 egress denials, and destination-level linking, whose attribution is heuristic, assigns 62% of egress volume to re-attempts against a destination already blocked earlier in the same trial, up to 86 re-attempts on one destina-tion. A re-attempt establishes pressure on a destination, not intent: a deliberate retry is indistinguishable from a client library’s automatic retry (package installers retry their host by default). Consistent with a retryability reading, the denials that present as final ( EROFS , EPERM ) show no re-attempts at all. 

Concentration across tasks. Of the 88 evaluable tasks, 14 record a verified zero and 48, including those 14, record five or fewer blocked actions in total, while the top five carry 52.8% of all volume: build-pov-ray (693), break-filter-js-from-html (685), 

mteb-retrieve (596), protein-assembly (555), and count-dataset-tokens (534); the top twelve carry 80%. Seven tasks record a blocked action in every ver-ified trial: build-pmars , build-pov-ray , count-dataset-tokens , hf-model-inference , make-doom-for-mips , mteb-retrieve , and protein-Control Non-root NIST-derived high Model Success (%) Cost ($) Success (%) Cost ($) Success (%) Cost ($) GPT-5.6 Sol 83 .9±1.9 45 .59 72 .3±3.2 50 .49 74 .2±2.4 58 .88 

GPT-5.6 Terra 79 .0±3.2 24 .60 65 .2±1.8 29 .46 63 .3±1.9 30 .27 

GPT-5.6 Luna 71 .9±1.6 13 .28 56 .6±3.7 14 .25 53 .9±1.8 15 .41 

Claude Sonnet 5 73 .4±2.1 113 .89 60 .3±1.9 135 .58 55 .1±2.8 138 .21 

Claude Opus 4.8 74 .9±1.4 123 .44 62 .9±0.9 147 .31 63 .3±3.7 164 .23 

Claude Fable 5 79 .0±0.5 316 .44 65 .9±4.7 317 .68 67 .8±1.4 375 .30 

Claude Opus 5 77 .5±1.6 215 .26 68 .2±0.5 213 .05 65 .2±2.4 290 .11 

Kimi K3 72 .3±2.3 24 .93 60 .3±1.9 32 .45 54 .7±1.4 36 .62 

GLM-5.2 73 .4±1.9 30 .12 59 .6±2.4 36 .46 55 .8±2.6 39 .40 

Qwen3.7 Max 56 .9±1.9 19 .82 45 .3±2.9 29 .77 40 .4±0.9 26 .63 

MiniMax M3 59 .6±4.8 19 .34 46 .8±1.1 35 .03 44 .2±1.9 26 .26 

Grok 4.5 82 .0±1.6 46 .20 73 .0±0.9 81 .59 74 .9±1.4 123 .49 

Table 12: Per-bundle success rate and cost under each policy on the full 89-task pool (the set plotted in Figure 1 of the main paper). Success rate is the percentage of passing trials, subscript the standard deviation across the three repetitions; cost is the mean 89-task replicate cost in US dollars. 

Control Non-root NIST-derived high Model Success (%) Cost ($) Success (%) Cost ($) Success (%) Cost ($) GPT-5.6 Sol 82 .5±2.1 41 .65 77 .2±3.5 46 .20 79 .3±2.6 51 .67 

GPT-5.6 Terra 77 .2±3.5 22 .74 69 .9±2.1 27 .76 67 .5±2.1 28 .09 

GPT-5.6 Luna 69 .5±1.7 12 .54 61 .0±4.0 13 .52 57 .3±2.0 13 .63 

Claude Sonnet 5 72 .4±1.5 104 .26 64 .2±2.1 127 .16 58 .9±2.5 125 .03 

Claude Opus 4.8 72 .8±1.5 116 .35 67 .1±1.0 133 .85 68 .7±4.0 141 .28 

Claude Fable 5 77 .6±0.6 288 .92 70 .3±5.1 283 .90 73 .6±1.5 320 .40 

Claude Opus 5 76 .8±2.0 196 .84 72 .8±0.6 204 .82 70 .7±2.6 267 .23 

Kimi K3 71 .1±3.0 23 .90 64 .6±2.0 27 .89 58 .9±2.1 28 .63 

GLM-5.2 73 .2±1.0 28 .57 63 .4±2.6 25 .72 60 .2±3.2 30 .83 

Qwen3.7 Max 55 .7±0.6 18 .37 48 .8±3.4 23 .17 43 .9±1.0 23 .01 

MiniMax M3 58 .9±4.1 18 .98 50 .4±1.5 19 .46 48 .0±2.1 19 .87 

Grok 4.5 81 .7±1.7 44 .92 78 .0±1.0 52 .31 79 .3±1.7 75 .64 

Table 13: Per-bundle success rate and cost under each policy on the 82 tasks that admit a solvability witness under NIST-derived high (Appendix B). The seven blocked-by-design tasks ( build-cython-ext , build-pmars , build-pov-ray ,

count-dataset-tokens , mailman , nginx-request-logging , kv-store-grpc ) are excluded. Columns are as in Table 12. 

Bundle Success (%) Cost ($) Frontier status GPT-5.6 Luna 57.3 13.63 on frontier GPT-5.6 Terra 67.5 28.09 on frontier GPT-5.6 Sol 79.3 51.67 on frontier Grok 4.5 79.3 75.64 dominated by Sol 

Table 14: Success–cost Pareto frontier under NIST-derived high (82-task pool). The three non-dominated bundles, plus Grok 4.5, which ties GPT-5.6 Sol on success but at higher cost and so leaves the frontier as the costlier of the two. Success rates are point estimates; the Sol–Grok success tie is within replicate variation (Table 13), and the ordering is decided on cost. Computed from Table 13. 

assembly . Table 15 gives the distribution; totals include re-attempts, which only inflate counts, so membership in the low buckets is conservative. 

Blocked actions per task (total) Tasks Share 0 (verified) 14 15.9% 1–5 34 38.6% 6–15 7 8.0% 16–40 11 12.5% 41–100 10 11.4% 101–250 5 5.7% 251 or more 7 8.0% 

Table 15: Most tasks barely touch the policy; a small head absorbs most of it. Tasks bucketed by total blocked ac-tions under NIST-derived high , summed over all bundles and verified trials. Shares are of the 88 tasks with at least one verified-complete trial. 

Exposure follows solvability. Grouping tasks by their solvability status (Appendix B): on the 49 evaluable tasks whose shipped reference solution survives the policy (the 50 of Appendix B minus schemelike-metacircular-eval ), 14.4% of 1,107 trials record a blocked action (0.95 per trial); on the 32 tasks that required an authored witness, 51.6% of 764 trials (3.81 per trial); on the 7 tasks blocked by design, 67.8% of 180 trials (10.18 per trial). The gradi-ent is robust to the evidence gate: with truncated-trace trials included it reads 15.2%, 54.9%, and 69.8%. 

Association with outcomes. On witness tasks, trials with no blocked action pass 66.2% against 46.7% for trials with at least one, and failing trials record 2.7 times the blocked actions of passing trials (5.88 against 2.20). On reference-compatible tasks the pass gap persists (80.5% against 59.1%) but the volume relation inverts (passing trials average 1.04 against 0.67): there, hitting a wall is incidental, and failures are mostly not blockage-shaped. On blocked-by-design tasks no verified trial passes, except 13 trials of 

count-dataset-tokens , precisely the verifier artifact documented in Appendix C; that this analysis independently isolates the same task corroborates both the labels and the evidence. All of these are diagnostic associations, not causes: blockage evidence alone cannot establish why a trial failed, harder tasks are both more blocked and more failed, and an agent that anticipates the policy and never attempts a denied operation leaves no evidence at all.