Title: Improving PET/CT-Based Whole-Body Lesion Segmentation Using Prediction Uncertainty-Augmented Models

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.10115v1

Published Time: Wed, 10 Jun 2026 00:17:54 GMT

Number of Pages: 33

Markdown Content:
# IMPROVING PET/CT-B ASED WHOLE -B ODY LESION 

# SEGMENTATION USING PREDICTION 

# UNCERTAINTY -A UGMENTED MODELS 

A P REPRINT 

Bashirul Azam Biswas 

Department of Biomedical Data Science Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth Hanover, NH 03755, USA 

Bashirul.Azam.Biswas@dartmouth.edu 

Biratal Raj Wagle 

Department of Biomedical Data Science Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth Hanover, NH 03755, USA 

Biratal.Raj.Wagle@dartmouth.edu 

Zhihan Yang 

Department of Biomedical Data Science Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth Hanover, NH 03755, USA 

Zhihan.Yang.GR@dartmouth.edu 

Marc A. Seltzer 

Radiology Dartmouth Hitchcock Medical Center Lebanon, NH 03766 , USA 

marc.a.seltzer@hitchcock.org 

Matthew E. Maeder 

Radiology Dartmouth Hitchcock Medical Center Lebanon, NH 03766 , USA 

Matthew.E.Maeder@dartmouth.edu 

James B. Yu 

Radiation Oncology Dartmouth Hitchcock Medical Center Lebanon, NH 03766 , USA 

James.B.Yu@dartmouth.edu 

Indrani Bhattacharya 

Department of Biomedical Data Science Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth Hanover, NH 03755, USA 

Indrani.Bhattacharya@dartmouth.edu 

June 10, 2026 

# ABSTRACT 

Background: Accurate lesion segmentation from whole-body Positron Emission Tomogra-phy (PET)/Computed Tomography (CT) scans is essential for cancer staging and treatment planning. PET provides functional metabolic information with different radiotracers (e.g., 

[18 F ]fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG), prostate specific membrane antigen (PSMA)), while CT is primarily used for attenuation correction and offers anatomical localization. Lesion delineation from PET/CT imaging is clinically challenging due to subtle imaging features, confounders, and inter-reader variability. The rapid increase in PET/CT imaging without a corresponding increase in subspecialty-trained radiologists to interpret them poses significant burden on radiologist workloads and can inhibit timely treatment planning in high-risk cancer patients. 

Purpose: There is a clinical need for accurate and generalizable automated whole-body PET/CT lesion segmentation methods that can assist radiologists in pan-cancer, multi-tracer images. Existing deep learning approaches suffer from training-related stochasticity, inconsistent predictions, missed lesions in high tumor-burden cases, and lack prediction uncertainty quantification, limiting their clinical reliability and adoption. 

Methods: Using the nnU-Net model as baseline, we propose an uncertainty-aware framework 

> arXiv:2606.10115v1 [cs.CV] 8 Jun 2026

Improving PET/CT-based WBLS Using Uncertainy-Augmented Models A P REPRINT 

for PET/CT whole-body lesion segmentation that integrates (1) Bayesian ensembling to mitigate training stochasticity, (2) voxel-wise uncertainty quantification and decomposition in epistemic (model-specific) and aleatoric (data-specific) components, and (3) epistemic uncertainty-augmented training to improve lesion detection. We analyze the relationship between epistemic uncertainty and different types of model misclassification, and assess the ability of uncertainty estimates to identify misclassified voxels. We also evaluate the generalizability of our method on unseen datasets. Two public datasets: AutoPET-III (1,611 scans) and Deep-PSMA (200 scans), both comprising FDG and PSMA studies across multiple cancer types, are used for our training and evaluation. 

Results: Bayesian ensembling improves robustness and performance over deterministic nnU-Net models on the unseen AutoPET-III test set (Dice: 60.1 → 62.0; False Positive Volume (FPVol): 2.9 → 2.0; False Negative Volume (FNVol): 13.9 → 13.6). Uncertainty maps highlight regions of model disagreement and correlate with misclassifications, with higher uncertainty observed for missclassified predictions, particularly false positives. Uncertainty-augmented training enhances lesion recovery (FNVol: 13.6 → 9.3) at the cost of increased FPVol (2.0 → 4.8), reflecting a precision–recall trade-off. A case-adaptive routing strategy improves Dice performance with statistical significance by selecting between base and augmented models (baseline Bayesian →

augmented Bayesian → case-adaptive routing: 62.0 → 61.7 → 63.1 ). On the out-of-distribution Deep-PSMA dataset, Bayesian ensembling improves Dice (baseline → ours: 62.8 → 64.7), and the uncertainty-augmented model achieves the highest Dice (65.3) with a similar trade-off pattern. 

Conclusions: Bayesian ensembling enhances robustness and consistency in PET/CT whole-body lesion segmentation, while uncertainty quantification provides meaningful indicators of prediction reliability. Incorporating uncertainty into model training improves lesion detection by reducing false negatives. The proposed framework demonstrates strong generalization across both in-distribution and out-of-distribution datasets. To our knowledge, this is the first study to systematically inves-tigate uncertainty quantification in multi-tracer, pan-cancer PET/CT segmentation and to integrate Bayesian ensembling with uncertainty-aware modeling for this task. 

Keywords Whole-body lesion segmentation, Uncertainty Quantification, Uncertainty-aware modelling 

# 1 Introduction 

Whole-body Positron Emission Tomography (PET)/Computed Tomography (CT) imaging is a valuable multimodal tool for cancer staging, treatment planning, and response assessment 1. PET visualizes physiological and molecular processes by detecting uptake of different radiotracers, such as [68 Ga] -PSMA-11 and [18 F] -labeled prostate specific membrane antigen (PSMA)-targeted radiotracers 2, [18 F ]fluorodeoxyglucose ( [18 ]FDG) 3 and Sodium Fluorine-18 Flu-oride ( [18 ]F-NaF) 4. These PET radiotracers’ uptake reflect underlying tissue metabolism or receptor activity, whereas CT provides complementary anatomical information. However, interpreting PET/CT imaging is challenging due to subtle multimodal imaging features, difficulty differentiating normal uptake from cancer, diversity of anatomical re-gions, different radiotracers, and the labor- and expertise-intensive task of lesion identification and annotation 5. The growing volume of PET/CT scans, without a corresponding increase in nuclear medicine experts available for inter-pretation, creates a clinical need for standardized and generalizable computer-aided whole-body lesion segmentation systems. In addition, PET/CT scans are increasingly used for radiation treatment planning by radiation oncologists who may not have nuclear medicine fellowship training, often without explicit expert annotation of lesion extent or burden. As the number of radiotracers developed and used for cancer detection and staging continues to expand, there 1Improving PET/CT-based WBLS Using Uncertainy-Augmented Models A P REPRINT 

is a growing need for robust, reliable, and generalizable multi-tracer, pan-cancer PET/CT-based whole-body lesion segmentation methods that can provide diagnostic support across diverse diseases and imaging agents. Early computer-aided lesion segmentation methods for PET/CT employed diverse algorithms, including K-nearest neighbor classifiers 6, Markov Random Fields (MRFs) 7, subgraph-based energy minimization 8, and hypergraph-based random walks 9. While these classical machine-learning approaches rely on hand-crafted feature extraction, deep learning (DL) methods later emerged, offering automatic feature learning along with improved and more general-izable segmentation performance 10 . Initial DL–based studies using PET/CT imaging primarily focused on specific anatomical regions, such as the head and neck 10,11 , lungs 12 , or esophagus 13 . Huang et al. 10 proposed a deep convolu-tion network with downsampling blocks of feature representation and upsampling blocks of reconstruction for Gross Tumor Volume (GTV) segmentation in the head and neck region. Oreiller et al. 11 introduced a Head and Neck (H&N) GTV detection challenge with FDG PET-CT imaging. Zhao et al. 12 adopted a feature fusion strategy from PET and CT segmentation network to render the final segmentation map for lung cancer. Jin et al. 13 integrated early and late fusion of 3D deep neural networks to perform esophageal GTV segmentation on PET/CT data. In addition to local/regional lesion segmentation, automated lesion segmentation from whole-body PET/CT imag-ing 14,15,16,17 has also been an active area of research. Blanc-Durand et al. 14 deployed a 3D U-Net architecture to detect and segment lymphoma lesions from whole-body FDG-PET/CT. Jemaa et al. 16 developed a segmentation pipeline that integrates 2D segmentation, connected-component labeling, and a refinement stage leveraging 3D segmentation for enhanced accuracy with FDG PET/CT scans of whole-body. Gatidis et al. 18 introduced the AutoPET-II challenge and released a public dataset of FDG-PET/CT whole-body scans encompassing multiple tumour types to promote research in whole-body tumor segmentation. Utilizing this public dataset, later on, He et al. 17 deployed Camouflaged Object Detection mechanisms and Liu et al. 19 proposed hybrid Mamba-CNN architectures in lesion detection from whole-body scans. While FDG-PET is the most commonly used modality in PET/CT-based machine learning meth-ods for whole-body lesion segmentation, other radiotracers such as 68 Ga-Pentixafor 15 and PSMA 20,21 have also been explored. Xu et al. 15 developed a W-Net by cascading two V-Nets 22 , with the first network trained on CT images and the second trained on combined 68 Ga-Pentixafor PET and CT modalities to detect multiple Myeloma from whole-body scans. Li et al. 21 adopted 3D hybrid Transformer–CNN and Xu et al. 20 deployed UNet-based architectures for whole-body PSMA-PET/CT lesion segmentation. All these PET/CT-based methods operate on local or whole-body anatomical scans and are designed to segment either single or multiple tumor types. One limitation of these prior studies is that they were limited to single-tracer datasets and lack generalization across multiple tracers. The recent AutoPet-III grand challenge 23 was organized to address this gap through the development of whole-body, multi-tracer (FDG and PSMA), pan-cancer (prostate, lung, melanoma, or lymphoma) segmentation methods. Most of the methods that were reported as part of this grand challenge 24,25,26,27,28 , used U-Net 29 or nnU-2Improving PET/CT-based WBLS Using Uncertainy-Augmented Models A P REPRINT 

Net 30 variants. NnU-Net is a widely adopted medical image segmentation framework with strong performance across numerous tasks, including multi-tracer, pan-cancer PET/CT lesion segmentation. However, it still suffers from the following shortcomings: 1. Sensitive to initialization and data-batching: NnU-Net contains millions of parameters optimized through mini-batch training, making convergence sensitive to parameter initialization and batching strategies 31,32 . As a result, models trained on the same dataset can produce different predictions for the same test case, posing a challenge for clinical deployment of whole-body lesion segmentation. Although Schott et al. 33 studied random-initialization ensembling for uni-tracer, uni-cancer PET/CT segmentation, they did not assess the impact of initialization and mini-batch variability on accuracy, precision, and recall in a multi-tracer, pan-cancer setting. 2. Absence of prediction uncertainty quantification in multi-tracer, pan-cancer model: Deep learning seg-mentation models such as nnU-Net output voxel-wise lesion probabilities, which are often treated as confi-dence scores but do not reliably capture true model uncertainty 34,35 . Uncertainty quantification provides a more principled estimate of prediction reliability by decomposing uncertainty into aleatoric and epistemic components 34,36,37 . Existing approaches include Bayesian methods such as Monte Carlo dropout, deep en-sembles, and variational inference, as well as non-Bayesian methods such as Dempster–Shafer theory and test-time augmentation 36,38,39,40,41 . Uncertainty quantification for whole-body PET/CT lesion segmentation remains limited. To the best of our knowledge, the recent study by Schott et al. 33 is the only study to investi-gate uncertainty estimation for nnU-Net on whole-body PET/CT and showed its utility for image degradation detection, False Positive (FP) identification, and False Negative (FN) recovery. However, their work is re-stricted to a single tracer and lesion type. Uncertainty quantification for multi-tracer, pan-cancer, whole-body PET/CT lesion segmentation remains underexplored, despite its importance for handling variability in lesion burden, cancer type, tracer distribution, scanner protocols, and multimodal PET/CT inputs. 3. Lack of uncertainty-aware modeling in multi-tracer, pan-cancer setting : Our analysis of AutoPET-III shows that PSMA cases have more lesions than FDG cases (PSMA: 35.36 ± 51.54 vs. FDG: 12.42 ±

19.06) and higher, more variable lesion-wise intensities (PSMA: 7.56 ± 7.76 vs. FDG:4.95 ± 2.64). These differences are statistically significant by unpaired t-tests 42 and Mann–Whitney U tests 43 , with all p-values 

< 0.05 . We present tracer-specific distributions of lesion counts per case and mean lesion intensities for both FDG and PSMA in Figure 1. The AutoPET-III contains fewer PSMA samples ( 597 ) than FDG samples (1097 ), creating an approximately 1:2 imbalance. This can bias models toward FDG-like, lower-lesion-burden cases, promoting precision-oriented behavior and under-segmentation in PSMA, resulting in higher False Negative Volume (FNVol). Prior AutoPET-III methods similarly report lower PSMA performance and 3Improving PET/CT-based WBLS Using Uncertainy-Augmented Models A P REPRINT 

higher FNVol 24,26,44 . Although Schott et al. 33 studied uncertainty for FP/FN analysis in whole-body PET/CT, their work is limited to single-tracer, single-cancer data and does not integrate uncertainty into nnU-Net for improving performance. Thus, uncertainty-aware modeling remains underexplored for heterogeneous multi-tracer, pan-cancer PET/CT lesion segmentation.  

> (a) (b)

Figure 1: Tracer-specific variations in the AutoPET-III dataset, where, compared to FDG samples, PSMA samples demonstrate a higher mean and larger variance with statisitcal significant difference ( p ≪ 0.05 ) in both (a) per-case lesion counts and (b) per-lesion intensities. 4. Lack of generalizabillity assessment on unseen datasets for whole-body lesion segmentation: 

Deep learning frameworks have demonstrated strong performance on homogeneous data distributions with carefully designed models, but they often struggle in heterogeneous settings. Such heterogeneity can arise from variations in intensity, resolution, noise characteristics, artifact patterns, anatomical structures, label distributions, and acquisition protocols 45 . As a result, domain generalization has been extensively studied in medical imaging for various organs, including cardiac 46 , prostate 47 , breast 48 , and liver 49 . Similar to these applications, whole-body lesion segmentation models must generalize across diverse domains, includ-ing different institutions, tracers, scanners, and disease types, since the limited availability of domain-specific whole-body datasets makes training separate models for each domain impractical. However, to the best of our knowledge, prior work has not systematically evaluated generalization in the context of whole-body lesion segmentation. In this work, we frame four Research Questions (RQs) encapsulating these shortcomings and address them through Bayesian Deep Learning (BDL) and Uncertainty Quantification (UQ), uncertainty–misclassification correlations and uncertainty-aware modelling. Using the state-of-the-art nnU-Net model 30 initialized with pretrained weights by 4Improving PET/CT-based WBLS Using Uncertainy-Augmented Models A P REPRINT 

Rokuss et al. 26 as our baseline for whole-body PET/CT lesion segmentation, our key research questions and find-ings are: • RQ1: How sensitive are nnUNet-based deterministic whole-body lesion segmentation models to initial-ization and data batching, and can Bayesian Deep Learning help generate predictions robust to training stochasticity? We assess the effect of parameter initialization and mini-batching on lesion segmentation performance and find wide variability in nnU-Net performance even with small changes in parameter ini-tialization and mini-batching. We draw on the extensive literature in Bayesian Deep Learning (BDL) 37,38 

and adopt the deep ensemble approach 36 to develop a Bayesian whole-body segmentation model, in which multiple nnU-Net models with identical architectures and optimization objectives are trained using different parameter initializations and data batch configurations. Instead of relying on a single deterministic version of the model that yields voxel-wise prediction probabilities, we compute the expected values from multiple training iterations of the same model to obtain more reliable, repeatable, and stable predictions. In addition to achieving reliable and stable predictions, we use our Bayesian ensembling approach to quantify the total predictive uncertainty, and decompose it into aleatoric (data) and epistemic (model) uncertainty. Aleatoric uncertainty represents inherent data noise that cannot be reduced without acquiring additional or higher-quality information, whereas epistemic uncertainty captures the model’s gaps in knowledge and can be mitigated through further training or data diversification 50 . During inference, our model generates voxel-wise prediction probability as well as uncertainty maps that capture complementary information about the model’s predictions as well as the model’s uncertainty in these predictions. • RQ2: Is there any relationship between PET/CT lesion prediction uncertainty and prediction misclassifica-tion? Epistemic uncertainty, as a quantitative indicator of a model’s knowledge gap, is theoretically expected to correlate with prediction misclassification in deep learning systems 36 . In this work, we examine whether epistemic uncertainty in whole-body lesion segmentation can reliably identify voxel-wise misclassifications between lesion and non-lesion regions, thereby serving as a proxy for prediction reliability. Using validation samples from the AutoPET-III dataset, we evaluate how effectively uncertainty distinguishes misclassifica-tions such as FPs and FNs. We find that FP voxels show consistently higher epistemic uncertainties compared to FN voxels where epistemic uncertainties are more diverse. This suggests that epistemic uncertainty from the baseline model can be used to distinguish True Positive (TP) from FP voxels more reliably over True Negative (TN) from FN voxels (Figure 5). • RQ3: How can we optimally leverage epistemic uncertainty to improve model performance and prediction reliability? Would a model’s performance improve if we provide it with its own knowledge gaps (captured by epistemic uncertainty), much like improving human performance by providing them feedback? A pre-5Improving PET/CT-based WBLS Using Uncertainy-Augmented Models A P REPRINT 

vious study by Hartmann et al. 51 employed uncertainty maps as additional inputs and achieved improved segmentation performance in Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) images to segment glacier regions from wa-ter or broken ice regions. Motivated by this, we augment the input channels with epistemic uncertainty maps (that capture model’s knowledge gaps) derived from the Bayesian whole-body segmentation model and train an Uncertainty-Augmented model. When compared on the validation set, the two-channel (PET and CT) Bayesian base model exhibits a precision-oriented behavior with lower False Positive Volume (FPVol), whereas the uncertainty-augmented three-channel (PET, CT, uncertainty maps) model favors recall with re-duced FNVol. Since the Autopet-III dataset includes multi-tracer cases with wide variability in lesion type, number, location, and size, we train a case-adaptive router that builds on this structured precision–recall trade-off between the Bayesian baseline and uncertainty-augmented models. This case-adaptive router is a shallow convolutional neural network model that takes the PET image of a case as input and predicts whether the case would benefit more from a precision-oriented or recall-oriented model. This early case-adaptive routing strategy leads to improved overall Dice performance on the multi-tracer, pan-cancer cases, compared to using either model individually, demonstrating that learned model selection can effectively exploit the complementary strengths of the Bayesian baseline and uncertainty augmented models. • RQ4: How well does the uncertainty-aware nnU-Net generalize to unseen datasets? Generalization to unseen datasets and external datasets are critical for any medical image segmentation models. In this study, we investigate the first three research questions with the training and validation samples of the publicly available AutoPET-III dataset, which comprises multi-tracer, pan-cancer samples. To evaluate generalization, we test our approach on two unseen datasets: (1) an in-distribution split of AutoPET-III, where 321 scans are held out as a test set, and (2) an out-of-distribution Deep-PSMA dataset 52 consisting of 100 patients with metastatic prostate cancer, each with both a PSMA-PET/CT and an FDG-PET/CT scans. The Deep PSMA dataset was designed to segment whole body disease burden on PSMA PET/CT (a mix of 68 Ga-PSMA-617 and 18 F-DCFPyL) and FDG PET/CT images for staging of patient for 177 Lu-PSMA Therapy. Although our training set included PSMA-PET/CT for prostate cancer cases, it did not include any FDG PET/CT for prostate cancer. The FDG-PET/CT images in our training set were for other cancers (lung, melanoma, lymphoma) that show different distribution than prostate cancer metastases. Thus, the Deep PSMA dataset presents a unique unseen dataset to evaluate generalizability of our models. Our results show that uncertainty augmentation improves performance on PSMA cases within the unseen AutoPET-III test set, and enhances both FDG and PSMA performance on the Deep-PSMA dataset. To the best of our knowledge, this work is the first to (a) study how sensitive nnU-Net model is to training stochastic-ity in multi-tracer, pan-cancer PET/CT datasets, and how Bayesian ensembling can generate improved predidctions, 6Improving PET/CT-based WBLS Using Uncertainy-Augmented Models A P REPRINT 

(b) quantify total uncertainty and decompose it to epistemic and aleatoric compoenents for whole-body multi-tracer, pan-cancer lesion segmentation task, (c) leverage the quantified epistemic uncertainty to reduce the models’ knowl-edge gaps, improving performance across different radiotracers in PET/CT imaging, and (d) test the generalizability of uncertainty-augmented models in unseen datasets. We are also the first to evaluate how well epistemic uncer-tainty captures model misclassifications and investigate whether any systematic patterns emerge across two types of misclassifications (false positives and false negatives). 

# 2 Materials and methods 

2.1 Problem formulation for whole-body lesion segmentation 

Our goal is to automatically identify and segment lesions in a whole-body 3D PET/CT scan. Therefore, we aim to develop a 3D binary segmentation model that examines every voxel in the 3D whole-body scan and classifies it as either lesion or non-lesion. The input space is defined as X ⊂ ℜ H×W ×D×Cin where (H, W, D ) denote the spatial dimensions (height, width, and depth), and Cin corresponds to the number of imaging channels. The output space is a binary segmentation mask Y ⊂ { 0, 1}H×W ×D×1 where each voxel v = {i, j, k } is labeled as yv = 1 for being a foreground (lesion), and yv = 0 othwise (background). Given a training dataset Dtrain = {(Xi ∈ X , Y i ∈ Y )}Ni=1 ,we aim to learn a segmentation model θ that maps a 4D data Xi to a 3D segmentation mask, as follows 

θ : ℜH×W ×D×Cin → { 0, 1}H×W ×D×1 (1) 

2.2 Dataset and pre-processing Dataset: We use two different publicly available datasets, the Autopet-III 23 and the Deep-PSMA 52 for this study (Table 1). We use the AutoPET-III dataset for training, validation, and independent testing, whereas we use the Deep-PSMA dataset exclusively as an out-of-distribution test set to assess the generalizability of our trained models. Table 1: Dataset summary of AutoPET-III and Deep PSMA with decomposed statistics for FDG and PSMA. M=Male, F=Female, NS=Not Specified, M=Melanoma, Lu=Lung Cancer, Ly=Lymphoma, Neg=Negative, Pr=Prostate, dz =distance, μP ET = Mean PET Intensity                                                                 

> Properties AutoPET-III Deep-PSMA FDG PSMA FDG PSMA
> #Patients 1014 597 100 100 Sex (M/F/NS) 570 / 440/ 4 597/ 0 100/ 0 100/0 Age (years) 59.4 ± 16.0 (11–95) 71.43 ± 8.18 (48–92) N/A N/A Data PET-CT PET-CT PET-CT PET-CT Disease dist. M/Lu/Ly/Neg 188/168/145/513 Pr/Neg 537/60 Pr/Neg 100/0 Pr/Neg 100/0
> #lesions (per case) 15.15 ±29.17 35.04 ±51.70 38.38 ±39.66 68.41 ±58.35
> μP ET (per lesion) 4.56 ±2.32 7.48 ±7.12 3.73 ±1.19 5.64 ± 3.33
> #slices (per vol) 200–661 135–963 199–1206 195–1261 In-plane res. (mm) 2.04–2.04 2.73–4.07 2.73–5.47 1.59–5.47
> dz bet. slices (mm) 3.00–3.00 2.00–5.00 1.5–5.00 1.5–5.00 train/val/test 664/151/199 379/96/122 0/0/100 0/0/100

7Improving PET/CT-based WBLS Using Uncertainy-Augmented Models A P REPRINT 

The AutoPET-III dataset 23 contains a total of 1, 611 PET/CT studies: 1, 014 acquired with FDG tracers and 597 with PSMA tracers. Among the FDG cohort, 513 cases are lesion-free, while the remaining 501 include 188 malignant melanoma cases, 168 lung cancer cases, and 145 lymphoma cases. Within the PSMA cohort, 60 cases are lesion-free and the remaining 537 represent prostate cancer patients with metastatic disease. For cancerous cases, the number and location of the lesions vary significantly, ranging from 1 to 294 for PSMA cases (prostate cancer metastasis), and to 

1031 for FDG cases. The PET intensity values also showed significant variability, with average intensity values within lesions ranging from 0.99 to 31 .06 for FDG cases, and 0.74 to 158 .29 for PSMA cases. In AutoPET-III, FDG cases were reviewed by a radiologist and nuclear medicine physician to identify primary tumors and metastases. Malignant FDG-avid lesions were manually segmented slice by slice on PET images 53 . For PSMA cases, PSMA-avid primary and metastatic lesions were delineated by a reader with three years of hybrid imaging experience. Candidate lesions were pre-segmented using user-defined uptake thresholds and manually refined slice by slice to generate 3D binary masks 54 .The Deep-PSMA dataset 52 consists of 100 PET/CT patients, each with an FDG and PSMA PET/CT scan acquired for staging prior to LuPSMA therapy. All patients had metastatic prostate cancer. Although each patient had both FDG and PSMA scan, there was variability in the visibility of lesions on the two tracers. The number of lesions varies considerably across patients, ranging from 1 to 149 in FDG cases and from 2 to 235 in PSMA cases. The average PET intensity values within lesions range from 1.97 to 19 .38 for FDG cases and from 2.99 to 50 .77 for PSMA cases. It may be noted that the AutoPET-III dataset does not contain any FDG prostate cancer metastasis cases, which makes this dataset a unique out of distribution test set to evaluate. In the Deep-PSMA dataset, candidate regions were identified using PET SUV thresholds: SUV > 3 for PSMA scans and liver mean plus two standard deviations for FDG scans. Expert nuclear medicine physicians with at least five years of specialization then reviewed these regions and labeled tracer uptake as lesion or physiological/non-lesion. 

Data Preprocessing: We follow the methodology of Rokus et al. 26 . Specifically, we remove intensity values below the 5th and above the 95th percentile for both PET and CT scans, and apply Z-score normalization to the remaining voxel intensities. The mean voxel spacing is computed as (x = 2 .04 , y = 2 .04 , z = 3 .0) , and all PET and CT volumes are resampled to this uniform resolution. During training, random cropping is performed with a patch size of 

[192 , 192 , 192] , while inference is conducted using a sliding-window approach consistent with the standard nnU-Net protocol 30 . We construct a held-out test set of 321 AutoPET-III images ( 199 FDG and 122 PSMA), using the remaining 

1,043 images for training and 247 for validation. To prevent data leakage, splits are defined so that longitudinal scans from the same patient appear in only one of the train, validation, or test sets. All samples from the Deep-PSMA dataset are used exclusively as a held-out test set and are preprocessed using the same pipeline as AutoPET-III. 8Improving PET/CT-based WBLS Using Uncertainy-Augmented Models A P REPRINT 

2.3 Overview of our proposed method 

An overview of the proposed framework is presented in Figure 2, which consists of four key modules: (i) the Bayesian whole-body segmentation model, (ii) uncertainty quantification, (iii) the uncertainty-augmented segmentation model, and (iv) the case-adaptive Routing block. Section 2.4 describes the Bayesian modelling for whole-body lesion seg-mentation. Section 2.5 introduces the fundamentals of uncertainty quantification and details how uncertainty maps are obtained from the Bayesian model. Section 2.6 then explains how these uncertainty maps are incorporated as an additional input channel, expanding the model from two input modalities (CT and PET) to three (CT, PET, and un-certainty). Finally, Section 2.7 outlines the case-adaptive routing network, which is trained solely on PET images and dice difference of base and augmented models to predict the best model for each case. Each of these four components is described in detail in the following subsections. Bayesian Segmentation Model Uncertainty-Augmented Bayesian Segmentation Model Case-Adaptive Routed Probability Uncertainty Map     

> Probability Map
> (0/1) Probability Map Case-Adaptive Router Uncertainty Map PET CT + PET CT + PET + Uncertainty
> CT PET Uncertainty Map 3D CNN
> [64, 64, 64] [32, 64, 64, 64] [64, 1] Case-Adaptive Router 3D CNN (0/1) (1/0) (0/1) Uncertainty Map

Figure 2: Overview of our proposed approach. 

2.4 Bayesian whole-body lesion segmentation 

State-of-the-art whole-body lesion segmentation models are typically deterministic, where the network parameters θ

are optimized to a single point estimate θ∗ using maximum likelihood estimation on the training dataset Dtrain . In 9Improving PET/CT-based WBLS Using Uncertainy-Augmented Models A P REPRINT 

the following sections, we first describe our deterministic nnU-Net baseline and then extend it to Bayesian prediction using deep ensembling. 

2.4.1 Deterministic whole-body lesion segmentation models 

We use nnU-Net 30 as the deterministic baseline for whole-body lesion segmentation. Following the AutoPET-III training strategy of Rokuss et al. 26 , one of the top-performing challenge methods, the input consists of CT and PET channels, i.e., Cin = 2 . The model parameters are optimized using an equally weighted combination of Dice and cross-entropy losses: 

θ∗ = arg min 

> θN

X

> i=1

(wDICE LDICE + wCE LCE ) , (2) where wDICE = wCE = 0 .5, and N denotes the number of training samples. We train each model for up to 120 epochs with early stopping if validation performance does not improve for 15 epochs. This shorter schedule, compared with the 1500 epochs used in 26 , enables computationally feasible analysis of model sensitivity and deep ensembling. At inference, the trained model predicts the voxel-wise lesion label for a test image Xtest as 

¯yv = arg max  

> {0,1}

p(yv |Xtest , θ ∗), v = ( i, j, k ). (3) 

2.4.2 Posterior probability through Bayesian modelling 

The probability in Eqn. (3) is obtained from the softmax output of a single deterministic model. However, such point-estimate predictions are limited for uncertainty estimation 36 . We therefore adopt a Bayesian formulation in which the model parameters θ are treated as random variables. The posterior predictive probability for each voxel is given by 

p(yv |Xtest , Dtrain ) = 

Z

> θ

P (θ|D train )P (yv |Xtest , θ )dθ = Eθ∼P (θ|D train )

P (yv |Xtest , θ ) (4) Since exact posterior inference is intractable for deep networks, we approximate this expectation using deep ensemble averaging 36 :

p(yv |Xtest , Dtrain ) ≈ 1

K

> K

X

> k=1

P (yv |Xtest , θ ∗

> k

), (5) where θ∗ 

> k

denotes the parameters of the kth independently trained ensemble member. 

2.5 Uncertainty quantification 

The posterior predictive probability in Eqn. (4) enables voxel-wise uncertainty estimation. We define total uncertainty 

Utot using predictive entropy, which can be decomposed into aleatoric and epistemic components 34,55 :

H  P (yv |Xtest , Dtrain )| {z } 

> Total Unc. Utot

= Eθ∼P (θ|D train )

H  P (yv |Xtest , θ ) | {z } 

> Aleatoric Unc. Uale

+ I yv , θ |Xtest , Dtrain | {z } 

> Epistemic Unc. Uepi

. (6) The aleatoric term captures expected prediction uncertainty due to inherent data ambiguity, while the epistemic term measures model disagreement induced by uncertainty over θ. Thus, epistemic uncertainty increases when test samples 10 Improving PET/CT-based WBLS Using Uncertainy-Augmented Models A P REPRINT 

are poorly represented by the training distribution 56 . Using the deep ensemble approximation, we estimate these quantities as 

Utot ≈ H 1

K

> K

X

> k=1

P (yv |Xtest , θ ∗

> k

)

!

,

Uale ≈ 1

K

> K

X

> k=1

H  P (yv |Xtest , θ ∗

> k

) ,

Uepi = Utot − U ale .

(7) The resulting Utot , Uale , and Uepi have the same spatial dimensions as the predicted segmentation mask, {H × W ×

D × 1}, and are therefore represented as voxel-wise uncertainty maps. 

2.5.1 Relationship between epistemic uncertainty and misclassification 

As discussed in Section 2.5, epistemic uncertainty reflects the model’s knowledge gap; consequently, voxels with high epistemic uncertainty are expected to correspond to misclassified predictions 36 . Building on this idea, Malinin et al. 57 

proposed using epistemic uncertainty to identify misclassified samples. Motivated by this, we conduct a study with the validation set samples (Section 4.2) to investigate the relationship between epistemic uncertainty and misclassification. 

2.6 Uncertainty-augmented segmentation model 

We design an uncertainty-augmented model that leverages the epistemic uncertainties estimated by the Bayesian model as a means to incorporate model’s knowledge gaps. Specifically, we extract epistemic uncertainty maps for all sam-ples in the AutoPET-III dataset and incorporate them as an additional input channel to a deterministic segmentation framework. The model is then trained using the same loss function as in Eqn. 2, resulting in a three-channel deter-ministic segmentation model. To clearly delineate the distinction between the models, we summarise their parameter configurations as follows 

θ : ℜH×W ×D×Cin =2 → { 0, 1}H×W ×D×1 Cin = ∥{ CT, P ET }∥ 

θU A : ℜH×W ×D×Cin =3 → { 0, 1}H×W ×D×1 Cin = ∥{ CT, P ET, Uepi }∥ 

(8) Analogous to the two-channel Bayesian model derived from the deterministic parameters θk in Eqn. 5, we construct a Bayesian version of the uncertainty-augmented model. The deterministic members of this model are trained for 90 epochs, compared to 120 epochs used for the base model. Mathematically, the posterior probability of a voxel being a lesion or not from the Bayesian uncertainty-augmented model can be expressed as follows 

pU A (yv |Xtest , Dtrain ) ≈ 1

K

> K

X

> k

PU A (yv |Xtest , θ ∗

> aug,k

) (9) 11 Improving PET/CT-based WBLS Using Uncertainy-Augmented Models A P REPRINT 

2.7 Case adaptive routing 

On examining the performance of the Bayesian baseline and the Bayesian uncertainty-augmented models on the val-idation set samples (Sect. 4.3.2, Figure 7), we find a clear and statistically significant disparity in misclassification characteristics: the uncertainty-augmented model achieves significantly lower FNVol, whereas the base model yields significantly FPVol. This indicates a structured precision–recall trade-off between the two models that is not captured by Dice alone. Since the AutoPET-III dataset includes a wide variability in lesion and PET intensity distribution, we hypothesize that an automated early routing module to adaptively select the optimal model for each PET-CT case would enable a precision-recall balance. Specifically, we train a case-adaptive router using PET as the input signal to predict which model is expected to perform better. We explore two training objectives for the router: Mean Squared Error (MSE) and Cross Entropy (CE) loss. Under the MSE formulation, the router is trained to regress the Dice dif-ference between the base and augmented models. During inference, a positive predicted difference routes the case to the base model, while a negative prediction selects the uncertainty-augmented model. Under the CE formulation, we convert the Dice difference into binary labels, assigning label ‘0’ when the base model outperforms the augmented model and ‘1’ otherwise. For each test sample, the trained router predicts the preferred model, and the sample is subsequently processed by either the base or the uncertainty-augmented model. Mathematically, given a test sample 

Xtest , the MSE-based router predicts a continuous performance-difference score 

∆θ

 Xtest PET 

 ∈ R, (10) where the router is trained to regress the Dice difference between the base and uncertainty-augmented models: 

∆test = Dice  fb(Xtest ), Y test  − Dice  fa(Xtest ), Y test  . (11) Thus, a positive predicted difference indicates that the base model is expected to outperform the uncertainty-augmented model, whereas a negative predicted difference indicates that the uncertainty-augmented model is expected to perform better. The routing decision is given by 

ˆztest =

0, if ∆θ (Xtest PET ) > 0,

1, if ∆θ (Xtest PET ) ≤ 0, (12) where ˆztest = 0 and ˆztest = 1 correspond to selecting the base and uncertainty-augmented models, respectively. The final segmentation is then obtained as 

ˆY test =

fb(Xtest ) , if ˆztest = 0 ,fa(Xtest ) , if ˆztest = 1 . (13) 

# 3 Ablation experiments 

Our model design choices were based on ablation experiments to assess: 12 Improving PET/CT-based WBLS Using Uncertainy-Augmented Models A P REPRINT 

1. how sensitive nnUNet-based deterministic whole-body cancer segmentation models are to intialization and data-batching, and if Bayesian ensembling (Section 2.4) provides a more consistent whole-body lesion seg-mentation performance; 2. how to quantify and decompose prediction uncertainty (Section 2.5), and how to understand the relationship between epistemic uncertainty and model errors; 3. how to levearge epistemic uncertainty to improve model performance in pan-cancer multi-tracer whole body PET/CT datasets 

Summary of ablation experiments: We utilise 1043 training and 247 validation samples from AutoPET-III for all of our ablation experiments. We consider a baseline nnU-Net with PET–CT inputs under both deterministic and Bayesian (Base) settings, and an uncertainty-augmented variant with PET–CT–uncertainty inputs under deterministic and Bayesian (Aug) settings. To exploit complementary strengths of the base and uncertainty-augmented models, we investigate combination strategies through late fusion (intersection, average probability, maximum probability) and early routing approaches. For early routing, we evaluate both a tracer-aware routing and a learned router approach. In learning the router, we investigate multiple design choices, including loss functions (vanilla cross-entropy, vanilla MSE, and signaware MSE), input modalities (PET, CT, PET-uncertainty, and PET–CT), and different input reshape sizes (64×64×64, 80×80×80, and 120×120×120). We provide an overview of all experimental configurations evaluated in this study in Table 2. Table 2: Overview of all experimental configurations evaluated in this study. We utilize both deterministic and Bayesian ensembling of baseline and uncertainty augmented models. Afterwards, we investigate complementary strengths of base and augmented model through late fusion and early routing strategies.              

> Model Inputs/Modes Method
> Baseline nnUNet 26 PET-CT Deterministic Bayesian (Base) Uncertainty Augmented nnUNet PET-CT-Uncertainty Deterministic Bayesian (Aug) Combination of Base and Aug Late Fusion Intersection Average Probabiliy Maximum Probability Early routing Tracer-aware rule Learnt Router Loss Variant Input Reshape Size CE Vanilla PET 64x64x64 80x80x80 120x120x120 MSE Vanilla PET 64x64x64 Weighted Signaware PET 64x64x64 CT PET-Uncertainty PET-CT

13 Improving PET/CT-based WBLS Using Uncertainy-Augmented Models A P REPRINT 

3.1 Sensitivity analysis of deterministic nnU-Net and Bayesian ensembling 

As described in Sect. 1, deep models can converge to different local optima due to initialization and batching variabil-ity, and we forumulate RQ1 to address such stochasticity. We follow Rokuss et al. 26 and train K = 5 nnU-Net models with identical architectures on the same AutoPET-III splits for 120 epochs. We then apply Bayesian ensemble aver-aging (Eqn. 5) and evaluate whether the ensemble improves over the average performance of individual deterministic models. 

3.1.1 Evaluation 

We deploy the well-established segmentation evaluation DICE, False Positive Volume (FPVol), and False Negative Volume (FNVol), similar to Rokuss et al. 26 and present both the aggregate evaluation (ALL) and decomposed evalua-tion with FDG and PSMA. 

3.2 Uncertainty quantification and its relationship with misclassifications 

In this section, we address RQ2 through quantifying uncertainty and investigating its relationship with misclassifica-tion. We first obtain K voxel-wise segmentation probability maps from the K deterministic models θ∗

> k

. Following Eq. 7, we compute the entropy from the expected probability as the total uncertainty and the expectation of the individual entropies as the aleatoric uncertainty. The epistemic uncertainty is then derived by subtracting the aleatoric component from the total uncertainty. 

3.2.1 Evaluation 

We evaluate how uncertainty is related to the misclassified voxels, i.e. FP and FN voxels, inspired by previous stud-ies 33,41,58 . To measure such relationships, we resort to two different types of analysis: • For each case, we compute the median epistemic uncertainty for TN, TP, FN, and FP voxels. We visualize these distributions using violin plots and evaluate whether the differences are statistically significant. Pairwise statistical comparisons were performed using the Wilcoxon signed-rank test between TN and TP, TP and FN, and FN and FP. • To assess whether epistemic uncertainty distinguishes correctly classified voxels from misclassified ones, we compute voxel-wise Area Under Receiver Operativing Curve (AUROC) on AutoPET-III validation samples, treating misclassified voxels, false positives (FPs) or false negatives (FNs), as True and correctly classified voxels as False . The analysis is restricted to the union of predicted and ground-truth voxels: non-overlapping predictions are FPs, non-overlapping ground-truth voxels are FNs, and overlapping voxels are true posi-tives. By sweeping the epistemic uncertainty threshold, we generate ROC curves for each case and compute AUROC as a measure of uncertainty-based misclassification detection. Higher AUROC indicates stronger 14 Improving PET/CT-based WBLS Using Uncertainy-Augmented Models A P REPRINT 

separation between uncertain misclassified voxels and confident correct predictions. Finally, we compare AUROC distributions for FP and FN detection across validation samples using unpaired Welch’s t-test and the Mann–Whitney U test. 

3.3 Leveraging uncertainty to improve model performance 

In this ablation study, we investigate RQ3 to leverage epistemic uncertainty to improve model performance and pre-diction reliability. 

3.3.1 Uncertainty-augmented Bayesian nnU-Net 

We incorporate epistemic uncertainty maps into the segmentation model as an additional input modality, alongside PET and CT, as described in Sect. 2.6. By encoding information related to both false-positive and false-negative regions, these maps provide complementary cues that enable the uncertainty-augmented model to improve lesion detection compared to the base model. 

Evaluation: We follow the same protocol used for the base Bayesian model in Sect. 3.1. 

3.3.2 Case-adaptive routing 

To evaluate RQ3 , we first compare FPVol and FNVol between the base and uncertainty-augmented models on vali-dation samples and observe the augmented model consistently reduces FNVol, whereas the base model yields lower FPVol, indicating complementary strengths (Figure 7). Motivated by this, we conduct an ablation study combining the two models through late fusion and early routing strategies. Late fusion includes maximum probability, average probability, and intersection-based fusion. For early routing, we first use a tracer-based rule that assigns FDG cases to the base model and PSMA cases to the augmented model. We then evaluate learned routers trained with CE and MSE objectives, varying PET input resolution for CE-based routing and testing standard/sign-aware MSE with PET, CT, PET-uncertainty, and PET-CT inputs. 

Training details for case-adaptive router: The objective of the routing mechanism is to select the most suitable model for a given input. To this end, we use the Dice difference between the base and augmented models as the supervision signal for training the router. In the CE formulation, the target label is set to 0 if the Dice difference is greater than zero (favoring the base model) and 1 if it is less than zero (favoring the augmented model). In the MSE formulation, the router directly predicts the Dice difference; a positive prediction selects the base model, while a negative prediction selects the augmented model. During training and validation of the case-adaptive router, we exclude cases where the absolute Dice difference is below a predefined margin of 0.01 to avoid ambiguous supervision. 15 Improving PET/CT-based WBLS Using Uncertainy-Augmented Models A P REPRINT 

Evaluation: We follow the same protocol as the base Bayesian model in Sect. 3.1, extending it to evaluate various late-fusion and early-routing strategies, including tracer-aware and learned approaches. 

# 4 Experimental results 

Summary results: We observe that deterministic models exhibit substantial variability in their predictions as reflected in Dice, FPVol, and FNVol (Figure 3, Table 3). In contrast, Bayesian ensembling provides more stable and robust performance across all three metrics compared to the average of the deterministic models (Table 3). We observe that per-case median epistemic uncertainty is higher for misclassified voxels than for correctly classified ones (Figure 5a). Furthermore, uncertainty is more effective at identifying FP voxels than FN voxels, as indicated by higher AUROC values for FP detection (Figure 5b). The uncertainty-augmented models achieve higher recall with reduced FNVol, but at the cost of lower precision and increased FPVol, relative to the two-channel base Bayesian model for both validation samples (Figure 7, Table 4) and held-out testing samples (Table 5) from AutoPET-III. The proposed routing approach helps select the optimal of the base and augmented model in the held-out AutoPET-III test set, achieving the best Dice by balancing precision and recall (Tables 4 and 5). For the unseen Deep-PSMA test set, the uncertainty-augmented model improves performance over baseline for all cases (Table 5). Table 3: Bayesian ensembling consistently outperforms the average performance of deterministic models for both the base (2-input: PET and CT) and uncertainty-augmented (3-input: PET, CT, and epistemic uncertainty) settings with validation samples ( N = 247 ). It achieves higher Dice scores along with lower FPVol and FNVol across ALL, FDG, and PSMA cases. On average, deterministic models also benefit from uncertainty augmentation. Notably, the base Bayesian model attains the highest Dice for FDG cases, whereas the augmented Bayesian model achieves the best Dice for PSMA cases. Additionally, uncertainty augmentation reduces FNVol at the cost of increased FPVol, reflecting a precision–recall trade-off.                                                                                                                                                                                                                 

> Inputs Method
> Cancer (N=161) FDG=77, PSMA=84 No-disease (N=86) FDG=74, PSMA=12 DICE ↑FPvol ↓FNvol ↓FPVol (No-disease) ↓
> All FDG PSMA All FDG PSMA All FDG PSMA All FDG PSMA PET
> +
> CT
> Det 161.1 68.5 54.4 9.9 4.8 14.5 14.2 11.4 16.8 37.4 37.4 37.2
> Det 264.3 72.8 56.6 12.4 5.7 18.6 16.2 15.0 17.3 33.1 32.2 39.0
> Det 361.8 70.4 53.9 12.0 7.9 15.8 15.9 10.9 20.4 42.6 42.2 45.6
> Det 463.0 72.6 54.2 9.3 3.6 14.6 14.9 15.6 14.3 38.5 37.8 43.2
> Det 561.3 67.8 55.2 10.8 6.3 14.9 10.1 6.3 13.6 34.2 35.1 28.5
> Det M ean base 62.3 70.4 54.9 10.9 5.7 15.7 14.3 11.8 16.5 37.2 36.9 38.7
> Bayes base 64.0 ↑72.9 ↑55.8 ↑10.4 ↓5.4 ↓15.1 ↓13.1 ↓10.0 ↓16.0 ↓35.2 ↓34.7 ↓38.2 ↓
> PET
> +
> CT
> +
> Epi. Uncer
> Det 164.4 72.2 57.3 13.2 8.6 17.4 8.3 5.7 10.7 43.8 43.4 46.5
> Det 264.5 71.9 57.7 14.9 10.0 19.4 8.5 6.0 10.8 45.4 45.3 46.1
> Det 363.0 70.3 56.3 13.6 8.2 18.5 7.5 3.9 10.9 40.4 40.5 39.8
> Det 463.7 70.9 57.0 14.7 9.6 19.4 8.5 5.9 10.9 47.1 47.0 47.5
> Det 564.0 71.9 56.8 14.7 9.3 19.6 7.4 4.1 10.4 46.9 46.9 47.2
> Det M ean aug 63.9 71.5 57.0 14.2 9.2 18.9 8.0 5.1 10.7 44.7 44.6 45.4
> Bayes aug 64.3 ↑71.8 ↑57.4 ↑13.9 ↓8.5 ↓18.8 ↓8.2 ↑5.6 ↑10.5 ↓44.8 44.7 45.8

16 Improving PET/CT-based WBLS Using Uncertainy-Augmented Models A P REPRINT 

4.1 Sensitivity analysis of deterministic nnU-Net and Bayesian ensembling Qualitative evaluation: Figure 3 presents an example with four regions from two FDG PET/CT cases using the nnU-Net 59 baseline, and we compare deterministic predictions from five deterministic models ( Det 1 → Det 5) with Bayesian ensembling ( Bayes ). Row 1 shows a true-positive case correctly detected by four deterministic models and the Bayesian ensemble, but missed by Det 5 model. Row 2 shows a false positive from Det 3, while the others remain correctly negative. In Row 3, Det 5 misses the lesion, but the Bayesian ensemble detects it. Row 4 presents a failure case of Bayesian ensembling where multiple false positives arise from deterministic members and the Bayesian ensembling is unable to correct the error. CT PET 

Figure 3: Deterministic nnU-Net shows variability in predictions, and is sensitive to training stochasticity, whereas Bayesian ensembling improves predictions. We visualize four representative regions from two FDG validation cases. Columns 1 and 2 show the CT and PET inputs, and columns 3–7 present the lesion predictions from the five deter-ministic nnU-Net ensemble members. Column 8 shows the Bayesian ensemble prediction. In the first row, where a lesion is present, four deterministic models ( Det 1–Det 4) correctly identify it as a true positive, and the Bayesian ensemble also produces a true-positive prediction. In the second row, where no lesion is present, Det 3 yields a false positive, whereas all other deterministic models and the Bayesian ensemble correctly remain negative. In the third row, Det 5 misses the lesion, but the Bayesian ensemble successfully detects it. In the final row, we show a failure case for Bayesian ensembling: four deterministic members produce false positives, and the Bayesian ensemble is unable to correct this error. 

Quantitative evaluation: Deterministic models ( Det 1 → Det 5) exhibit substantial variability across DICE, FPVol, and FNVol for both baselines ( Det 1 → Det 5). The Dice scores range from 61.1–64.3 , FPVol ranges from 9.3–12.4, and FNVol ranges from 10.1–16.2. When averaged across deterministic models, the mean deterministic DICE is 62.3 whereas Bayesian model achieves a DICE of 64.0, reducing FPVol from 10.9 → 10.4 and FNVol from 14.3 →

13.1. These results show that deterministic models suffer from substantial training stochasticity, whereas Bayesian ensembling delivers more stable and better segmentation performance. 17 Improving PET/CT-based WBLS Using Uncertainy-Augmented Models A P REPRINT 

4.2 Uncertainty quantification and its relationship with misclassifications Qualitative evaluation : Figure 4 shows the total, aleatoric, and epistemic uncertainty maps on a PSMA sample. We observe that for true-positive (TP) lesions, the uncertainty maps primarily highlight the boundary regions, whereas for false-negative (FN) and false-positive (FP) lesions, elevated uncertainty appears throughout the entire lesion region. CT PET Aleaotric Uncertainty Bayesian Probability Total Uncertainty Epistemic Uncertainty 

Figure 4: Visualizing Bayesian nnU-Net prediction probabilities and uncertainty maps in four regions of a PSMA sample, highlighting complementary behavior of prediction probability and prediction uncertainty. Row 1 illustrates a true-positive case, where all three uncertainty measures remain low within the lesion core and increase slightly near the boundaries. Row 2 shows a partially captured lesion characterized by uniformly high uncertainty across the predicted region. Row 3 presents a false-negative case in which the Bayesian probability is very low within the ground-truth lesion, yet the uncertainties in that area are elevated. Row 4 depicts a false-positive case exhibiting both high Bayesian probability and high uncertainty throughout the predicted region. It is worth noting that, across all four rows, the aleatoric uncertainty remains substantially lower, indicating that each deterministic model maintains high confidence in its own predictions. 

Quantitative evaluation: Per-case median epistemic uncertainty is lowest for correctly classified voxels (TN and TP) and significantly higher for misclassified voxels (FN and FP) (Figure 5a). Among the misclassification types, FP voxels exhibit the highest uncertainty, followed by FN, indicating that uncertainty is strongly associated with prediction errors. The statistical tests (Wilcoxon) confirm that the differences between TP–FN and FN–FP distributions are highly significant. 18 Improving PET/CT-based WBLS Using Uncertainy-Augmented Models A P REPRINT 

Uncertainty is more effective at identifying false positives than false negatives, as reflected by significantly higher AUROC values for FP detection ( p ≪ 0.05 for both Welch’s t-test and Mann–Whitney test) (Figure 5b) . This suggests that uncertainty provides better separability for FP errors, whereas FN errors are comparatively harder to distinguish based on uncertainty alone. Overall, the results demonstrate that epistemic uncertainty is a meaningful indicator of model errors, with stronger discriminative power for FP detection and consistently elevated values in misclassified regions for the baseline nnU-Net model for whole body lesion segmentation.  

> (a) (b)

Figure 5: Investigating the relationship between epistemic uncertainty and misclassification shows epistemic uncer-tainty is significantly high for false positive predictions. (a) Per-case median epistemic uncertainty is higher for misclassified voxels (FP and FN) than for correctly classified voxels (TP and TN). Among the misclassifications, FP voxels exhibit higher per-case median uncertainty than FN voxels. (b) Distributions of AUROC for FP and FN de-tection with nnUNet 30 . We treat each misclassified voxel (FP or FN) as T rue and each correctly classified voxel as 

F alse , omitting the large number of correctly predicted background voxels (TN). Using epistemic uncertainty as a de-cision variable, we perform voxel-wise binary classification to determine whether a voxel is misclassified or not. This allows us to compute an ROC curve and the corresponding AUROC for each validation case, providing a measure of how effectively epistemic uncertainty can serve as a thresholding criterion for misclassification detection. AUROC for FP detection shows significantly higher values (p-values ≪ 0.0001 ) under both Mann–Whitney and unpaired t-tests. 

4.3 Leveraging uncertainty to improve model performance 4.3.1 Uncertainty-augmented Bayesian nnU-Net Qualitative evaluation: Figure 6 presents four PSMA lesion cases. In all instances, the Bayesian probabilities from the base models (third column) are low, indicating false negatives in the two-channel segmentation model. Notably, the corresponding epistemic uncertainty maps (fourth column) show elevated uncertainty across these lesion regions. In the fifth column, the uncertainty-augmented models successfully recover these missed regions, as reflected by higher Bayesian probabilities. Furthermore, the epistemic uncertainty decreases in the augmented models (last column), indicating improved confidence in the corrected predictions. 

Quantitative evaluation: In this subsection, we evaluate whether Bayesian ensembling improves the uncertainty-augmented 3-channel deterministic models, similar to the 2-channel setting in Section 4.2. Augmented Bayesian model 19 Improving PET/CT-based WBLS Using Uncertainy-Augmented Models A P REPRINT Epistemic Uncertainty (Augmented Bayesian) CT PET Probability (Base Bayesian) 

> Probability (Augmented Bayesian) Epistemic Uncertainty (Base Bayesian)

Figure 6: Uncertainty-augmented Bayesian nnU-Net (Augmented Bayesian) improves lesion detection over baseline Bayesian nnUNet (Base Bayesian) and lowers prediction uncertainty. We visualize four lesions from different PSMA cases to demonstrate how uncertainty augmentation improves performance. In all examples, the base Bayesian model renders low probabilities, leading to false-negative predictions accompanied by high epistemic uncertainty around the lesion regions. With the augmented model, the Bayesian probabilities increase significantly, and the corresponding epistemic uncertainty decreases, indicating more confident and accurate lesion detection. (Bayes aug ) consistently outperforms the average deterministic counterpart ( Det M ean aug ) (Table 3), further supporting 

RQ1 on the benefits of Bayesian ensembling. Although individual deterministic models show noticeable variability, the mean augmented model ( Det M ean aug ) achieves improved Dice, particularly for PSMA cases (57.0), compared to the base setting. This improvement is driven by a reduction in FNVol (e.g., 10.7 for PSMA with augmented model compared to 16.5 with the base model), indicating better recovery of missed lesions, but it comes with an increase in FPVol (e.g., 18.9 for PSMA with augmented model increasing from 15.7 with base model), reflecting a precision–recall trade-off. The Bayesian ensemble ( Bayes aug ) further stabilizes these predictions and provides additional gains in overall Dice (64.3), while maintaining the same trade-off between FNVol and FPVol. We observe that uncertainty-augmented model achieve significantly lower FNVol compared to base in Figure 7. Similar to the analysis of base model in Sect. 4.2, we also analyze the uncertainty–misclassification relationship for the uncertainty-augmented model. The comparison is presented in Figure 8. We again observe that uncertainty is more reliable for FP detection than FN detection, as reflected by higher AUROC scores. Interestingly, the AUROC 20 Improving PET/CT-based WBLS Using Uncertainy-Augmented Models A P REPRINT 

Figure 7: Complementary behavior between the base (Bayesian) and uncertainty-augmented models across cases. The violin plots illustrate paired distributions of (a) false positive volume (FPVol) and (b) false negative volume (FNVol). The augmented model exhibits a statistically significant increase in FPVol (p = 0.00344), indicating reduced precision, while achieving a significant decrease in FNVol (p = 0.00018), reflecting improved recall. This consistent precision–recall trade-off highlights the complementary strengths of the two models and motivates the need for a case-adaptive routing strategy based on input characteristics (e.g., PET uptake patterns) to selectively leverage each model. distributions for the uncertainty-augmented model appear less variable than those of the base model for both FP and FN detection. Moreover, we observe a weak complementary trends between FDG and PSMA in Figure 9. Specifically, FDG samples tend to perform better with the base model, whereas PSMA samples show improved performance with the augmented model. However, this trend is not statistically significant. We further analyze the proportion of win cases and observe that more than 50% of FDG cases favor the base model, while the opposite holds for PSMA. 

4.3.2 Case adaptive routing Quantitative evaluation: Table 4 summarizes the fusion and routing results for filtered validation samples. Among late fusion methods, maximum probability performs best (Dice: 61.7), outperforming intersection and average fu-sion, suggesting that voxel-wise fusion partially captures the complementary behavior of the base and augmented models. Rule-based tracer-aware routing achieves comparable performance (Dice: 61.5), consistent with the weak, non-significant tracer-dependent differences observed earlier. Learned routing provides the strongest overall performance. The MSE-based router has Dice of 61.6, while CE-based routing performs best, with the 120 × 120 × 120 PET input achieving the highest Dice score of 61.8. This gain reflects improved balancing of false positives and false negatives by adaptively selecting between the precision-oriented base model and recall-oriented augmented model. Across tracers, learned routing with PET as input improves both FDG 21 Improving PET/CT-based WBLS Using Uncertainy-Augmented Models A P REPRINT 

Base Bayesian 

> (a)
> (b)

Augmented Bayesian 

> (c)
> (d)

Figure 8: Uncertainty–misclassification relationship is consistent between baseline Bayesian (Base Bayesian) and uncertainty-augmented Bayesian (Augmented Bayesian) nnUNet models for whole-body PET/CT lesion segmenta-tion, with overall less uncertainty and fewer outliers in the Augmented Bayesian model. (a,b) Per-case median epis-temic uncertainty distributions for true negatives (TN), true positives (TP), false negatives (FN), and false positives (FP) using the (a) base Bayesian model and (b) uncertainty-augmented Bayesian model. Gray lines connect class-specific measurements from the same case, and Wilcoxon test p-values indicate significant differences in uncertainty between misclassified and correctly classified regions. In both models, FP and FN regions exhibit higher uncertainty than TN regions, supporting the association between epistemic uncertainty and segmentation misclassifications. (c,d) AUROC distributions for uncertainty-based detection of FP and FN regions for the (c) base Bayesian model and (d) uncertainty-augmented Bayesian model. FP detection shows consistently higher AUROC than FN detection, with significant differences by Welch’s t-test and Mann–Whitney test, indicating that epistemic uncertainty is more dis-criminative for false-positive errors than for missed lesions. 22 Improving PET/CT-based WBLS Using Uncertainy-Augmented Models A P REPRINT 

Figure 9: Complementary performance between the base (Bayesian) and uncertainty-augmented models across tracers. (a) Violin plots of Dice scores show a weak but consistent tracer-dependent trend: for FDG, the base model achieves slightly higher mean Dice than the augmented model, whereas for PSMA, the augmented model slightly outperforms the base model. However, these differences are not statistically significant (Wilcoxon test). (b) Case-wise win-rate analysis further highlights this complementary behavior: the base model performs better in more than 50% of FDG cases, while the augmented model wins in more than 50% of PSMA cases. (c) The oracle performance (selecting the better prediction per case) yields noticeable improvements over both individual models across FDG, PSMA, and all cases, indicating substantial unrealized potential and motivating the need for a case-adaptive routing strategy. and PSMA performance, with the largest gains in PSMA Dice, up to 61.8, demonstrating its advantage over heuristic routing and static fusion. Table 4: Ablation study on filtered AutoPET-III validation samples ( N = 111 ) comparing fusion and routing strategies for combining the Bayesian base nnU-Net and uncertainty-augmented nnU-Net models. To reduce noisy supervision, we restrict both training and validation to samples with a Dice difference greater than 0.01 between the two models. We evaluate three late-fusion strategies and multiple early-routing approaches. The results show that late-fusion meth-ods outperform the individual base and augmented models, while early-routing approaches achieve the best overall performance and further surpass the late-fusion strategies.                                                                                                                                             

> Method
> Cancer (N=111) FDG=41, PSMA=70 DICE ↑FPvol ↓FNvol ↓
> All FDG PSMA All FDG PSMA All FDG PSMA
> Bayes Base (PET + CT) 60.4 66.4 56.8 13.6 7.7 17.0 12.7 8.4 15.3 Aug (PET + CT + Unc.) 61.0 65.1 58.5 16.5 11.4 19.5 7.2 3.0 9.6
> Late Fusion
> Intersection. 59.6 65.9 55.9 12.8 7.3 16.0 12.9 8.4 15.5 Average Prob. 61.2 65.6 58.7 16.5 12.5 18.8 7.2 3.1 9.6 Max Prob. 61.7 65.7 59.3 17.2 11.7 20.4 7.0 3.0 9.4
> Early Routing
> Tracer-aware routing rule 61.5 66.4 58.5 15.1 7.7 19.5 9.2 8.4 9.6 Learnt (CE - 64x64x64) 61.3 66.0 58.5 15.2 8.0 19.5 7.9 5.1 9.6 Learnt (CE - 80x80x80) 61.7 66.4 59.0 14.4 7.7 18.3 9.2 8.4 9.7 Learnt (CE - 120x120x120) 61.8 67.1 58.7 15.2 7.9 19.4 8.1 5.4 9.7 Learnt (MSE) - PET Only 61.6 66.4 58.8 14.5 8.1 18.3 9.2 8.1 9.8 Learnt (Weighted MSE) - CT Only 61.6 66.9 58.5 15.2 8.0 19.4 9.1 7.9 9.8 Learnt (Weighted MSE) - PET & CT 60.9 65.6 58.2 15.5 9.3 19.1 8.0 5.0 9.8 Learnt (Weighted MSE) - PET & Uncer. 60.9 65.6 58.2 15.5 9.3 19.1 8.0 5.0 9.8 Learnt (Weighted MSE) - PET Only 61.8 66.4 59.1 14.2 7.7 18.1 9.4 8.4 10.0

23 Improving PET/CT-based WBLS Using Uncertainy-Augmented Models A P REPRINT 

# 5 Performance on unseen datasets 

Our ablation experiments and results conducted on the validation set of AutoPet-III in the previous subsection address our first three research questions from RQ1 to RQ3 . To assess generalizability, we evaluate our methods on two unseen test sets: 321 held-out AutoPET-III scans for in-distribution testing and 200 Deep-PSMA scans for OOD testing (Sect. 2.2). 

Qualitative evaluation: Similar to Figure 6, we qualitatively evaluate the effect of uncertainty augmentation on the Deep-PSMA dataset in Figure Figure 10. The first three rows show successful cases in which the uncertainty-augmented model detects lesions more effectively than the base model. The last row illustrates a failure case, where a high-uncertainty true-negative region in the base model is incorrectly segmented as a false positive by the uncertainty-augmented model. Epistemic Uncertainty (Augmented Bayesian) CT PET Probability (Base Bayesian) 

> Probability (Augmented Bayesian) Epistemic Uncertainty (Base Bayesian)

Figure 10: Uncertainty-augemented Bayesian nnU-net (Augemneted Bayesian) performance generalizes to unseen DeepPSMA dataset. We visualize four lesions from different FDG (first and second row) and PSMA (third and fourth row) cases in the Deep-PSMA dataset to illustrate how uncertainty augmentation improves performance on unseen data. In the first three examples, the base Bayesian model produces low lesion probabilities, resulting in false-negative predictions with elevated epistemic uncertainty around the lesion regions. In contrast, the uncertainty-augmented model substantially increases the Bayesian probabilities while reducing the corresponding epistemic uncertainty, in-dicating more confident and accurate lesion detection. The last row shows a failure case, where high epistemic uncer-tainty in a lesion-free region leads the uncertainty-augmented model to generate a false-positive segmentation. 

Quantitative evaluation: Bayesian ensembling consistently outperforms deterministic models for both the base (PET+CT) and uncertainty-augmented (PET+CT+Unc.) settings, improving Dice and generally reducing FNVol in both the held out AutoPet-III test set, as well as the unseen DeepPSMA dataset (Table 5). On AutoPET-III test set, 24 Improving PET/CT-based WBLS Using Uncertainy-Augmented Models A P REPRINT 

uncertainty augmentation shows a precision–recall trade-off, reducing FNVol but increasing FPVol. This improves PSMA Dice while slightly lowering FDG performance, consistent with RQ2 . The learned router achieves the best overall Dice across ALL, FDG, and PSMA cases, confirming that it effectively exploits the complementary strengths of the base and augmented models, as observed in RQ3. On Deep-PSMA, uncertainty augmentation improves Dice for both FDG and PSMA cases, with lower FNVol but higher FPVol (Table 5). However, the AutoPET-III-trained router does not outperform the augmented model, suggest-ing limited OOD transferability of the learned routing strategy. Table 5: Held-out test performance of the base, uncertainty-augmented, and best-performing case-adaptive routing models on both AutoPET-III ( N = 321 ) and Deep-PSMA ( N = 200 ) datasets. In the AutoPET-III test set, there are 207 cancer cases (97 FDG and 110 PSMA) and 114 no-disease cases (102 FDG and 12 PSMA). The Deep-PSMA dataset consists of 200 cancer cases, with 100 FDG and 100 PSMA studies. Consistent with the validation results, un-certainty augmentation generally reduces FNVol in both deterministic and Bayesian settings, while increasing FPVol. On the AutoPET-III test set, FDG Dice decreases whereas PSMA Dice improves under uncertainty augmentation. Our proposed case-adaptive combination through routing achieves the highest Dice scores compared with both determin-istic and Bayesian baselines. On the Deep-PSMA dataset, uncertainty augmentation improves performance for both FDG and PSMA cases, while the learned router shows limited generalization.                                                                                                                                                                                          

> Dataset Method Inputs DICE ↑FPvol ↓FNvol ↓FPvol (No-disease) ↓
> All FDG PSMA All FDG PSMA All FDG PSMA All FDG PSMA AutoPET-III
> Det M ean Base PET + CT 60.1 68.2 52.9 2.9 4.2 1.9 13.9 10.9 16.6 14.4 8.4 65.4 Aug PET + CT + Unc. 61.5 67.5 56.1 4.9 ↑6.9 ↑3.1 ↑9.5 ↓5.7 ↓12.8 ↓21.1 ↑13.7 ↑84.2 ↑
> Bayes Base PET + CT 62.0 70.7 54.3 2.0 2.9 1.3 13.6 10.3 16.4 12.3 6.4 62.0 Aug PET + CT + Unc. 61.7 67.8 56.2 4.8 ↑6.8 ↑3.0 ↑9.3 ↓5.6 ↓12.6 ↓21.1 ↑13.5 ↑85.1 ↑
> Combination Learnt router (Weighted MSE; PET) 63.1 70.7 56.3 2.9 2.9 2.9 11.6 10.3 12.8 14.7 6.4 85.1 Deep PSMA
> Det M ean Base PET + CT 62.8 60.9 64.6 8.3 4.8 11.7 19.3 23.1 15.6 –––Aug PET + CT + Unc. 65.1 63.7 66.4 17.5 ↑7.4 ↑27.6 ↑11.3 ↓13.2 ↓9.4 ↓–––
> Bayes Base PET + CT 64.7 63.8 65.5 5.6 3.4 7.8 17.9 22.3 13.5 –––Aug PET + CT + Unc. 65.3 63.9 66.8 17.9 ↑7.4 ↑28.3 ↑11.4 ↓13.5 ↓9.2 ↓–––
> Combination Learnt router Weighted MSE; PET 65.1 63.9 66.2 14.0 3.7 24.3 16.2 22.1 10.4 –––

5.1 Statistical analysis on the unseen test set 

We conduct statistical comparisons between the best-performing deterministic nnU-Net and our proposed method on the unseen AutoPET-III test set, yielding p-values of 0.022 (t-test) and 0.043 (Wilcoxon signed-rank test). We perform a similar analysis on the Deep-PSMA dataset, comparing the best deterministic baseline with the uncertainty-augmented Bayesian model, where we obtain p-values of 0.00001 (t-test) and 0.00000 (Wilcoxon test), indicating highly significant improvements. 

# 6 Discussion 

In this work, we propose a uncertainty-aware framework for multi-tracer, pan-cancer, whole-body PET/CT lesion segmentation. Our approach mitigates the stochastic variability of deterministic nnU-Net models, enables voxel-wise uncertainty quantification, uses uncertainty to recover missed lesions, and improves segmentation performance. Existing deterministic methods are sensitive to random initialization and provide no predictive uncertainty, while 25 Improving PET/CT-based WBLS Using Uncertainy-Augmented Models A P REPRINT 

heterogeneous multi-tracer datasets can bias models toward low-lesion cases, leading to missed detections in high-burden patients. We therefore investigate four questions: the benefits of Bayesian ensembling, the relationship between uncertainty and misclassification, the value of uncertainty-augmented training, and generalization to in-distribution and OOD test sets. Our experiments yield four main findings. First, Bayesian ensembling produces more stable and accurate segmen-tations than individual deterministic models. Second, epistemic uncertainty is more strongly associated with false positives and missed lesions than with correct predictions in nn-UNet models. Third, uncertainty-augmented training improves recall by recovering missed lesions, introducing a precision–recall trade-off with the base model. A learned case-adaptive router further improves performance by selecting the most suitable model for each case. Finally, the uncertainty-augmented model generalizes well to OOD data, improving performance for both FDG and PSMA cases with high lesion burden. This study has some limitations. First, deep ensembling is computationally expensive, so our experiments are limited to five ensemble members; future work will explore larger ensembles and lightweight uncertainty estimation methods. Second, our analysis is based on nnU-Net, and future studies will extend the framework to other architectures, includ-ing other CNN models, vision transformers, diffusion models, and Mamba-based models. Third, our learned router does not generalize well to the Deep-PSMA dataset. Since the router is trained to select the better-performing model based on AutoPET-III-specific input features, the learned decision boundary may not transfer reliably to an external dataset. This effect may be further amplified by the relatively shallow 3D CNN architecture of the router, which may overfit to dataset-specific cues rather than learning domain-invariant routing features. In our future works, we will explore domain-invariant learning of the case-adaptive router. Finally, we only included publicly available datasets and did not include private heterogeneous datasets. Our future work will focus on including private datasets. To our knowledge, this is the first study to connect Bayesian deep learning with multi-tracer, pan-cancer, whole-body PET/CT lesion segmentation. We also introduce uncertainty-augmented nnU-Net training and a learnable case-adaptive routing mechanism for selecting between complementary models. By evaluating these components on both in-distribution and OOD test sets, our work provides one of the first systematic assessments of robustness, uncertainty, and generalization in whole-body lesion segmentation. Our study supports clinical deployment of automated whole-body lesion segmentation by improving robustness with Bayesian ensembling and systematically evaluating the sensitivity of deterministic models. In a multi-tracer, pan-cancer setting, we provide new insights into uncertainty quantification and show that uncertainty-augmented nnU-Net improves detection in high-burden cases, such as Deep-PSMA, with a simple architectural extension. Finally, evalua-tion on unseen datasets offers an early systematic assessment of generalization in whole-body lesion segmentation. 26 Improving PET/CT-based WBLS Using Uncertainy-Augmented Models A P REPRINT 

# 7 Conclusion 

In this paper, we present an uncertainty-aware framework for PET/CT-based whole-body lesion segmentation. Our approach begins with Bayesian ensembling of deterministic baselines, yielding improved prediction robustness along with reliable uncertainty quantification. We then analyze the relationship between uncertainty maps and model mis-classifications, and leverage these insights to design an uncertainty-augmented training strategy that improves segmen-tation performance by balancing precision and recall. Furthermore, we introduce a case-adaptive routing mechanism that effectively combines the complementary strengths of the base Bayesian model and the uncertainty-augmented Bayesian model, resulting in a more reliable and generalizable segmentation pipeline. Finally, evaluations on both in-distribution and out-of-distribution unseen test datasets further demonstrate the generalization capability of the pro-posed framework. Our study enhances the clinical utility of AI-assisted whole-body lesion segmentation by improving robustness, enabling uncertainty-aware modeling through uncertainty quantification, and demonstrating strong gener-alizability, which broadens its applicability in multi-tracer, pan-cancer clinical workflows, including diagnosis and treatment planning. 

# Acknowledgement Statement 

Research reported in this publication was supported by an Institutional Development Award (IDeA) from the National Institute of General Medical Sciences of the National Institutes of Health under grant number 1P30GM149408. We also gratefully acknowledge support from the Munck-Pfefferkorn Fund, the American Cancer Society Institutional Research Grant, and the Department of Biomedical Data Science at Dartmouth College. All of this support was instrumental in making this work possible. 

# References 

[1] J. Trotter, A. R. Pantel, B.-K. K. Teo, F. E. Escorcia, T. Li, D. A. Pryma, and N. K. Taunk, Positron emission tomography (PET)/computed tomography (CT) imaging in radiation therapy treatment planning: a review of PET imaging tracers and methods to incorporate PET/CT, Advances in radiation oncology 8, 101212 (2023). [2] D. A. Silver, I. Pellicer, W. R. Fair, W. Heston, and C. Cordon-Cardo, Prostate-specific membrane antigen expression in normal and malignant human tissues., Clinical cancer research: an official journal of the American Association for Cancer Research 3, 81–85 (1997). [3] P. Som et al., A fluorinated glucose analog, 2-fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose (F-18): nontoxic tracer for rapid tumor detection, Journal of Nuclear Medicine 21 , 670–675 (1980). [4] M. Blau, W. Nagler, and M. Bender, Fluorine-18: a new isotope for bone scanning, J. nuclear Med. 3 (1962). [5] M. S. Hofman and R. J. Hicks, How we read oncologic FDG PET/CT, Cancer Imaging 16 , 35 (2016). 27 Improving PET/CT-based WBLS Using Uncertainy-Augmented Models A P REPRINT 

[6] H. Yu, C. Caldwell, K. Mah, and D. Mozeg, Coregistered FDG PET/CT-based textural characterization of head and neck cancer for radiation treatment planning, IEEE transactions on medical imaging 28 , 374–383 (2008). [7] J. Yang, B. M. Beadle, A. S. Garden, D. L. Schwartz, and M. Aristophanous, A multimodality segmentation framework for automatic target delineation in head and neck radiotherapy, Medical physics 42 , 5310–5320 (2015). [8] Q. Song, J. Bai, D. Han, S. Bhatia, W. Sun, W. Rockey, J. E. Bayouth, J. M. Buatti, and X. Wu, Optimal co-segmentation of tumor in PET-CT images with context information, IEEE transactions on medical imaging 32 ,1685–1697 (2013). [9] U. Bagci, J. K. Udupa, N. Mendhiratta, B. Foster, Z. Xu, J. Yao, X. Chen, and D. J. Mollura, Joint segmentation of anatomical and functional images: Applications in quantification of lesions from PET, PET-CT, MRI-PET, and MRI-PET-CT images, Medical image analysis 17 , 929–945 (2013). [10] B. Huang et al., Fully automated delineation of gross tumor volume for head and neck cancer on PET-CT using deep learning: A dual-center study, Contrast media & molecular imaging 2018 , 8923028 (2018). [11] V. Oreiller et al., Head and neck tumor segmentation in PET/CT: the HECKTOR challenge, Medical image analysis 77 , 102336 (2022). [12] X. Zhao, L. Li, W. Lu, and S. Tan, Tumor co-segmentation in PET/CT using multi-modality fully convolutional neural network, Physics in Medicine & Biology 64 , 015011 (2018). [13] D. Jin, D. Guo, T.-Y. Ho, A. P. Harrison, J. Xiao, C.-K. Tseng, and L. Lu, Accurate esophageal gross tumor volume segmentation in PET/CT using two-stream chained 3D deep network fusion, in International Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention , pages 182–191, Springer, 2019. [14] P. Blanc-Durand et al., Fully automatic segmentation of diffuse large B cell lymphoma lesions on 3D FDG-PET/CT for total metabolic tumour volume prediction using a convolutional neural network., European Journal of Nuclear Medicine and Molecular Imaging 48 , 1362–1370 (2021). [15] L. Xu, G. Tetteh, J. Lipkova, Y. Zhao, H. Li, P. Christ, M. Piraud, A. Buck, K. Shi, and B. H. Menze, Auto-mated whole-body bone lesion detection for multiple myeloma on 68Ga-pentixafor PET/CT imaging using deep learning methods, Contrast media & molecular imaging 2018 , 2391925 (2018). [16] S. Jemaa, J. Fredrickson, R. A. Carano, T. Nielsen, A. de Crespigny, and T. Bengtsson, Tumor segmentation and feature extraction from whole-body FDG-PET/CT using cascaded 2D and 3D convolutional neural networks, Journal of digital imaging 33 , 888–894 (2020). 28 Improving PET/CT-based WBLS Using Uncertainy-Augmented Models A P REPRINT 

[17] J. He, Y. Zhang, M. Chung, M. Wang, K. Wang, Y. Ma, X. Ding, Q. Li, and Y. Pu, Whole-body tumor seg-mentation from PET/CT images using a two-stage cascaded neural network with camouflaged object detection mechanisms, Medical Physics 50 , 6151–6162 (2023). [18] S. Gatidis et al., Results from the autoPET challenge on fully automated lesion segmentation in oncologic PET/CT imaging, Nature Machine Intelligence 6, 1396–1405 (2024). [19] A. Liu, D. Jia, K. Sun, R. Meng, M. Zhao, Y. Jiang, Z. Dong, Y. Gao, and D. Shen, LM-UNet: Whole-Body PET-CT Lesion Segmentation with Dual-Modality-Based Annotations Driven by Latent Mamba U-Net, in International Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention , pages 405–414, Springer, 2024. [20] Y. Xu, I. Klyuzhin, S. Harsini, A. Ortiz, S. Zhang, F. B´ enard, R. Dodhia, C. F. Uribe, A. Rahmim, and J. L. Ferres, Automatic segmentation of prostate cancer metastases in PSMA PET/CT images using deep neural networks with weighted batch-wise dice loss, Computers in Biology and Medicine 158 , 106882 (2023). [21] Y. Li et al., An automated deep learning-based framework for uptake segmentation and classification on PSMA PET/CT imaging of patients with prostate cancer, Journal of Imaging Informatics in Medicine 37 , 2206–2215 (2024). [22] F. Milletari, N. Navab, and S.-A. Ahmadi, V-net: Fully convolutional neural networks for volumetric medical image segmentation, in 2016 fourth international conference on 3D vision (3DV) , pages 565–571, Ieee, 2016. [23] M. Ingrisch, J. Dexl, K. Jeblick, C. Cyran, S. Gatidis, and T. Kuestner, Automated Lesion Segmentation in Whole-Body PET/CT - Multitracer Multicenter Generalization, Zenodo, Version 1, 2024, Available at https: //zenodo.org/records/10990932 .[24] H. Kalisch, F. H¨ orst, K. Herrmann, J. Kleesiek, and C. Seibold, Autopet III challenge: Incorporating anatomical knowledge into nnUNet for lesion segmentation in PET/CT, arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.12155 (2024). [25] J. Song, X. Yang, X. Liang, J. Huang, J. Ma, Y. Sun, W. Luo, S. Mok, Y. Wang, and T. Tan, DuEU-Net: Dual Encoder UNet with Modality-Agnostic Training for PET-CT Multi-modal Organ and Lesion Segmentation, in 

Deep Breast Workshop on AI and Imaging for Diagnostic and Treatment Challenges in Breast Care , pages 23–31, Springer, 2024. [26] M. Rokuss, B. Kovacs, Y. Kirchhoff, S. Xiao, C. Ulrich, K. H. Maier-Hein, and F. Isensee, From FDG to PSMA: A Hitchhiker’s Guide to Multitracer, Multicenter Lesion Segmentation in PET/CT Imaging, arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.09478 (2024). [27] L. Y. L. Chan, C. Li, and Y. Yuan, AutoPET Challenge: Tumour Synthesis for Data Augmentation, arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.08068 (2024). 29 Improving PET/CT-based WBLS Using Uncertainy-Augmented Models A P REPRINT 

[28] C.-W. Wang, T.-S. Su, and K.-W. Liu, Dual channel CW nnU-Net for 3D PET-CT Lesion Segmentation in 2024 autoPET III Challenge, arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.07144 (2024). [29] O. Ronneberger, P. Fischer, and T. Brox, U-net: Convolutional networks for biomedical image segmentation, in International Conference on Medical image computing and computer-assisted intervention , pages 234–241, Springer, 2015. [30] F. Isensee, P. F. Jaeger, S. A. Kohl, J. Petersen, and K. H. Maier-Hein, nnU-Net: a self-configuring method for deep learning-based biomedical image segmentation, Nature methods 18 , 203–211 (2021). [31] X. Glorot and Y. Bengio, Understanding the difficulty of training deep feedforward neural networks, in Pro-ceedings of the thirteenth international conference on artificial intelligence and statistics , pages 249–256, JMLR Workshop and Conference Proceedings, 2010. [32] N. S. Keskar, D. Mudigere, J. Nocedal, M. Smelyanskiy, and P. T. P. Tang, On large-batch training for deep learning: Generalization gap and sharp minima, arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.04836 (2016). [33] B. Schott, V. Santoro-Fernandes, ˇ Z. Klaneˇ cek, S. Perlman, and R. Jeraj, Uncertainty quantification for deep learning-based metastatic lesion segmentation on whole body pet/ct, Physics in Medicine & Biology 70 , 115009 (2025). [34] A. Kendall and Y. Gal, What uncertainties do we need in bayesian deep learning for computer vision?, Advances in neural information processing systems 30 (2017). [35] F. Yu, A. Moehring, O. Banerjee, T. Salz, N. Agarwal, and P. Rajpurkar, Heterogeneity and predictors of the effects of AI assistance on radiologists, Nature Medicine 30 , 837–849 (2024). [36] B. Lakshminarayanan, A. Pritzel, and C. Blundell, Simple and scalable predictive uncertainty estimation using deep ensembles, Advances in neural information processing systems 30 (2017). [37] M. Abdar et al., A review of uncertainty quantification in deep learning: Techniques, applications and challenges, Information fusion 76 , 243–297 (2021). [38] Y. Gal and Z. Ghahramani, Dropout as a bayesian approximation: Representing model uncertainty in deep learning, in international conference on machine learning , pages 1050–1059, PMLR, 2016. [39] Y. Zhao, C. Yang, A. Schweidtmann, and Q. Tao, Efficient Bayesian uncertainty estimation for nnU-Net, in 

International Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention , pages 535–544, Springer, 2022. [40] M. Sensoy, L. Kaplan, and M. Kandemir, Evidential deep learning to quantify classification uncertainty, Ad-vances in neural information processing systems 31 (2018). 30 Improving PET/CT-based WBLS Using Uncertainy-Augmented Models A P REPRINT 

[41] G. Wang, W. Li, M. Aertsen, J. Deprest, S. Ourselin, and T. Vercauteren, Aleatoric uncertainty estimation with test-time augmentation for medical image segmentation with convolutional neural networks, Neurocomputing 

338 , 34–45 (2019). [42] G. D. Ruxton, The unequal variance t-test is an underused alternative to Student’s t-test and the Mann–Whitney U test, Behavioral Ecology 17 , 688–690 (2006). [43] N. Nachar et al., The Mann-Whitney U: A test for assessing whether two independent samples come from the same distribution, Tutorials in quantitative Methods for Psychology 4, 13–20 (2008). [44] B. Kovacs, S. Xiao, M. Rokuss, C. Ulrich, F. Isensee, and K. H. Maier-Hein, Data-Centric Strategies for Over-coming PET/CT Heterogeneity: Insights from the AutoPET III Lesion Segmentation Challenge, arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.10120 (2024). [45] J. S. Yoon, K. Oh, Y. Shin, M. A. Mazurowski, and H.-I. Suk, Domain generalization for medical image analysis: A review, Proceedings of the IEEE 112 , 1583–1609 (2024). [46] C. Chen, Z. Li, C. Ouyang, M. Sinclair, W. Bai, and D. Rueckert, Maxstyle: Adversarial style composition for robust medical image segmentation, in International Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention , pages 151–161, Springer, 2022. [47] Q. Liu, Q. Dou, and P.-A. Heng, Shape-aware meta-learning for generalizing prostate MRI segmentation to unseen domains, in International conference on medical image computing and computer-assisted intervention ,pages 475–485, Springer, 2020. [48] C. Xu, Z. Wen, Z. Liu, and C. Ye, Improved domain generalization for cell detection in histopathology images via test-time stain augmentation, in International Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention , pages 150–159, Springer, 2022. [49] R. Wen, H. Yuan, D. Ni, W. Xiao, and Y. Wu, From denoising training to test-time adaptation: Enhancing domain generalization for medical image segmentation, in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision , pages 464–474, 2024. [50] A. Der Kiureghian and O. Ditlevsen, Aleatory or epistemic? Does it matter?, Structural safety 31 , 105–112 (2009). [51] A. Hartmann, A. Davari, T. Seehaus, M. Braun, A. Maier, and V. Christlein, Bayesian u-net for segmenting glaciers in sar imagery, in 2021 IEEE International Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium IGARSS , pages 3479–3482, IEEE, 2021. 31 Improving PET/CT-based WBLS Using Uncertainy-Augmented Models A P REPRINT 

[52] J. Meakin, P. K. Gerke, S. Kerkstra, T. Koopman, A. Mickan, C. van Run, H. van Zeeland, F. Ciompi, A. Her-ing, C. Jacobs, N. Khalili, P. Koopmans, J. van der Laak, G. Litjens, S. Quax, C. I. S´ anchez, J. Tannhauser, M. Groeneveld, and H. Huisman, Grand-Challenge.org, 2025. [53] S. Gatidis, T. Hepp, M. Fr¨ uh, C. La Foug` ere, K. Nikolaou, C. Pfannenberg, B. Sch¨ olkopf, T. K¨ ustner, C. Cyran, and D. Rubin, A whole-body FDG-PET/CT dataset with manually annotated tumor lesions, Scientific Data 9,601 (2022). [54] K. Jeblick et al., A Whole-Body PSMA-PET/CT Dataset with Manually Annotated Tumor Lesions (PSMA-PET-CT-Lesions), 2024. [55] S. Depeweg, J.-M. Hernandez-Lobato, F. Doshi-Velez, and S. Udluft, Decomposition of uncertainty in Bayesian deep learning for efficient and risk-sensitive learning, in International conference on machine learning , pages 1184–1193, PMLR, 2018. [56] Y. Gal et al., Uncertainty in deep learning, (2016). [57] A. Malinin and M. Gales, Predictive uncertainty estimation via prior networks, Advances in neural information processing systems 31 (2018). [58] A. Jungo and M. Reyes, Assessing reliability and challenges of uncertainty estimations for medical image segmentation, in International Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention ,pages 48–56, Springer, 2019. [59] M. J. Roberts et al., A prospective, multi-centre trial of PSMA-PET compared to FDG-PET for staging of newly diagnosed high risk prostate cancer, EJNMMI research 15 , 92 (2025). 32